                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/19/2012                                      Report No.: 67603
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P050529                 Original Project Name: LB - Cultural
                                             Heritage and Urban Dev.
Country: Lebanon                             Project ID: P116197
Project Name: LB-Cultural Heritage Add. Financing
Task Team Leader: Chantal Reliquet
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 25,        Estimated Board Date: April 12, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: MNSSD                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other industry (30%);General transportation sector (20%);Central government
administration (20%);Sub-national government administration (20%);General water,
sanitation and flood protection sector (10%)
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (40%);Other urban development
(40%);Participation and civic engagement (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            27
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.13
         FRANCE: French Agency for Development                        30.06
                                                                      30.19
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objectives are to: (a) create the conditions for local economic
development and enhanced quality of life in the historic centers of five main secondary
cities; and (b) improve the conservation and management of Lebanon's built cultural
heritage.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Rehabilitation of historic city centers and urban infrastructure. Activities
under this component support the rehabilitation of the historic centers and urban
infrastructure of the cities of Baalbeck, Byblos, Saida, Tripoli, and Tyre and the
promotion of cultural sensitivity and cultural tourism through: (a) upgrading and
improving public spaces (such as streets, squares, commercial “souks? and residential
areas) and infrastructure; (b) developing conservation and management of classified
monuments and historic buildings and promoting their adaptive reuse; (c) supporting and
developing productive and commercial activities related to cultural heritage, and
promoting and communicating communication with and participation of local
populations; (d) rehabilitating the housing stock, including, inter alia, the construction
and/or rehabilitation of housing units for temporary occupancy or resettlement purposes;
(e) promoting the enforcement of zoning regulations defining historic city centers,
including the establishment of a rehabilitation and construction permit system; (f)
improving access to historic centers, traffic management and parking availability and
regulation; (g) protecting and enhancing landscaping of coastal and green areas; and (h)
carrying out technical and financial feasibility studies for urban redevelopment.

 Component 2: Archeological Sites Conservation and Management. These activities are
taking place primarily in Baalbeck and Tyre, two of the main archeological sites of
Lebanon, both inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage list. Activities under this
component support the conservation and management of archeological sites through: (a)
conducting a program of research, inventory and documentation to the conservation and
management of monuments and artifacts; (b) improving protection and conservation of
exposed surfaces and structures; (c) improving landscaping, enhancing site protection and
management and rehabilitating and/or expanding site museums; (d) improving and
developing site presentation and visitor facilities, including the enhancement of visitor
information capacities and the design of audio-visual programs and cultural circuits; and
(e) preparing archeological studies.

 Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management. This component
includes the following complementary technical assistance and capacity building
activities: (a) strengthening the administrative and technical capacity of the five
municipalities by rehabilitating, developing, maintaining and managing their historic
centers; (b) reviewing the legal, regulatory and institutional framework governing
cultural heritage; (c) strengthening the Department of Antiquities; and (d) supporting the
Project Management Unit to strengthen its capabilities in implementing the Project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
This is an ongoing project which is assisting the government of Lebanon in: (i) targeted
urban rehabilitation activities in the old towns of Baalbeck, Byblos, Saida, Tripoli, and
Tyre; and (ii) tackling the most pressing conservation and management issues on the its
two biggest archaeological sites (Baalbeck and Tyre), inscribed on the UNESCO World
Heritage List, and representing a serious challenge from the point of view of
archaeological works and management.

 The municipality of Tripoli has 128 buildings which are officially designated as national
monuments, out of which 75% are in the specially designated historic zone.
Unfortunately, listing and even designation of the monuments or groups of buildings
have not produced a desirable effect, and most protected monuments continue to be in
unsatisfactory condition, either closed to public or squatted and used for storage. Old
town centers, such as in Saida and Tripoli, are witnessing rapid degradation of the built
stock and of the urban environment. In the absence of context-sensitive urban regulations,
construction activity in the historical centers has led to the loss of their unique character.
Unregulated replacement of old urban fabric by modern constructions, street-widening,
together with collapsing old buildings is eroding the stock of heritage buildings and
changes the traditional use of space within the historic areas. The deplorable condition of
the built stock is a reflection of the underlying socio-economic problems of the historic
urban spaces. The lack of economic opportunity for the local residents generate a vicious
cycle of progressive impoverishment and degradation of the once most vibrant and
culture-rich urban areas. Given their complex street pattern and marginal role in urban
economies, city centers also suffer from lack of adequate environmental amenities, such
as sanitation, drainage, and solid waste management.

 The archeological sites have had a very low level of upkeep and overall management for
over a quarter of a century. Valuable archeological remains are left exposed to ambient
effects and unregulated human presence, which together with time accelerate
deterioration of unearthed foundations and mosaics. The famous Qala'a archeological site
in Baalbeck receives around 100, 000 visitors a year who wander freely on the fragile
site. The still standing structures of the temples represent significant visitor safety
hazards. Being integral parts of the urban areas, the sites are threatened by wastewater
that, in the case of Baalbeck, pours into the archeological area untreated. As a general
rule, modern constructions and infrastructure are encroaching on the existing
archeological sites and are expanding over the areas that are still held as archeological
reserves for future study. Some archeological sites, such as the Roman quarry in
Baalbeck, are used as solid waste dump-yards. Fragile coastal zones, rich with marine
archeological remains, like in Tyre, are exposed to dumping and illegal uses. Priority
environmental measures include: land use planning sensitive to protection of the natural
setting of archeological sites; creation of green spaces and public parks and gardens,
coastal zone treatment in old port cities; traffic management; and waste and waste water
management.

  Presently, little economic benefit is derived by the local residents from the rich cultural
assets that are found within their communities. Currently, the benefits of tourism to
Lebanon are either captured by foreign tour operators or by a small group of Beirut-based
agencies and hotels. The municipalities are not able to program and implement
investments that would create jobs and ensure an additional source of revenues coming
from fees and property and professional taxes levied on rehabilitated and re-used historic
properties. Historic towns still host a number of traditional productive and commercial
activities that go hand in hand with the built environment and that are characteristic of the
souks: spices, perfumes, soaps, jewelry, pottery, sweets, fabrics, furniture and the like.
However, as the commercial life of the city centers becomes progressively impoverished,
such activities tend to be crowded out by the resale of banal imported commercial goods.

 The additional financing is due to cost over-runs due to the following factors: (a) after a
lengthy process of geographical targeting, project identification and design, only the first
batch of investments could be appraised and costed in order to respond to the
government’s request for implementing the rehabilitation work without additional delays;
the lack of sufficiently detailed feasibility studies at the time of appraisal of the original
project resulted in significant under estimation of packages during actual contract
execution; (b) high country inflation between 2003 and 2010, aggravated by soaring
construction material prices in the international market, particularly regarding steel,
cement and asphalt, combined with the enforcement of new environmental regulation led
to the closure of several quarries and imposed large variation orders; (c) because of
uncertainties associated with the rehabilitation work, particularly when testing historical
buildings or structures was restricted during appraisal, it was very difficult to anticipate
the full extent of repairs; this led to major adjustments in design as the work evolved; (d)
underground infrastructure upgrading, including utilities networks displacement and
relocation which are very difficult to cost out, generated the largest cost increase; and (e)
the unusually high frequency of archeological “chance finds? in all five cities during
projec implementation caused unpredictable cost increases and resulted in unexpected
delays due to the work site closure by the Department of Antiquities (DGA) and
redesigned works.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Nina Bhatt (MNSSO)
   Mr Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSWA)
   Mr Gael Gregoire (MNSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Safeguard Issues: Given their complex street pattern and marginal role in
urban economies, city centers suffer from lack of adequate environmental amenities, such
as sanitation, drainage, solid waste management. Priority environmental measures
include: land use planning sensitive to protection of the natural setting of archeological
sites; creation of green spaces and public parks and gardens: coastal zone treatment in old
port cities; traffic management; and waste and waste water management.
 The primary adverse environmental impacts are associated with the construction period.
In addition, there might be temporary impacts associated with the re-routing of traffic
around the construction areas during the rehabilitation activities in the various cities.
These impacts can be minimized by careful planning of the staging used for construction
and rerouting of traffic, careful supervision of construction activities, and use of
environmental monitoring to support management decisions by the CDR and other
parties. Since one of the main objectives of the CHUD project is the attraction of a larger
number of visitors/tourists, it is expected that increased solid waste and wastewater
generation rates will occur. Various projects/programs are underway in the involved
cities. Once completed, the capacity of these projects/programs will easily accommodate
the increased number of visitors associated with the implementation of the project.
Another potential negative environmental impact during the operation phase relates to
increased vehicle-induced emissions associated with the attraction of larger numbers of
visitors/tourists. These emissions are best mitigated through the improved traffic
circulation and parking management in and around old city centers anticipated through
the CHUD project.

  There is no change in the environmental category “B? as no new safeguard policies are
triggered, therefore no new safeguards instruments will be prepared under this Additional
Financing. The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) has been revised to incorporate,
inter alia, the latest revision of the environmental management plan. The EIA has been
prepared, consulted upon, cleared, and disclosed both in-country, and at the Bank
InfoShop prior to appraisal. The Executive Summary of the EIA was translated into
Arabic and also has been disclosed both locally and in the InfoShop. The proposed
activities under the Additional Financing are of the same nature and the Project will
continue to apply the same agreed environmental framework and mitigation measures, as
updated. There are no unresolved environmental safeguard issues that require special
attention. The last supervision mission (November 2011) highlighted that, during the
rehabilitation activities in various cities, the primary adverse environmental impacts have
been associated with the construction period and the temporary impacts associated with
the re-routing of traffic around the construction areas. Nevertheless, these impacts have
been minimized by careful planning of the staging used for construction and rerouting of
traffic and careful supervision of construction activities. Also, since one of the main
objectives of the project is the attraction of a larger number of visitors/tourists, special
attention is being paid to the proper management of the valuable public space improved
under the project, especially in terms of cleanliness and removal of increased amounts of
solid waste.

 Social Safeguards Issues - Involuntary Resettlement: While every effort has been made
to minimize displacement and to upgrade the areas with the populations in situ, some
displacement could not be avoided, especially where the integrity of the site or technical
requirements apply. A Resettlement Policy Framework and six Resettlement Action
Plans for the affected sites were prepared under the overall project. These include
instruments prepared for the following sites:

 Khan-el-Askar in Tripoli City
 RAPs for Affected Families Relocation. In Tripoli, the project displaced a total of 71
families from the ancient structure of the Khan-el-Askar. All families have been
relocated in a set of three apartment complexes designated as A, B and C. The families
were relocated from the old Khan in two phases: thirty eight families were resettled in
apartment’s complexes known as Blocks A and B under provisions that were specified in
a RAP prepared in 2002. An additional 33 families were more recently resettled under
the Block C apartment complex under a RAP prepared in 2007 but which was updated in
2011 to account for changes in local circumstances. Relocated families at the new
resettlement sites have been interviewed with visits undertaken to the apartments of
relocated project affected peoples (PAPs). The PAPs are very pleased with their new
circumstances including specifically: the proximity of the apartment complexes to the old
site, that it is adjacent to a public school under construction (250 feet away), and the
availability of amenities previously unavailable in the old Khan (toilets, running water,
and larger family space).

 RAP for Relocation of Shops. A design change for the Khan-El-Askar revealed the
necessity of impacting 44 unlicensed external shops in Khan-El-Askar including through
some relocation. These are mainly small commercial shops (general provisions stores,
barbers, clothing shops etc) and whose status is considered illegal by the Municipality.
As with the families located within the ancient Khan, these shops have a strong sense of
ownership which is locally and informally well recognized because their businesses have
been existed since 1956, and an informal inheritance structure is in place. As with the
relocated households, the shop owners have been relocated to a nearby site which ensures
no disruption in terms of access to their former clientele.

 Tripoli Market Platform - RAP for relocation of vendors. The project impacts are due
mainly to the resettlement of unlicensed kiosks and flea markets from the eastern and the
western banks of the Abou Ali River to a newly built platform over the bridge and
possible loss of income due to changes in traffic routes. The census which was carried
out in 2005 (with a cut-off date) identified 258 eligible vendors with several updates
confirming the original list (in June 2006, and again in May 2007 by the PMU). The data
collection towards developing the eligibility list is based on survey data from: (a) the
vendors or merchants themselves (the affected population); (b) other area residents; (c)
confirmation from the syndicate of stalls’ vendors and flea markets; and (d) key
informants (including long term residents such as the elderly and persons with
knowledge, such as the Tripoli Mayor) in the Old City. The local government has
endorsed this number. This is documented in a letter received by the CDR from the
Municipality of Tripoli dated April 16, 2010. The form of resettlement assistance
provided to the vendors is a new location adjacent to their present location and of higher
value due to improvement in market conditions. Each beneficiary will have a total area of
5.4 m2 comprising 4m2 for displaying goods, and 1.4m2 as a private circulation area
compared to an existing area of 2m2 with a shared circulation area with other vendors
and clients. The conditions in the new market of the quality of the stall, aeration, hygiene
and infrastructure (water, electricity, drainage) are far more improved than the existing
market. The Municipality will undertake operation and maintenance including cleaning
and solid waste management of the new market which is not the case of the existing
market.

 El-Bawaba Square, Tyre City

  RAP for vendor relocation. 197 informal business owners (vegetable vendors, butchers,
seamstresses, cobblers) will be relocated to a temporary market (which is fully
established) in the immediate vicinity while physical works are carried out. The business
owners are scheduled to move back to the rehabilitated market once complete. The
vendor's temporary location is 30 meters from their current location and the RAP
preparation process (now finalized) underwent an extensive process of consultations.
Vendors (who were unlicensed pre-project) have signed a 15 year contract with the
municipality attesting to their willingness to move. Affected people believe this contract
is important because it is their guarantee of receiving a stall in the coveted new
marketplace. There is full expectation on the part of PAPs that they will be able to
maintain, if not improve upon their daily income levels. The last World Bank mission
was pleased to note that the marked improvement of the temporary market place already
provides a marked improvement from the current location in terms of amenities,
overhead shelter from the elements, the design of the kiosks, etc.

 Salameh Building in Saida City

 Salameh RAP. Two families consisting of three individuals have been temporarily
moved to an adjacent dwelling to permit restoration of their ancestral homes which is
considered of significant historical importance. These buildings suffered significant
structural damage and were partially collapsed following an earthquake. In lieu of a
portion of one of the buildings being made available to the public for a fixed period, the
municipality is restoring the historical Salameh Building in Saida City.

 19.     Under the overall project, the summary of safeguards instruments is as follows:
an updated Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was cleared by the Bank in 2011 and
disclosed in-country (www.cdr.gov.lb) and at the Bank InfoShop in both English and
Arabic versions. No new safeguards issues are triggered under the Additional Financing
for this project, thus no new safeguards instruments will be prepared under the Additional
Financing. The overall project prepared a total of six RAPs. All six RAPs have been
submitted to the Bank by the project. The English and Arabic versions of these RAPs
have been disclosed in-country (www.cdr.gov.lb) and at the Bank InfoShop. It came to
the team’s attention that the early RAP from 2002 had not been formally cleared nor
disclosed at the time, but upon discovery of this issue, the Task Team made an immediate
request to the PMU to locate, translate, and disclose this RAP in-country (this has been
completed). The Task Team confirms that the 2002 RAP was implemented in a
satisfactory manner. The project affected people are pleased with the relocation; a
functioning grievance redressal mechanism is in place, including accessibility to the
PMU on relocation and general project issues. There is no discernible difference in
implementation outcomes between all 71 relocated families (those relocated under the
provisions of the 2002 RAP compared to those relocated under the provisions of the 2011
RAP).
  Other safeguards related issues:
  The implementation of the expected social safeguards was considerably delayed for
technical and political reasons but the Project Management Unit (PMU) now has a strong
technical team in place to help manage safeguards. The PMU also has very strong field
presence, including field based staff, this resulting in regular interactions with affected
peoples and local government authorities. This interaction also serves to strengthen the
grievance redress process because field based staff (who are from the local area) are well
known to affected peoples and thus are available for airing viewpoints and complaints on
a regular basis if needed. There has also been closer Bank follow-up on the progress
related to each instrument. Finally, two complaints (now resolved) by some community
members created an opportunity for crisis management and for mutual learning.
  Physical Cultural Resources: The Project Objectives include the conservation and
management of the built heritage. All provisions are fully compliant with the safeguard
triggered under OP/BP4.11.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Improved quality of life for residents who will benefit from better housing; preservation
of cultural heritage sites; improved tourism, environmental conditions, and economic
activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Project Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) and Resettlement Action Plans have been prepared for the Project Additional
Financing. The environmental assessment contains an Environmental Management Plan
with a special cultural heritage component to address issues related to cultural property.
Implementation of the environmental management plan and resettlement action plan are
an integral part of the project supervision process, and environmental and social
specialists from the Bank regularly participate in supervision missions to monitor these
activities.

 The direct involvement of the Directorate General of Antiquities (DGA) in the
implementation of this project, and the project's central objectives of cultural property
preservation and enhancement, ensures appropriate compliance with the Bank policy.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project key stakeholders include the local municipalities, the local population in and
around key heritage sites (segmented in different interest groups); key government
ministries and departments responsible for urban planning, heritage conservation and
tourism; and a range of interested NGOs and civil society organizations. Extensive
consultations have taken place on each site prior to Project implementation and during
implementation according to the procedures detailed in the RAPs.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/20/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/23/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/23/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/20/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/23/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/23/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
  Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
  Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
  adverse impacts on cultural property?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Chantal Reliquet                          01/20/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gael Gregoire                             01/20/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Nina Bhatt                                01/20/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Mutasem El-Fadel                          01/10/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Hocine Chalal                             01/20/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Franck Bousquet                           01/20/2012
  Comments:
