                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/06/2011                                   Report No.: AC6081
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Lesotho                               Project ID: P119432
Project Name: Lesotho Smallholder Agriculture Development Program
Task Team Leader: Frauke Jungbluth
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 6, 2011         Estimated Board Date: November 10, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Agricultural extension and
research (30%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (30%)
Theme: Land administration and management (25%);Rural markets (25%);Rural
services and infrastructure (25%);Other rural development (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              10.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               3.48
         International Fund for Agriculture Development                 10.00
         Local Farmer Organizations                                       0.98
                                                                        14.46
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase marketed output among project
beneficiaries in Lesotho#s smallholder agriculture sector.

3. Project Description
The project will consist of three components implemented over six years: (a) Increasing
Agricultural Market Opportunities; (b) Increasing Market-oriented Smallholder
Production; and (c) Project Management.

 Component 1: Increasing Agricultural Market Opportunities. The objective of this
component is to support Lesotho#s developing agricultural business sector to contribute
to increased commercialization of smallholder agriculture. The main beneficiaries will
be small and medium-sized agro-based businesses, rural entrepreneurs, and farmer
associations having the potential to expand their market-related activities, thereby
providing improved market opportunities for smallholder farmers.
  Sub-Component 1.1: Promotion of Innovative Agri-Business Initiatives. The main
objective of this sub-component is to support, through a Competitive Grants Program
(CGP), the introduction, testing and demonstration of new business initiatives and
technological innovations by small and medium agriculture-related and rural businesses,
registered associations and cooperatives. The business initiatives and innovations will
likely focus on measures to increase competitiveness, improve market access, add value,
and improve service provision, thereby increasing opportunities and demand for local
smallholder produce. Grants will be awarded based on proposals received from
applicants and chosen through a competitive selection process. The demand-driven
approach will ensure that proposals are relevant to the applicants# expressed needs and
that winning applicants are the most entrepreneurial and innovative. However, in
recognition of the limited management capacity of most businesses, and to support them
in developing and implementing their activities, grant applicants will be required to seek
assistance from one or more service providers. The service provider(s) will provide
technical assistance, business and management advice, and support for business
development and market identification, and will help with drafting the application and
reports as needed. Eligible service providers will include a wide range of private sector
consultants, traders, faculty, extension and research staff and NGOs present in Lesotho.

  Each grant will include three major elements: (a) a demonstration element to cover costs
of setting up the activity (a business development element); (b) a service provider
element to cover costs of local technical assistance and support; and (c) a technology
transfer element to cover costs of disseminating the grant findings to other potential
adopters. Two levels of grants are proposed: (a) grants for small and medium businesses
(up to a maximum amount of US$ 25,000), focusing particularly on value adding
activities including small-scale processing and marketing, as well as provision of inputs
and services; and (b) grants for small developing entrepreneurs, generally registered
associations, at the district or community level (up to a maximum amount of US$ 5,000).
It is anticipated that up to 100 of the small grants and 70 of the larger grants will be
awarded. To engender ownership and to demonstrate commitment, there will be a cost-
sharing requirement, which will be set at 20 percent for the smaller grants and 40 percent
for the larger grants. Proposals will be evaluated and selected based on criteria such as:
(a) the viability of proposed activities; (b) the extent that activities would increase
competitiveness, improve market access, add value, and/or improve service provision; (c)
the expected impact on market demand for smallholder produce; (d) the extent that the
proposal introduces innovations in the Lesotho context; (e) possible replicability by other
small rural businesses, and (f) likely sustainability. Criteria and procedures are defined in
the project implementation manual, with proposals evaluated and selected by an
independent committee based on the defined criteria.

 Sub-Component 1.2: Market Linkage Development. The main objective of this sub-
component is to develop and improve links between agricultural producers and markets,
reduce market transaction costs, and align production decisions with business and market
opportunities. This will be achieved by setting up market linkage mechanisms and
providing for improved information flow and responsiveness between all actors in the
market chain. The sub-component will target commodity-based farmer associations,
district and local apex associations, registered farmer cooperatives, informal farmer
organizations or producer interest groups, market intermediaries, agri-businesses, input
suppliers and other market participants.Activities to be supported include: (a) an
upgraded public market information system, to be managed by the Department of
Marketing of the Ministry of Trade and Industry, Cooperatives and Marketing (MTICM),
which will seek to improve information quality and services by providing training,
supporting sub-sector and commodity studies, and introducing IT-supported data and
information exchange (e.g. web-based data exchange and Short Message Service (SMS);
(b) agricultural trade fairs at district level; (c) round-table meetings with farmer/farmer
groups and traders/processors; and (d) a mentoring service providing direct field support
to producer groups and associations helping them to understand and adopt technologies in
accordance with market requirements (e.g. food safety, product handling).

 Component 2: Increasing Market-oriented Smallholder Production. The objective of
this component is to support small-scale farmers in their efforts to increase production of
marketable commodities and respond more readily to market requirements, to help
motivated semi-subsistence producers to improve the productivity of their agricultural
activities and become more market-oriented, and to address natural resource management
concerns.

  Sub-component 2.1: Preparation and Implementation of Agricultural Investment Plans
(AIPs). The Agricultural Investment Plans will identify promising agricultural activities,
establish investment priorities, and indicate training that will be needed to ensure that the
activities can be taken up successfully. The AIPs will target three main groups of
beneficiaries: (a) existing producer groups that want to improve the production and
productivity of their crops, improve their market integration, increase their membership
or join forces with other groups; (b) broader community-based groups that manage
resources or facilities which are important for market-oriented production; and (c) poorer
farmers who have an interest in joining a group or committed farmers with a common
interest wishing to form new groups. To clearly demonstrate impact and avoid scattered
interventions, the project will concentrate its efforts in district areas that offer more
potential for market-oriented production by smallholders. The sub-component will build
on the experience with Community Action Plans but will focus more on market-oriented
agriculture with a greater emphasis on analyzing the viability of interventions. The sub-
component will support three main activities: (a) Preparation of AIPs; (b) AIP related
training; and (c) Implementation of AIPs.

 a) Preparation of AIPs. Approximately 90 four-year AIPs that spell out the support to
be provided under the SADP will be prepared in the four project districts. The AIPs will
identify and prioritize training and technical assistance needs, along with key resource
management activities and productive investments. The area of coverage for each AIP
will be based on agricultural sub-centers. The number of sub-centers covered in each
district will differ depending on the population of the district and the number of sub-
centers located in the district. AIP preparation will involve assessing opportunities for
productivity improvements, market requirements and opportunities, and reviewing the
findings of other community-based planning initiatives that have taken place in the recent
past. It will also involve consultations with potential beneficiaries in a sub-centre area,
including active farmer associations and groups and selected individual market-oriented
farmers, and discussions with other key stakeholders in the area. A multi-disciplinary
team of district-based staff will lead the AIP planning process (the Agricultural
Investment Planning Team # AIPT), which will be similar to the Action Learning Cycle
approach under the Community Action Planning processes. Support will be provided for
the facilitation of the process, including operations of district-level planning teams,
technical support including external technical inputs, workshops and public gatherings,
and evaluation and learning activities.

  b) AIP related training. Successful preparation and implementation of AIPs will require
strengthening the capacity among district staff. Additional skills will be required as well
among agricultural service providers if these are to assist farmers effectively in taking a
more market-driven and business-oriented approach to farming. Training will be
provided to increase the capacity of service providers in support of the preparation and
implementation of the AIPs, including the AIPTs, MAFS and other relevant ministry staff
at district and sub-center level, and community-based extension and animal health
workers where they exist.The initial focus will be on training in participatory planning
and the Action Learning Cycle for AIPTs and extension staff. Provision has also been
made to address other training needs that will emanate from the AIPs, especially in
productivity improvements, marketing and business planning topics, and in skill gaps
related to crops and livestock products for the market. Due to the importance of
livestock, and the limited knowledge of livestock husbandry among extension staff,
specialized training on livestock topics will be reintroduced for selected Agricultural
Resource Center (ARC) and sub-centre staff, Livestock Assistants, and Community
Animal Health Workers at the facilities of the Department of Livestock Services in
Maseru. Provision has been made for the rehabilitation and refurbishment of this training
facility, training costs, and small kits for trained staff.

 c) Implementation of AIPs. The project will provide support for the implementation of
agreed interventions that have been selected as priorities in the AIPs.Implementation of
AIPs will involve preparing agreements with producer groups and other community-
based institutions, and also local service providers where these will be involved;
procurement of items for investment support; training and advice on technical as well as
business management aspects; activities to improve the condition or management of
natural resources; and annual round tables as well as annual AIP review and action
planning meetings. Project support will amount to US$ 80,000 per AIP on average over
four years, with an annual budget ceiling of US$ 25,000 per year. Each sub-center AIP
fund will consist of three cost elements (training, natural resources management, and
productive investments), with a ceiling of 40 percent of the total amount in each category.
Productive investments will include both community-wide activities and support for local
producer group and associations, with beneficiaries expected to contribute 10 percent of
the costs for the former and 20 percent for the latter, to instill ownership and
commitment.
  Sub-Component 2.2: Technology Packages for Smallholders. To take advantage of
specific expertise or approaches that are available among non-state actors but not in the
government system, contracts will be provided to locally-based NGOs and private
operators to support the introduction, adaptation and dissemination of new and improved
technologies, coupled with training and support. Topics will be drawn from common
themes emerging during the preparation of the AIPs and requiring innovative solutions
not necessarily obvious to the local communities, and will be prioritized at annual
technology forums attended by district and national staff and experts. Examples of
technologies likely to be supported through the project include: conservation agriculture,
water harvesting, improved homestead gardening, mushroom production, micro-scale
irrigation systems, use of open-pollinated varieties, livestock feeding and improvement,
and small-scale processing technologies.

 Component 3: Project Management. The objective of this component is to manage and
use resources in accordance with the project#s objectives and procedures. A Project
Management Unit will be established in MAFS and staffed with recruited specialists and
seconded Government officers. An effective project management and administrative
system will be set-up to ensure coordination between the project, other initiatives and
national institutions working in the sector.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will operate in four districts: Leribe, Botha-Bothe, Berea and Mafeteng. For
competitive grants, Maseru-based market operators who are active in the districts may be
considered. For interventions under Component 2, the project area is suggested to
include those parts of the four districts that offer the more potential for market-oriented
production by small-scale farmers.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)
   Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Component 1 of the project will provide support to successful applicants through a
Competitive Grants Program designed to increase competitiveness, improve market
access, add value, and improve service provision. Two levels of grants are proposed: (a)
grants for small and medium businesses (up to a maximum amount of US$ 25,000),
focusing particularly on value adding activities including small-scale processing and
marketing, as well as provision of inputs and services; and (b) grants for small
developing entrepreneurs, generally registered associations, at the district or community
level (up to a maximum of amount of US$ 5,000).
 Activities to be undertaken under both categories of grants are expected to have
negative impacts on the bio-physical environment. For example, under the agriculture-
oriented business category, processing of fruits and vegetables and production of pickles
and juices involve wet processes that require liquid waste water treatment to meet
acceptable standards; operation of slaughter houses and manufacturing of meat products
produce solid wastes that require proper solid waste and effluent management systems
(which are likely to require substantial volumes of water for maintaining acceptable
hygiene standards); and operation of starch mills (corn and sorghum) creates noise and
emits fuel fumes. Component 1 therefore triggers OP/BP 4.01 for Environmental
Assessment.
 Activities to be undertaken under both categories of grants also are expected to
contribute to increased use by farmers of fertilizers and chemicals, such as pesticides and
herbicides. Component 1 therefore also triggers OP/BP 4.09 for Pest Management.

 Component 2 will support small-scale farmers in their efforts to increase production of
marketable commodities and respond more readily to market requirements, to help
motivated semi-subsistence producers to improve the productivity of their agricultural
activities and become more market-oriented, and to address related natural resource
management concerns. The component will include three main activities:
 (a) preparation and implementation of Agricultural Investment Plans (AIPs); (b)
strengthening the capacity of local agricultural services to support the preparation and
implementation of the AIPs; and (c) developing partnerships with locally-based NGOs
and other service providers to demonstrate innovative technology packages within the
context of the AIPs. The component will deliver the following outputs: (i) AIPs prepared
and interventions identified, (ii) investments in improved production systems
implemented, (ii)       sustainable management of priority natural resources by users
strengthened, and (iii) innovative technologies demonstrated.

 Activities to be undertaken under this component are expected to have negative impacts
on the bio-physical environment. For example, under investments in improved
production systems and innovative technology packages, farmers will engage in land
clearing and preparation, as well as introduction of mechanized farming. Component 2
therefore also triggers OP/BP 4.01 for Environmental Assessment.
  Component 3 will support project management and sector coordination. At national
level, there will be a project management committee and a project management unit for
day-to-day management and coordination of project activities, monitoring and evaluation,
financial management, procurement, and technical specialists responsible for component
activities. At district level, there will be district management committees and one project
field officer per district. Activities under this component are not expected to have
adverse environmental and social impacts.

 OP/BP 4.01: Environmental Assessment. Since the exact nature and location of project
interventions cannot be determined at this stage, the Borrower has prepared an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) spelling out the procedures
that will be followed to mitigate any adverse environmental and social impacts of project
investments. The ESMF formulates standard methods and procedures, along with
institutional arrangements for screening, reviewing, implementing and monitoring
specific project activities and, if needed, Environment Management Plans (EMPs). The
implementation manuals for the project activities will also assure that activities are
conducted within the guidelines provided by the ESMF.

 OP/BP 4.09: Pest Management. The project aims to promote more sustainable
agricultural production methods and does not foresee any direct investment in pesticides.
However, it cannot be ruled out that project activities might indirectly promote the
increased use of fertilizers and purchase of pesticides. Therefore, pest and pesticide
management issues relevant to the project are discussed in the Pest Management Plan
(PMP) prepared for the project to cover potential increased purchase and use of fertilizers
and other agricultural chemicals pesticide during project implementation. The Borrowers
will abide by the WHO negative list as one measure to mitigate risks associated with
pesticide application.

 OP/BP 4.11: Physical Cultural Resources. The policy is not directly triggered by the
project, but in some of the districts in which the project will be implemented, such as
Leribe and Botha Bothe, artifacts from historical cultural resources have been found at
some places. The project will establish a Physical Cultural Resources Chance Find
Procedure to put in place procedures for handling chance finds that might occur during
the implementation of the project.

 OP/BP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement. It is not anticipated that there will be any land
acquisitions as a direct result of the project. However, some people in the project area
might have to be resettled as a result of the recently passed Land Act or might be affected
by activities supported under sub-component 2.1. The policy is triggered as a
precautionary measure in case project beneficiaries are affected by the new legislation or
in the unlikely event that project-supported activities might require involuntary
resettlement, which could occur, for example, if a farmers group chooses to establish a
processing center and establishment of the center requires land acquisition.

  OP 7.50: Projects on International Waterways. Small-scale irrigation activities could be
financed under sub-component 2.1. Since the project will use a demand-driven planning
process, it is not known how many such schemes might be financed and in which
locations investments might take place. Since Lesotho is part of the Orange-Senqu river
basin, Lesotho has to notify the other riparians to this basin, namely, South Africa,
Namibia and Botswana.

 It is the assessment of Bank staff that the proposed activities will not cause appreciable
harm to the other riparians, and that the proposed activities will not be appreciably
harmed by the other riparians# possible water use.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
n/a

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
n/a

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
While capacity differs between institutions, at the overall country level, environmental
oversight capacity is adequate. All of the institutions that will be involved in the
implementation of the project have previously implemented Bank-funded projects or are
currently involved in the implementation of Bank-funded projects or programs. As such,
they are familiar with the Bank#s safeguards policies and have gained experience in the
implementation and oversight of Bank-funded projects.

  To ensure that the project remains in compliance with the government#s regulatory
framework, as well as Bank safeguard policies, funds have been earmarked in
Component 3 to provide hands-on training and capacity building to national- and district-
level staff/stakeholders tasked with oversight and application of the project's safeguards
instruments. Particular emphasis will be placed on training core staff assigned with
oversight of the project's safeguard policies during project preparation and the first year
of implementation.

 A local environmental specialist will be hired and made available to the PMU to
backstop environmental and social safeguard issues of the grant and investment activities.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The draft safeguards documents (ESMF and RPF) have been extensively discussed with
various groups of stakeholders at district and national level, including relevant
government agencies, national and international NGOs, and farmer associations.

 The safeguard documents (ESMF and RPF) were reviewed in Lesotho by the National
Environmental Secretariat prior to being submitted to the Bank.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/03/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/11/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/30/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/11/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/03/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/11/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   N/A
  SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
  project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Frauke Jungbluth                          07/01/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba                   07/01/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Kristine Schwebach                        07/06/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Michael Morris                            09/12/2011
  Comments:
