                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/02/2011                                      Report No.: AC6597
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P120660                  Original Project Name: LIBERIA
                                              Electricity System Enhancement Project
                                              (LESEP)
Country: Liberia                              Project ID: P129097
Project Name: Additional Financing Liberia Electricity System Enhancement Project
Task Team Leader: Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1,         Estimated Board Date: January 26, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTEG                          Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                              Loan
Sector: Thermal Power Generation (90%);General energy sector (10%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             22
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
         Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds          1.45
                                                                        1.45
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the project is to improve and increase access to electricity in Liberia.

 The global environmental objective of the GEF-financed component of the project,
which targets the supply of modern renewable energy services for off-grid users, is to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions when compared with Liberia's emissions growth
baseline, and thus to contribute to mitigating climate change.

3. Project Description
The Additional Financing proposes to support the original project design in the areas of:
(a) enhancement of distribution services and general systems support for Liberia's power
utility Liberia Electricity Corporation (LEC), (b) enhancing options for power generation
through the procurement of a thermal generation plant of approximately 10 MW; and (c)
provision of modern renewable energy to off-grid users. These three components can be
readily scaled-up increasing the project's impact and development effectiveness.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located in Liberia's capital Monrovia, its suburban areas and some targeted
rural areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
   Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTWR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
It is expected that the installation of the distribution equipment, the fuel supply lines and
storage facilities will have limited environmental impacts due to the use of existing rights
of ways and premises in the urban areas of Monrovia following OP 4.12 alongside OP
4.01. The fuel supply pipelines linking the fuel jetty with the storage facilities will be
operated according to international safety and pollution prevention standards. The
additional financing will also finance a 10 MW thermal power plant, which will be
located on the existing premises of the Liberia Electricity Corporation (LEC).

 It is expected that this power plant will have limited environmental impacts on
surrounding air quality and very limited impact on water and soil quality. An emergency
response plan to manage accidental hydrocarbon spills, explosions and fire will be part of
the EIA prepared for the project. The EIA preparation will be guided by the World Bank
approved ESMF for the original project. The EIA will be prepared, reviewed and cleared
by the Bank, and disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop within six months of the
effectiveness of the Additional Financing, and before any construction starts. It is
expected that the renewable energy component will have very limited environmental
impacts. The proposed EIA Category is B, since no adverse large scale/long term
impacts are anticipated.

 Experience shows that extension of the distribution network has a very low likelihood to
cause resettlement. The fuel supply pipelines, storage tanks and the 10 MW thermal
power plant will all be located in existing right of ways and on existing premises. It is
also expected that the renewable energy component will not cause resettlement. In case
any people are affected, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared will be the
guiding document to prepare a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The RAP will be
cleared by the World Bank and disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop before any
construction can start.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
It is expected that the project will not cause any serious indirect or long term
environmental or social impacts. The project is expected to positively impact the
beneficiary communities and individuals in a number of ways. The rehabilitation of
electricity infrastructure will not only improve the way of life of the people in terms of
having improved access to electricity, but will also serve as the basis for their social and
economic empowerment and reduction in poverty levels.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
There are not any viable alternatives to the proposed project. The proposed project will
build on the two safeguard instruments developed by LEC: the Environment and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
Provisions under these frameworks will guide the preparation and implementation of
emergency electricity infrastructure activities under the proposed project. The activities
under the additional financing will also build on these two frameworks. Environmental
and social screening will guide the preparation of EIAs or RAPs. An EIA will be
prepared for the 10 MW thermal power plant which will need to be approved by the
World Bank and disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop before construction can start.
Both safeguard instruments are designed to guide LEC and the RREA as implementing
agencies for their respective components. A project specific EIA and RAP are being
prepared for the fuel, supply lines, the storage tanks and the 10 MW thermal power plant.
These documents will be prepared, reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed in-
country and in the Infoshop within six months of the effectiveness of the Additional
Financing, and before any construction starts. Apart from the Safeguard Policy OP 4.01
on Environmental Assessment and OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, the World Bank
Group General Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (April 2007), the
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines on Electric Power Transmission and
Distribution and the Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines on Thermal Power
apply. Please note that these guidelines have replaced Part III of the Pollution Prevention
and Abatement Handbook on 30 April 2007.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementing agencies Liberia Electricity Corporation (LEC) and the Rural and
Renewable Energy Agency (RREA) will be responsible for the implementation of the
ESMF and RPF, although Consultants will be engaged to prepare Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) and Environmental Impact Assessment and Environmental Management
Plans (EIAs/EMPs) when necessary. Capacity building sessions will be provided by the
team or consultants to ensure smooth implementation and safeguards instruments.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Where project activities will potentially impact negatively on people living and/or
working on or near the project areas, the procedures as described in the existing ESMF
and RPF will become applicable, including the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure. People will be also compensated and/or resettled for any loss that they may
incur due to project activities. Likewise, no project activities will be implemented until a
resettlement action plan (RAP) has been prepared, approved of (by the government as
well as by the World Bank) and disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop. The
Borrower's capacity for Safeguard Policies is nevertheless limited. With the arrival of the
new Management Contractor, who is required to comply with IFC and World Bank
environmental and social safeguard standards, the capacity of the power utility to
implement Safeguards Policies has been enhanced.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     08/10/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 09/13/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/14/2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     08/11/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 09/13/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/14/2010
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius   11/22/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Robert A. Robelus                  11/22/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz           11/22/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi              11/28/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lucio Monari                       11/23/2011
  Comments:
