INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
(FCPF READINESS FUND)
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:70961


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 30, 2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Liberia                               Project ID: P124073
                                               Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Liberia – FCPF REDD READINESS PREPARATION SUPPORT
Task Team Leader: Paola Agostini
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A                  Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: AFTEN                           Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector: ENV
Theme: Forests, Climate Change
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
FCPF Amount (US$m.): 3.6
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing              Simple [ X]                Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project      Yes [ ]                   No [ ]


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of R-PP Assessment Note]:
The Project Development Objective is to carry out a consultative and quantitative analysis of the
different land use options for development of the national REDD+ Strategy for Liberia to be
approved by the National Climate Change Steering Committee.

The options analysis will look at the tradeoffs and complementarities of various land uses, based
on different criteria such as: revenues for GoL, livelihoods for the communities, benefits for the
communities, environmental and social sustainability, and only as a last criterion and additional
benefit, the possibility of carbon credit. The options analysis will be fully consulted and will
provide the basis for the development of a socially and environmentally sound national strategy
to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+).



                                                                                                1
Key Results
   1. Consultations on land-use options with GoL and stakeholders (4 county level)
      (participation as defined by SESA national first validation workshop)
   2. Consultations on REDD+ Strategy (4 county level)(participation as defined by SESA
      national validation workshop)
   3. Quantitative analysis of land use in forested and mixed agricultural lands prepared and
      validated by the National Climate Change Steering Committee (NCCSC) (yes/no)
   4. Quantified reference scenario prepared and validated by the REDD+ Technical Working
      Group (RTWG) (yes/no)
   5. Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) drafted and validated by
      relevant stakeholders (yes/no)
   6. National REDD+ strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
      (REDD+) is prepared and validated by national stakeholders (yes/no).


C. Project Description:

The FCPF grant will provide funding to support Liberia in carrying out selected key activities
outlined in the R-PP for the REDD+. The total funding requested from the FCPF is
US$3,600,000. This amount will fund a portion of the identified R-PP activities, and will help
the Country towards achieving REDD+ Readiness.


The activities to be financed by the FCPF are limited to technical assistance, analytical studies,
capacity building, goods, operating costs, and consultation processes and does not include the
implementation of site specific REDD+ programs on the ground (carbon deals). The following is
a table with the four components to be financed by the FCPF.



       FCPF grant         FCPF grant Subcomponents (Lead GoL              R-PP Components to be
                            Agency to provide technical oversight-all
       Component                 contracts managed by RIU)                  financed by FPCF
                        1.1. National Readiness Management              1(a) National Readiness
                        Arrangements and activities (FDA)               Management Arrangements
    1. Support to the
    coordination of     1.2. Information Sharing and Early              1(b) Information Sharing and
    the REDD+           Dialogue with Key Stakeholder Groups            Early Dialogue with Key
    Readiness Process   (FDA)                                           Stakeholder Groups
    and consultations   1.3 Consultations & participation in
    ($1.61 M)           REDD strategy development (FDA -                1(c) Consultation and
                        implementation- and MPEA -                      participation process
                        coordination-)
                        1.4. Consultation and Participation             1(c) Consultation and
                        Process SESA (EPA)                              Participation Process


                                                                                                       2
                        1.5. Strengthening national feedback
                                                                  Included in 1(c) Consultation
                        and grievance redress mechanisms
                                                                  and Participation Process
                        (FDA)
                                                                  2(d) Social and
                        2.1. Social and Environmental Impacts
                                                                  Environmental Impacts
                        Assessments during Readiness
                                                                  (SESA)
    2 Contribute to     Preparation (SESA) (EPA)
    the design of the
    national REDD+                                                  2(e) Finalisation of National
    strategy                                                         REDD Strategy document
                        2.2 Finalization of the REDD+ Strategy     (including partially financing
    ($0.8 M)
                        (FDA -implementation- and MPEA -              of 2(b) REDD+ Strategy
                        coordination-)                                        Options)


                        3. Development of a Reference Level or
      3. Reference
                        Scenario (including Forest Cover          3) Development Reference
    level or Scenario
                        Mapping and forest inventory in           Level or Scenario
    ($0.6M)
                        priority areas) (FDA)
    4. Project
    management
                        4. Project Management (FDA)
    ($0.59)

        TOTAL




D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
The project does not entail construction or any other physical intervention on the ground. Rather,
it is focused on providing technical assistance to enhance the technical and institutional capacity
of the government to participate in a future international REDD+ mechanism.


E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

In Liberia, there is a weak institutional capacity that undermines the ability of the government to
implement the SESA and to ensure that social and environmental risks identified are effectively
mitigated although Liberia has enacted a robust Environmental Protection Act and adopted
appropriate regulations destined to inform the conduct of environmental activities, assessments,
impacts and audits. The development of SESA will be informed by an analysis of the current
environment policies and regulations, World Bank Safeguards and any foreseen social and
environmental impacts as a result of REDD implementation. The World Bank will provide all
necessary guidance in order to implement the social and environmental mitigation.




                                                                                                    3
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Moses Yao Duphey                        Environmental Safeguard Specialist, AFTEN
Lucienne M M’Baipor                     Sr. Social Development Spec, AFTCS


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant must comply with World Bank safeguard policies
regarding the management of environmental and social impacts. This grant will, in part, support
the country’s activities to identify the potential risks associated with REDD+ and mitigation
options. In order to do this, the FCPF is using a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA) to integrate key environmental and social considerations into REDD+ Readiness by
combining analytical and participatory approaches. The SESA allows: (i) social and
environmental considerations to be integrated into the REDD+ Readiness process, in particular
the REDD+ strategy; (ii) stakeholder participation in identifying and prioritizing key issues,
assessment of policy, institutional and capacity gaps to manage these priorities and
recommendations, and disclosure of findings in the REDD Country’s progress reports on
Readiness preparation; and (iii) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
to be put in place to manage environmental and social risks and to mitigate potential adverse
impacts.




                                                                                             4
It is envisioned that the safeguards policies mentioned below may be triggered in the REDD+
Readiness process.

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)               Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
In line with the nature of the REDD+ Readiness preparation activities, the Government of
Liberia will use a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) as the applicable
safeguards approach. The strength of the SESA for REDD+ is that it will combine analytical
work and consultation in an iterative fashion to inform the preparation of the REDD+ strategy.
The SESA will help ensure compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies by integrating key
environmental and social considerations relevant to REDD+ including all those covered by the
safeguard policies. The SESA will help the Government of Liberia formulate their REDD+
strategy in a way that reflects inputs from key stakeholder groups and addresses the main
environmental and social issues identified. The SESA includes an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) as a distinct output, which provides a framework for managing
and mitigating the environmental and social risk related to investments and carbon finance
transactions in the context of the future implementation of REDD+. The future investments and
carbon finance transactions will still require specific environmental and social assessments, but
these will benefit from the strategy context created by the SESA and ESMF. The ESMF will
include standing methods and procedures, along with appropriate institutional arrangements for
screening, reviewing, implementing and monitoring specific ESMPs to prevent adverse impacts
as well as cumulative impacts.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                    X
This policy seeks to ensure that all options proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy should
take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as well as the numerous environmental
services and products that natural habitats provide to human society. Overall, REDD+ activities
are expected to have significant positive impacts on natural habitats, as the country puts in place
an effective strategy to reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA will address issues related to
natural habitats and potential impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy, which will later be
included in the ESMF.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            X
Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have significant positive impacts on forest, in that the
main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation and forest degradation, while contributing to
the well-being of forest-dependent communities. Potential impact of the National REDD+
Strategy on natural forests will be assessed through the SESA and included in the ESMF. The
SESA and associated ESMF will reflect the requirements of the Bank’s Operational Policy
regarding forest management.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                X
This policy could be triggered depending on the final scope of the National REDD+ Strategy.
Agricultural intensification and reforestation activities, for instance, could trigger this policy,
depending on the methods employed by concrete activities on the ground to manage pests. The
SESA will address critical issues related to pest management, as necessary.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                 X

Some of the future project activities may affect physical cultural resources. Further investigation
is being undertaken to determine if this policy would be triggered or not.

                                                                                                 5
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)              Yes           No          TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
This policy does not apply as there are no Indigenous Peoples in Liberia
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X

REDD+ activities might trigger Involuntary Resettlement in situations involving involuntary
restrictions of access to legally designated parks, protected areas, or forest management /
reforestation areas. The policy aims to avoid involuntary resettlement to the extent feasible, or to
minimize and mitigate its adverse social and economic impacts in cases where resettlement or
other involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided. Through the SESA process, any issues related
to land acquisition or involuntary resettlement will be identified, and a Resettlement Policy
Framework and/or Process Framework will be prepared in addition to the ESMF.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
The REDD+ activities do not involve the construction of new or use of existing dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
The REDD+ activities do not involve international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X
N/A
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                              X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)
N/A


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for review meeting of REDD Country’s mid-term progress report, at which
   time the ISDS may be updated as needed:

   After 1.5 years of initiated the SESA


B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
   needed. The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the initial ISDS
   and/or updated ISDS:




                                                                                                  6
The ESMF will be structured to contain subject-specific frameworks addressing the relevant
requirements of the applicable environmental and social safeguard policies including, but not
necessarily limited to, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); Process Framework (PF).


The draft ESMF report and consultation report and the SESA Report will be ready between 32 -
33 months after the refinement of ToRs. Terms of Reference for the SESA were prepared by the
Consultation Task Force in Liberia and where later consulted with the REDD+ Technical
Working group in March, 2012. The ToRs will be consulted again at the Sanction + 6
workshops in June 2012 before they are finalized.


IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Paola Agostini                           Date: 5/21/2012
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Alexandra C. Bezeredi                    Date: 5/11/2012
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Idah Pswarayi-Riddihough                 Date: 5/22/2012
   Comments:




                                                                                               7
