                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/02/2012                                    Report No.: AC6649
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P096481                   Original Project Name: Municipal Services
                                               Improvement
Country: Macedonia, former Yugoslav            Project ID: P129996
Republic of
Project Name: ADD'L FINANCING - MUNICIPAL SERVICES IMPROVEMENT
PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Bjorn Philipp
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2012      Estimated Board Date: May 10, 2012
Managing Unit: ECSS6                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (30%);Solid waste management (20%);Energy efficiency in power
sector (20%);Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (15%);Public administration- Water,
sanitation and flood protection (15%)
Theme: Other urban development (30%);Urban services and housing for the poor
(30%);Municipal finance (25%);Municipal governance and institution building (15%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            50
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) ‘to improve transparency, financial
sustainability and delivery of targeted municipal services in the participating
municipalities’ remains relevant and will not be changed.

3. Project Description
The proposed additional loan would finance the costs associated with scaling-up of
project activities to enhance the impact of a well-performing project and help mitigating
the adverse impacts of the unfolding economic crisis. It would continue (i) financing
investments in basic local infrastructure and municipal services; (ii) providing technical
assistance (TA) to municipalities and Communal Service Enterprises (CSEs); (iii)
supporting institutional reforms in municipalities through performance grants; and (iv)
supporting operation of the Project Management Unit (PMU) responsible for project
implementation.

 Component A (Municipal Investments) – This component provides loans to
municipalities that are eligible to borrow. Investments financed under this component are
mainly for revenue-generating services and other investment projects of high priority to
municipalities and with cost saving potential. Sub-projects are not limited to certain
sectors. However, revenue-earning investments are primarily for services and
infrastructure provided by CSEs, while cost-saving projects are either under CSEs or
under the direct provision of municipalities.

 Component B (Capacity Building and Institutional Reform) – This component includes
consultancy services and technical assistance for:

 1.    Sub-project preparation: feasibility studies and required financial, environmental
and social assessments; support preparation of final designs and bidding documents; and
provide support for bidding procedures for the kinds of investments funded under
Component A.

 2.      Local capacity building: finance technical assistance, training and consulting
services for municipalities and CSEs to improve performance in service provision and
meet the reform objectives of the Project. Capacity-building activities and institutional
strengthening would be related in particular to helping the municipalities and CSEs meet
criteria for Component C. The TA would also support communications and public
outreach activities.

 3.    National level Institutional strengthening: support to national agencies through
study of policy issues and strategy development related to the financial sustainability of
services.

 Component C (Performance-based Investment Grants) – This component provides
grants to municipalities as an incentive and reward fo implementation of reform
initiatives aimed at performance improvements in service delivery. Performance grants
are awarded according to simple and objective criteria based on the enforcement of legal
and regulatory requirements currently in place in FYR Macedonia (outlined in the Project
Operational Manual, POM). Performance criteria are formulated as a menu for
municipalities to prioritize their own reform agenda. The performance grant can be
awarded anytime up to one year before the close of the Project, whenever the measures
are verifiably implemented. The grants can be used for new investment of the same type
funded by the MSIP, including extension of the original investment funded by the
subloan. The municipality needs to present to the PMU a subproject proposal meeting all
the same appraisal criteria as for Component A investments. The Performance Grant is
subject to a separate Grant Agreement.

 Component D (Project Management and Operating Cost) – This component supports
operation of a project management unit (PMU) and assists with project implementation
and monitoring, as well as preparation of new sub-projects. The component finances
incremental operating costs incurred by the PMU, which is responsible for overall project
management and reports to the Ministry of Finance. The project management services
assist with project implementation in municipalities and CSEs, provide guidance and
support to local project entities, and ensure that the Bank fiduciary (procurement and
financial management) and safeguard (environment, social/land acquisition or other)
guidelines are observed. The PMU is also responsible for appraisal of sub-projects that
become eligible during the course of project implementation. In addition, the PMU will
establish a project portal website as central forum for stakeholder dialogue and feedback.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Sub-projects have been appraised in municipalities that were approved to participate in
the Project. They include, for example, rehabilitation of the water supply network in the
Municipality of Kocani; replacement of public street lighting with more energy efficient
lights in the Municipality of Bogdanci; procurement of solid waste management
collection equipment in the City of Skopje; and construction of storm water drainage
system in the Municipality of Kisela Voda.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Bekim Imeri (ECSS4)
   Mr Nikola Ille (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Due to the demand driven nature of project Component A (Municipal Investments) and
Component C (Performance-based Investment Grants), the list of sub-projects to be
financed throughout the project life is not known ex-ante. The activities under
Components A and C, if properly executed, are not expected to generate significant
adverse environmental effects. The Project does not finance sub-projects that include
wastewater treatment plants, extension of sewerage network and works related to new or
existing solid waste disposal sites. Any sub-projects which in any way affect
transboundary rivers are also ineligible for financing under the Project.
  Sub-projects requiring permanent land acquisition are unlikely but eligible, and the
LARPF has been prepared to cover both temporary and permanent land acquisition.
  Sub-projects which would qualify for Category A rating according to OP 4.01 are
ineligible for financing under the Project. The procedure for determining whether
subprojects are eligible or not is outlined in the Project Operational Manual (POM).
Similarly, the procedure for determining whether an EA/EMP or EMP alone is required
for a subproject, depending on its nature, is laid out in the POM.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Project alternatives are evaluated for any proposed investment, including the alternative
of doing nothing.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In accordance with the Bank’s Operational Policy 4.1, an Environmental Assessment and
Management Framework (EAMF) Report has been prepared for the project. The draft
EAMF was completed in August 2008 and disclosed in country on October 28, 2008.
Following the incorporation of comments received after public discussion, the final report
was submitted to the Bank in November 2008. The EAMF Report presents an overview
of the legal framework of environmental and local-self government sectors in Macedonia;
procedures for environmental assessment for the project development required under
national legislation; procedures for environmental assessment for project development
under World Bank procedures, and analysis of potential environmental impacts caused by
sub-projects during implementation of different types of activities. The Report lists the
potential negative environmental impacts for each type of project activities and provides
lists of environmental mitigation and monitoring activities in order to mitigate and
neutralize the relevant impacts. The Report provides a framework outlining how
Environmental Mitigation Plans and Environmental Monitoring Plans (EMPs) are
developed for each type of sub-project, and when site-specific EA/EIA are needed.

 The requirements triggered by the Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
Assessment) relate to Component A, which provides loans to municipalities that are
eligible to borrow, and Component C, which provides grants for investment. The EAMF
Report contains a list of generic issues that are considered in preparation of EMPs for
each type of sub-project activities financed under these Components. The EAMF and
POM detail the implementation roles of the Borrower and the Bank in preparation,
approval and execution of EMPs for each sub-project.
 As part of sub-project identification, the Project Management Unit (PMU) undertakes
environmental screening for each proposed sub-project and develops respective
environmental management and mitigation plans (EMPs), which are subsequently
included in bidding documents. Environmentally-related activities and procedures are
carried out by the Borrower as designed, with due diligence and sufficient attention to
details. Compliance with measures prescribed in sub-project specific EMPs is reviewed
by PMU staff at regular intervals and written reports on findings prepared and filed in the
PMU.

 Contracts for civil works under the project are subject to screening for environmental
impacts by the Ministry of Environment in the Borrower country. All studies and bidding
documents related to civil engineering works include measures to minimize and/or
mitigate potential environmental damage. Separate EMPs alone or site-specific EA/EIAs
and EMPs are prepared for each sub-project ; even if EA/EIA studies are not required by
the national legislation, the Borrower observes requirements set in the EAMF Report and
respective EMPs prepared for this project. Those EMPs/EAs/EIAs are reviewed and
endorsed by both the responsible environmental entity in the Borrower country and the
World Bank.

 Monitoring compliance in accordance with the findings of the Environmental
Assessment Report and requirements of relevant EMPs, including progress monitoring on
EMP implementation, is undertaken by the Ministry of Finance and reported to the World
Bank twice per year in the semi-annual progress reports.

  In addition to the environmental safeguard above, the project triggered involuntary
resettlement safeguard policy (OP 4.12) because some subprojects may require temporary
access to land, possibly land acquisition. However, subprojects are not likely to require
resettlement. The PMU checks potential for this trigger in all investments and ensures:
(i) whether land acquisition or access to land is required; (ii) if private land acquisition
can be avoided; and (iii) where resettlement is required, that it is done in accordance with
agreed procedures. Chance finds might be discovered during civil works, and these
should be reported to the appropriate authorities and dealt with accordingly.

 A land acquisition and resettlement policy framework (LARPF) has been developed for
the project to be used for sub-projects to be appraised. For appraised sub-projects, all land
acquisition and resettlement issues are clarified and, if needed, a land acquisition and
resettlement action plan (LARAP) would be developed accordingly. The LARPF was
disclosed on October 28, 2008. Any subsequent LARAPs, if required, would have to be
reviewed by the Bank and publicly disclosed. To date, there was no need for LARAPs.
The Operational Manual includes the environmental and land acquisition frameworks as
well as instructions on how to handle chance finds. The POM also includes the Bank
OPs 4.01 and 4.12 requirements dealing with these safeguards, as well as FYR
Macedonia laws and regulations. These are provided to participating municipalities and
consultants/contractors.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key beneficiaries of the subprojects are the customers of the communal service
enterprises (CSEs) owned by the municipalities; in cases of services managed directly by
the municipalities, such as greenmarkets, the beneficiaries are all users including vendors
and consumers.
 For some of the subprojects such as in Valandovo municipality, the water pipes to be
rehabilitated will pass through private properties, requiring temporary land acquisition
during the works. The Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework that has been
prepared also explains how temporary land acquisition will be treated in such cases.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/08/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/28/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/18/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/01/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/28/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/18/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Bjorn Philipp                             03/02/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Nikola Ille                               03/02/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Bekim Imeri                               03/02/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Benoit Paul Blarel                        03/02/2012
  Comments:
