                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/09/2012                                      Report No.: AC6795
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Madagascar                          Project ID: P131945
Project Name: MG-HD Multisector Operation
Task Team Leader: Andreas Blom
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 4,       Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTEE                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (45%);Primary education (40%);Other social services (15%)
Theme: Education for all (40%);Population and reproductive health (20%);Child health
(15%);Nutrition and food security (15%);Health system performance (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             65
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed IDA credit to the Republic of Madagascar for an amount of US$65.00
million aims to maintain basic services in education, health and nutrition. Key constrains
to improving education, health and nutrition outcomes include significant supply side
constraints in the public sector and a sharp increase in private costs of services, due to
cuts in public financing since 2009, as well as a weak governance and management
environment. The proposed operation prioritizes therefore activities that will result in
facilitating access to basic education and health services through a reduction of private
cost of services and the easing of supply side constraints. The project development
objective (PDO) is to preserve critical education, health and nutrition service delivery in
targeted vulnerable areas in the recipient's territory.

3. Project Description
The project design will be kept simple and built on existing activities that can be either
continued or scaled-up. The proposed operation will have the following three
components:
 Component 1: Preserving Critical Education Services

  (a) Subsidies to community teacher salaries. This activity will contribute to the
payment of salaries for community, non-civil servant teachers (FRAM teachers) for four
months out of the year. The government has been subsidizing the salary of these
teachers since 2002 to reduce the direct costs of education to families. Since the crisis, it
has been a challenge for the government to continue paying the subsidy on a timely and
regular basis and the gaps had to be filled by parents' contribution. To ensure the
continued functioning of the system, while at the same time protecting future
sustainability and government commitment for teacher salaries, donors have been
contributing to the payment of these salaries for a limited number of months during the
year, while the government assured the payment for the remaining months. The support
under this project will maintain this principle. The activity will be implemented by the
PIU through well-established mechanisms and structures, i.e. financial service providers
and in close coordination with the regional and local education administrative structures,
who will also provide supervision of this process. This sub-component will finance
salaries to community, non-civil servant teachers.

  (b) Support to school grants (Fonds catalytiques locaux, FCL). This component will
provide a top-up to the grants provided to public primary schools by the government
(called caisse ecole) since 2002. Specifically, these grants will: (i) provide schools with
small annual funds for operational expenses for the maintenance of facilities, acquisition
of basic learning supplies (e.g. chalk, notebooks), and (ii) fund activities of the annual
school action plan, with an emphasis on activities to improve quality. The school grants
will be given to school-based management committees consisting of parents, teachers, the
school director and representatives from the local community. Well-functioning, existing
mechanisms will be used to channel these resources directly to the committees. Training-
financed under sub-component (d)-will also be provided to school management
committees to increase budget transparency and strengthen capacity to manage the grants.
Third party verification through unannounced spot checks will be performed in a sample
of schools. This sub-component will finance transfers to school committees.
  (c) School health and nutrition package. This sub-component will deliver a package
of basic treatment and preventative health and nutrition interventions including
deworming treatment, iron folate and treatment of neglected tropical diseases in schools
in selected areas. The school health activities will be implemented at the school level
twice a year by the Ministry of Education (MEN) with supervision and training supported
by the local health and nutrition structures specifically trained health workers and
community nutrition volunteers. These programs have a successful history on
implementing school health and nutrition interventions. Supervision costs for this
component will also be included in the health and nutrition components respectively.
This sub-component will finance goods, services, consultancies, and operating costs.

  (d) Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. This sub-component will
finance: (i) capacity strengthening of local communities for managing their schools and
enhancing local governance and accountability; (ii) capacity building of local, regional
and national structures for the effective governance, implementation and supervision of
the activities, and (iii) monitoring and evaluation activities in general as well as
coordination, management and supervision activities of the project implementation unit.
This sub-component will finance training, consultancies, operation costs, and goods.

 Component 2: Preserving Critical Health Services

 The main objective of this component is to preserve the provision of basic health
services for at least fifty percent of the most vulnerable segment of the population -
Pregnant women and children under five. The proposed project will finance the
following sub-components:

  (a) Critical package for pregnant women and children under five at health facility
level. For pregnant women, an existing cost-effective package of essential services will
be financed from the first trimester of the pregnancy to the postnatal consultation.
Training for Health providers on Obstetric and Neonatal Emergency Care will also be
financed. This subcomponent will also finance an existing integrated package for
children under five at health facility level. This package includes IEC activities for
promotion of good practices and breastfeeding and nutrition for mothers and children,
Vitamin A supplementation, vaccinations, distribution of LLINs, treatment of diarrhea
with oral rehydration salts and zinc, prevention and treatment of malaria and support to
integrated treatment of childhood diseases (IMCI). The subcomponent will finance
periodic mass treatment campaigns against Neglected Tropical Diseases (helminthiasis,
bilarzia and filariasis). Health facilities will receive funding to support outreach activities
by qualified health personnel to increase coverage from 5km to 15km. This component
will also finance contracts with NGOs for delivery of key interventions to target groups
in hard to reach areas.

  (b) Project management and monitoring and evaluation: This sub component will
finance operational costs for the already functioning health PIU as well as supervision
costs. This includes supervision costs for the school health and nutrition interventions
under the Education component. The sub-component will also contribute to the financing
of the joint technical coordination unit. In addition, this sub-component will finance
monitoring and evaluation activities, including rapid data collection system by mobile
phone, periodic surveys and assessments, and third party verification of support provided
by NGOs for delivery of services. This sub-component will finance services,
consultancies, training, goods, and operating costs.

 Component 3: Preserving Critical Nutrition Services

 The project will finance nutrition interventions at the community level through support
to the community nutrition sites, community nutrition agents (CNAs), and local NGOs
selected to play a monitoring and supervision role.

 The proposed project will support the following sub-components:
 (a) Support basic community nutrition services. This component will provide
nutrition inputs, recruitment of NGOs to support community nutrition sites and capacity
building to the CNAs. The CNAs will implement the community-based activities to
improve nutrition. Activities will include growth monitoring for children under five with
critical focus on children under two, nutrition awareness and education through culinary
demonstrations, school health outreach activities and referral to health facilities for
severely malnourished children.

 (b) Support project management and monitoring and evaluation. This sub-component
will finance the operational costs of the PIU. In addition, the project will support surveys
and evaluations, including bi-annual community assessments of local malnutrition issues
to encourage community involvement in ensuring effective delivery of services. Similar
to the health component, the nutrition component will support the use of mobile phones
for data collection.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
A more targeted approach focused on five of the most vulnerable regions will allow
reaching out to the poorest and most vulnerable groups in the country, and will also help
maximize results as well as to adequately monitor implementation process. In order to
maximize impacts of available resources, the proposed activities will be implemented in
five regions (out of twenty-two), precisely Androy, Atsimo Atsinanana, Vatovavy
Fitovinany, Haute Matsiatra and Amoron'i Mania (see Map). These regions were
selected on the basis of: (i) poverty and social indicators to ensure activities reach the
poor and most vulnerable groups; (ii) existence of other donor interventions so to avoid
overlap; iii) the existing IDA health operation to optimize synergies. Intervening in these
limited regions will also intensify the pace of implementation. Moreover, it will also
facilitate joint supervision and oversight by the PIUs and the Bank.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
   Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTN1)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project is classified as an environmental and social Category B since
activities funded under the project are not expected to have significant negative
environmental and/or social impacts. The proposed project triggers only one World Bank
safeguards policy, namely OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). The project does
not involve land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or loss of access to
resources or livelihoods. In accordance with OP 8.00 and to guide the environmental and
social assessment and mitigation process, an Environmental and Social Screening and
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared by the Task Team, and will undergo
a thorough Participatory Public Consultation, as well as be disclosed publicly by the
Borrower during project implementation.

  The proposed operation will mainly support targeted activities (i) in the education
sector: (a) subsidize the payment of community teachers' salaries, (b) support to school
grants; (c) basic package of preventative school health and nutrition interventions; and
(ii) in the health sector: (a) delivery of essential package like immunizations, vitamin
supplementation to both pregnant women and children as well as STI/HIV services to
high-risk populations with procurement and delivery of relevant health commodities
(drugs); (b) delivery of essential package of equipment to health facilities to improve the
service to a minimum acceptable standard; and (c) support to community nutrition
activities.

  In view of the above, no major civil works that could lead to potential negative
environmental and social impacts will be undertaken in the proposed operation.
However, it is possible that, during implementation some repairs/rehabilitation of existing
facilities may be undertaken. Environmental and Social Management Plans will be
prepared as and when necessary during implementation. Any improvement of the health
services improves would ultimately enhance population accessibility to these services. It
is therefore expected that with improvements in health services delivery, the production
of both medical and pharmaceutical waste in the various care centers and pharmacies in
the country would ultimately increase accordingly. Though there is a regulation on the
management of expired pharmaceutical waste (expired medicines) the matter fact is that
the risk to increase expired medicines in the country would still remain higher if the
management and delivery system of drugs remain weak. Taken altogether, it is therefore
obvious that this could involve various kinds of risks associated with the inappropriate
handling and disposal of HIV and other STI infected materials that could therefore
increase the environmental pollution from the medical and pharmaceutical waste. These
risks primarily affect personnel in medical facilities in charge of handling the proper
disposal of medical waste, families whose basic income derive from the triage of waste,
notwithstanding the general public, to the extent that waste is not disposed of on-site nor
safely contained in protected areas. If not properly dealt with, preferably at early stages,
these activities may have some environmental and human impacts that could then hinder
the overall project outcomes. The ESSAF addresses these risks.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are foreseen to be of small-scale and site
specific, thus easily mitigated. No long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen during
project implementation; instead, the proposed project will contribute to preserving
delivery of basic social services in education, health and nutrition sectors by making
services available, accessible and affordable.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not Applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The ESSAF developed specifically for this Project is aimed at ensuring due diligence
notably on the consistent treatment of medical waste and elimination of expired
pharmaceutical drugs in the heath sector by the Government of Madagascar and its
service providers. To address potential impacts on the environment and the public health,
the Ministry of Health (MoH) has adopted a National Medical Waste Management Policy
by an interdepartmental Decree No 2006-680 of September 12, 2006 and approved by the
Ministry of the Environment (MoE) that includes a Medical Waste Management Plan
(MWMP) (attachment 1). The MWMP was approved and publicly disclosed both in-
country (March 20, 2007) and at the Infoshop (March 23, 2007) respectively. The
MWMP includes proper disposal of hazardous bio-medical wastes and a bio-safety
training program for the staff of all hospital, health centers and community-based
programs, including traditional midwifes and practitioners, who may be involved in
HIV/AIDS and/or STI testing and treatment. At national level, after eighteen months of
its implementation, the National Medical Waste Management Policy (NMWMP) was
updated to improve its results and its compliance with the National Health Sector
Development Plan which covers the period 2007-2011. The NMWMP and its national
action plan (MWMP) provide for five strategic objectives afferent to 51 activities.
Operational activities have mainly included dissemination of tools, elaboration of
medical waste management plans in the various health facilities, trainings of health staffs
and patients, and provision of incinerators to hospitals that meet the national standards.

 Under the Ministry of Health, the implementation of the National Medical Waste
Management Policy shows the following results: 200 small-scale burners to burn medical
wastes in all 200 health centers rehabilitated under CRESANII; 61% of public hospitals
(77 health centers) have been sensitized to the National Medical Waste Management
Policy; 30% (or 37 health centers) have elaborated medical waste management plans,
10% of the CSB (120 health facilities) have been sensitized to develop their own medical
waste management plan; 44 incinerators type DeMontfort have been built. Moreover, the
National Policy and its tools have been circulated to the partners, the Direction Regional
de Santé (DRS) and 120 public hospitals and health facilities. The training modules are
available in CDs formats.The cascade/successive/series of training processes have been
led to the inter-regional and regional level into the hospital and health centers: 16 regions
on 22 and 1044 (DSS and CHD) trainers have been trained. In the health sector, a
coordinator unit Service d'Appui aux Genies Sanitaires (SAGS), in charge of the
supervision and monitoring of the implementation of the Policy is since operational.
Under the current MSPPII health project, the Ministry of Health has received support for
the implementation of the National Medical Waste Management Policy through
Component 2, including construction of 22 incinerators health centers and training at
regional, district and health center level. Supervision missions have noted the strong
commitment of the Ministry of Health in the implementation of the National Medical
Waste Management Policy.

 To complete the National Medical Waste Management Policy, the Ministry of Health
has prepared a guideline to eliminate expired medicines in September 2011(attachment
2). In fact, the expired medicines are hazardous waste which elimination should be done
correctly to avoid any risks for the environment and local population. The guideline is
very detailed and clear on the characterization of expired medicines, the elimination
methods and steps to be adopted following the kinds of medicine. It has also provided
the criteria to constitute the elimination committee members with a sample of elimination
minutes/report to be provided and disclosed within a specific timeframe. Finally, this
guideline describes the very institutional arrangements on the implementation,
monitoring and evaluation on the elimination of expired medicine in the health sector.
The institutional arrangement for the appropriate and timely management of both expired
medicines and their eliminations includes the public sector and the private agencies. The
Ministry of Health has conducted many specific training at different levels (national and
regional) to ensure proper and wider dissemination of the guidelines.

 The current National Medical Waste Management Policy, after five years of
implementation, is currently being updated by the Ministry of Health so to capitalize the
results obtained and lessons learned from the past as well as to update the indicators to be
achieved for the next five years. The Term of References (ToRs) for this revision found
to be sufficient and coherent have been reviewed by the different donors and
development partners in the Health sector including the World Bank. The Ministry of
Health has adopted a participatory approach for this revision and the updated National
Medical Waste Management Policy is expected for Bank's approval and disclose in the
country and at the Infoshop by the end of February, 2013.

 Each of the components (education, health, and nutrition) will be adequately
coordinated and supervised by an existing Project Implementation Units (PIUs):
Education (Unité d'Appui Technique Education-Pour-Tous (UAT-EPT); Health (Unité de
Gestion de Programmes de Santé (UGP-Santé); and Nutrition (Unité de Gestion du
Programme National de Nutrition Communautaire (UG-PNNC). The respective PIUs
will be responsible for the usual day-to-day project management and implementation,
including safeguards and fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation. As the main
safeguard issues for this proposed operation are under the health component, the Project
will be able to draw upon successful previous experience with the ongoing health project
(MSPPII). In this context, for continuing timely management of safeguards, all
safeguard aspects will be led under the existing department of SAGS (Service d'Appui au
Génie Sanitaire) - which has a Social and Environmental Focal Point (SEFP) to ensure
that the MWMP is properly addressed throughout project implementation. SAGS is fully
operational and has the institutional capacity to manage the safeguard aspects related to
the proposed operation.

 Capacity building and monitoring of safeguards framework implementation

 The Recipient is familiar with World Bank safeguards policies, through the
implementation of other World Bank-funded projects. In the Health sector the MWMP
has been implemented in the country on a satisfactory manner under the current MSPPII
health project. The Project therefore will be able to draw upon successful previous
experience with the ongoing and available team in SAGS (department) at the Ministry of
Health which is fully operational. During and throughout the project supervision, the
World Bank task team will assess the appropriate implementation of the MWMP and
subsequently recommend additional strengthening measures whenever required.
Information sharing with the public will be part of the capacity building plan, to be
accomplished with the help of local media and communication systems.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
IDA funding will support a number of subprojects classified as Environment and Social
Category B to which will apply the public consultation and disclosure policy. During the
preparation of the current MSPPII health project, the National Medical Waste
Management Policy was prepared through a consultative and participatory process
involving all stakeholders at the regional and national levels in the Health sector. The
MoH includes the status of implementation of the National Medical Waste Management
Policy in its annual technical report. The revision of the National Medical Waste
Management Policy is currently been led in a publicly participatory and inclusive
manner.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/23/2012
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/10/2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/12/2012
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with OP/BP 8.00, the
completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments obey the 6-month
"Grace Period" during which time there were not required as a condition for project
appraisal. However, an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework
(ESSAF) has been prepared and will be ultimately disclosed at Infoshop as well as in-
country during project implementation. Additionally, the revised National Medical
Waste Management Policy including the MWMP will be disclosed in-country and at the
Infoshop during implementation.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              N/A
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Jumana N. Qamruddin                      10/05/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Paul-Jean Feno                           10/05/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna                       10/05/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Sajitha Bashir                           10/05/2012
  Comments:
