               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET                          74321
                             APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: NA
Date prepared/updated: May 11, 2012

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Malawi                                    Project ID: P110112
                                                   Additional Project ID (if any): NA
Project Name: Effective Management of the Nkhotakota Wildlife Reserve
Task Team Leader: Cary Anne Cadman and Iris Dueker (co-TTLs)
Estimated Appraisal Date: NA                       Estimated Board Date: NA
Managing Unit: AFTEN                               Lending Instrument: GEF MSP
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Biodiversity
IBRD Amount (US$m.): NA
IDA Amount (US$m.): NA
GEF Amount (US$m.): 0.845
PCF Amount (US$m.): NA
Other financing amounts by source:
Government                      1.244
Borrower/ Recipient:            0.840
NGO (identified):               0.150
Corporate:                       0.227
                                2.461
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                      Yes [ x ]                 No [ ]
Simplified Processing                              Simple [ ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises           Yes [ ]       No [ x ]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The objective of the project is to ensure effective management of the Nkhotakota Wildlife
Reserve through a sustainable management model focusing on its Bua watershed area.

3. Project Description:

The EMNWR project is comprised of three components: Reserve management; Revenues for
improved reserve support; and Project management. All components will be financed by
GEF/DNPW. WESM will be the implementing agency and DNPW the executing agency.
Component 1: Reserve Management. Under this component, NWR management will be
improved through enhanced planning and implementation capacity.

Subcomponent 1.1: Planning
This subcomponent will finance development of the planning instruments for improved reserve
management. The project will conduct a baseline biological resource inventory for the Bua
watershed area in year 1 to inform the 5-year operational management plan for the entire reserve.

The NWR management plan will provide an overview of all relevant baseline data. It will define
rules and limits for biological resource use within the reserve; and priority monitoring and
management activities, particularly for the Bua watershed area, along with an implementation
plan. A training plan for NWR staff will be part of the priority activities. The reserve
management plan will be discussed with stakeholders such as district authorities and the private
sector, and submitted to DNPW for approval.

The GEF project will support: (a) preparation of a biological inventory of the Bua watershed
area; and (b) development of the 5-year management plan.

Subcomponent 1.2: Management plan implementation
This subcomponent will support implementation of priority activities of the management plan
identified for the Bua watershed area including activities related to reserve infrastructure,
wildlife and biological resource monitoring, fire monitoring and control, law enforcement,
transportation and overall reserve management. DNPW’s development investments in the
reserve include the construction and rehabilitation of scout camps, roads, gates and bridges,
water supply for scout camps, and transportation. The project aims to increase staff numbers and
capacity for reserve monitoring and management, including training reserve staff and prosecutors
and magistrates to enhance the efficacy of law enforcement.

GEF funds will support: (a) implementation and monitoring of priority activities for the Bua
watershed by DNPW and WESM; (b) construction of 1 scout camp in the Bua watershed for six
families; (c) purchase of 1 4x4 vehicle and 2 motorcycles for law enforcement in the reserve; (d)
training for reserve field staff, management staff, prosecutors and magistrates; and (e) field
equipment for reserve scouts such as GPS units, radios and backpacks.

DNPW support for this component will include: 1 new entrance gate, rehabilitation of 2 old
scout camps, renovation of 200 km of roads, renovation of bridges, purchase of 2 vehicles, 2
motorcycles, drilling of 5 boreholes and the scout camp tsetse fly control program.

Component 2: Revenues for improved reserve support. Under this component the project will
support strengthening business opportunities to improve reserve support through tourism
operations and revenue retention. The reserve is seen as having excellent potential to contribute
to regional development through tourism operations. There are currently two tourism
concessions in NWR along the Bua River that can benefit from the development and
implementation of the NWR tourism and management plans. A comprehensive tourism
assessment and tourism plan will be produced based on the findings and recommendations of the
reserve management plan and national guidelines for ecotourism in protected areas.
Specifically, GEF funds under this component will support: (a) development of the tourism
assessment and management plan; (b) ecotourism training of reserve scouts; and (c) initial
development of additional ecotourism activities in partnership with the concessionaires such as
sign posts, tourist walking trails and information boards.

Private tourism operators under concession agreements with DNPW have been investing in the
construction of two lodges and campsites at sites along the Bua River. The construction of Bua
River Lodge is completed and the lodge started operating in mid 2010. Tongole Lodge is
currently under construction. Both Tongole and Bua River Lodges are situated at former scout
camp areas. The owners signed a concession agreement with DNPW thereby agreeing to adhere
to an environmentally friendly business operation.

Component 3: Project management. As the project Implementing Agency, WESM will
provide general administration of the project, working closely with DNPW field staff, including
the NWR Manager to deliver project results. WESM will be responsible for procurement and
financial management coordination, annual audits and annual stakeholder consultations. WESM
will organize World Bank supervision missions and biannual Project Advisory Committee
(PAC) meetings and prepare annual work plans, budgets and reports in close collaboration with
DNPW.

The GEF will fund: (a) a contribution to WESM operating expenditures related to project
administration such as utilities, office supplies, IT equipment; (b) annual audits; (c) procurement
processing fees; (d) annual stakeholder consultations; and (e) PAC meetings.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The project will be implemented inside the Nkhotakota Wildlife Reserve (NWR) in Malawi. The
Reserve is the largest (1,802 km2) wildlife reserve of Malawi, located in the center of the
country. The Reserve is one of four Malawian areas of global biodiversity significance and is
considered one of the most important and pristine wildlife areas in the country. The Reserve
encompasses important watersheds, including the lower portions of the Bua River; the second
largest in the country. The Bua River bisects the Reserve and is a significant tributary of Lake
Malawi. It is one of the few rivers where Lake Salmon spawn.

There are two Forest Reserves adjacent to the NWR, Ntchisi and Dwambazi, increasing available
habitat for large African mammals that exist in the Reserve such as elephant, roan, sable and
lion.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Cornelie van der Feen, Environmental and Social Safeguards Consultant (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                       Yes              No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                       x
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               x
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        x
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   x
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    x
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                             x
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       x
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                 x
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                            x
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                     x

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project is classified as a Category B operation since all envisaged adverse environmental and
social impacts that may be generated by specific project activities are expected to be small in
scale, site specific, time bound (construction period only) and readily mitigated.

Based on the scope, scale and nature of specific project investments, the project triggers the
following World Bank Safeguard Policies: OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment; OP 4.04 Natural
Habitats; 4.09 Pest Management, 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, 4.12 Involuntary
Resettlement and 4.36 Forests.

      Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered since the project involves
      small and medium scale civil works (reserve entrance gates and scout camps),
      rehabilitation and maintenance of reserve roads, reserve gates and scout housing.
      All adverse impacts associated with these works are expected to be site specific,
      time bound (i.e., during construction phase only), small in scale and readily
      mitigated through implementation of appropriate measures. The ESMF is
      designed to address the specific considerations of OP 4.01 as they pertain to this
      project.
      Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) is triggered since the NWR is a recognized critical
      natural habitat. The project aims to enhance its conservation status but there is a
      possibility that some of the proposed project activities may result in temporary
      ecosystem disturbance. The ESMF presents the appropriate screening, assessment
      and mitigation measures to address such impacts.
      Forests (OP/BP 4.36) is triggered since the project will be active in an area with
      standing primary forest and bordering two forest reserves. The overall
      environmental assessment is that all impacts on forests are expected to be
      positive, but careful consideration through the ESMF is given to identify and
      mitigate potential adverse impacts on forests that may be generated either directly
      or indirectly by the project.
      Pest Management (OP 4.09) is triggered since the project will procure, distribute,
      apply and dispose of known pesticides on a limited scale as part of the NWR
      scout camp tsetse control program. The ESMF is designed to address the specific
      considerations associated with this program to ensure it reflects international best
      practice and WHO guidelines.
      Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) is triggered since the project’s area
      contains known physical cultural resources. The project’s ESMF addresses the
      specific considerations for PCRs by ensuring that none of the project
      interventions will be implemented near or affect in any way known PCRs. The
      ESMF also includes chance finds procedures for those PCRs that may be
      identified during project implementation.
      Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) is not triggered.
      Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered, because although the project
      will not involve any resettlement, there is a small chance that bordering
      communities may lose their former illegal access to resources in the reserve. This
      will be mitigated by the expansion of community user zones in the reserve
      financed by the project. The PF sets out guidance to address the considerations
      of this OP as they pertain to this project.
      Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) is not triggered.
      Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) is not triggered.
      Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) is not triggered.

The policy considerations related to this project will be addressed through an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Process Framework (PF) prepared by the
Government of Malawi and WESM.

The main safeguards considerations are related to Component 1 activities, and include: (a)
implementation and monitoring of priority activities of the management plan identified for the
Bua watershed area by DNPW and WESM including: activities related to wildlife and biological
resources monitoring, fire monitoring and control, law enforcement, transportation and overall
management; (b) construction of 1 scout camp in the Bua watershed for six families; (c)
purchase of 3 4x4 vehicles and 4 motorcycles for law enforcement in the reserve; (d) training for
reserve field staff; (e) procurement of field equipment for reserve scouts such as GPS units,
radios and backpacks; (f) construction of 1 new reserve entrance gate; (g) rehabilitation of 2
existing scout camps; (h) renovation of 200 km of gravel road and 300kms of existing bush
tracks; (i) renovation of bridges; (j) drilling of 5 boreholes; and, (k) strengthening the scout camp
tsetse fly control program.

The proposed construction works to be financed by the project will cover a small area of the
reserve. One small construction project is planned for a new area (1 scout camp) covering less
than 4 ha (0.008% of the entire reserve which is 180,200 ha). A second construction project
involves rehabilitation of an existing scout camp. Minor site specific environmental impacts
may be generated by these investments. Game viewing and management roads will be
rehabilitated on existing tracks. No new roads will be financed by the project.
The proposed baseline data collection, management plan and implementation and improved law
enforcement activities to be financed by the project will lead to better protection of the reserve,
thus to the increased preservation of habitats, water retention and biodiversity. Better reserve
protection and improved law enforcement may also result in increased animal populations. Fish
stocks including Lake Salmon in the Bua River system will also be conserved in the long term
thus contributing to the survival of this important part of the Malawian economy.

Funding for reserve management as well as community based natural resources management is
expected to increase to some extent as a result of improved tourism and concession revenues as
well as through the existing DNPW PA related retention system in NWR.

With regard to the socio-economic impacts, a positive overall balance can be expected from the
proposed project. It is expected that the positive impacts will outweigh the negative ones.

Although some individuals might lose their previous (illegal) access to the reserve’s resources,
this will be replaced by legally regulated access to reserve resources for a larger portion of the
community through village user zones.

In order to mitigate the adverse impacts that may be generated by the project, WESM will use
the ESMF and PF to guide implementation of appropriate mitigation measures. However, it is
expected that the combined ecological and socio-economic impacts of the project will be
positive.

Specifically, potential environmental and social impacts, include:

The EMNWR Project is expected to result in overall positive environmental and social impacts,
however, some interventions may lead to small-scale, time-bound and site specific adverse
impacts that would need to be assessed and mitigated appropriately in line with national laws and
World Bank safeguard policies.

Project activities with a potential adverse impact on the natural and/or social environment are:
    Upgrading of 200 kms of existing gravel roads
    Rehabilitation and maintenance of 300 km of bush tracks
    Construction of 2 new scout camps
    Rehabilitation of 2 old scout camps
    Construction of 1 new reserve gate
    Scout camp tsetse fly control program
    Reduced (former illegal) access to resources in the reserve

Project activities with a potential positive impact on the natural and/or social environment are:
    Intensified law-enforcement activities
    Intensified fire-management
    Capacity building of DNPW staff in environmental law enforcement and monitoring
        procedures in the Reserve
    Participatory planning, management and monitoring of natural resources
    Expansion of and legal access to community resources user zones in reserve
Positive impacts

Environmental
The global environmental (biodiversity-related) benefits expected from the project will be an
improved protection status of the reserve with improved habitat quality in the Bua Watershed
Area.

Improved law enforcement in the reserve is anticipated to lead to reduced extraction of trees for
firewood, timber or charcoal production, less environmentally damaging fires and reduced
poaching activities. As a result, there will be less habitat destruction and increased carrying
capacity for wild animals. Ecological values will increase or at least be maintained at the present
status. Reserve management will become more efficient in the long term as a result of structured
data collection feeding into a tourism management plan.

An increase in tourism activities is anticipated to contribute to further protection of the reserve as
concessionaires have a stake in maintaining a pristine natural environment and thriving wildlife
populations. The current concession holders have committed themselves to assist DNPW with
reserve management including early burning which will assist to reduce the incidence of
damaging late fires.

Enhanced preservation of vital breeding habitat and control of illegal fishing in the Bua
watershed are expected to increase the population of endemic Lake Salmon and other fish
species. The widespread use of fish poison (using high concentrations of cotton pesticides) inside
and outside the reserve will be curbed by intensified law enforcement - thereby reducing
potential long lasting damage of the Bua river ecosystem. Watershed protection is further
expected to increase water quantity and quality and reduce the level of siltation at the river
mouth, hence contributing to maintaining the integrity of the Lake Malawi ecosystem, where the
vast majority of fish species are endemic.

Socio-economic
The project is expected to contribute to poverty reduction in the communities surrounding the
reserve through limited job creation in tourism and construction works, access to community
user zones and the formation and training of Natural Resources Committees involved in the
management of these zones.

DNPW has committed to employ 15-20 additional wildlife field staff and 2-4 additional
technical staff for the reserve. The tourism operators are expected to employ 40-50 permanent
staff in hospitality services. As for the maintenance of reserve roads, 300 casual workers will be
recruited over the next 3 years. WESM will employ one project manager and one accountant as
well as accountant services.

DNPW and the two tourism operators have pledged to buy food and scout rations as much as
possible from local producers, thus contributing to the local economy. Around 50 families are
assessed to benefit from the regular sale of rations and food supplies to DNPW and the tourism
operators. Tourism operators have also pledged to assist community producer groups with
quality control with a long term view to achieve a sustainable income. Employment in rural areas
may lead to a rural economic spin-off as employees tend to hire other community members to
work on their land, and spend part of their salary in rural shops.

Negative impacts

Environmental

Construction
Minor site-specific clearance of vegetation and soils will be unavoidable during construction
works. As per DNPW guidelines, careful consideration must be taken when choosing sites for
the construction or rehabilitation of scout camps, entrance gates and access roads. Where
possible, the project strives to allocate construction sites at previously occupied areas. The
ESMF environmental and social screening form should be used before any construction site is
selected and an EMP completed, as required, before any works begin. Vulnerable habitats such
as dambo’s and riverine forests should be identified and protected from any development.
Buildings and especially toilets should be constructed away from any source of drinking water to
avoid contamination.

Construction works and associated site clearing and vehicle movements may cause minor
environmental impacts which can be mitigated by avoiding construction works in the rainy
season as well as keeping vegetation clearance to a minimum.

The current tourism operators in NWR both signed concession agreements with DNPW wherein
they agreed to specific operating procedures with respect to waste water, litter, lighting, heating,
mechanical equipment, fuel and chemicals; all to be managed in an environmentally friendly
manner. As for firewood collection, it has been agreed that in the near term both lodges only use
dead firewood collected from inside the Reserve. They will also set up a woodlot outside the
reserve which will provide firewood for use by both lodges over the long term.

Roads
The renovation and maintenance of reserve roads needs special attention as the NWR terrain is
rugged and sensitive to erosion. Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment will result in soil
compaction and should be restricted as much as possible. Fragile areas like steep slopes, erosion
prone soils and scarce vegetation should be treated with caution. Vegetation clearance should be
avoided and construction works should only be done in the dry season. Road construction must
always include essential drainage systems. Throughout the year, heavy vehicles (> 3 ton) should
be allowed only on main roads – to be specified in the Reserve management plan. No new roads
will be constructed under this project only existing roads will be renovated.

Tourism and reserve management operations
There is a small chance that improved access to the reserve as a result of better roads will lead to
an increase in poaching. However, results in other PA’s have shown that the positive impact of
improved access for law-enforcement personnel outweighs the negative impact of improved
access for illegal hunters; with an overall result of better reserve protection.
The baseline survey will reveal whether late, early or no burning has been the practice over the
past few years. The introduction of an early burning regime could have a negative impact on the
environment if there was no burning before. An assessment of vegetation damage due to burning
provides information for development of a controlled burning regime.

Scout Camp Tsetse fly control program
Tsetse fly control is aimed at the reduction of sleeping sickness as part of a national campaign by
the GoM. The system is being implemented and monitored by DNPW, and requires the use of
insecticide glossinex deltamethrin and an attractant acetone on flags. Staff involved in the
application will be issued safety clothing. The WHO toxicity rating for this insecticide is listed as
Moderately Hazardous.

Known impacts of glossinex deltamethrin, include:
- Irritation of skin and eyes.
- Irritability to sound or touch, abnormal facial sensation, sensation of prickling, tingling or
creeping on skin, numbness.
- Headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive salivation, fatigue.
- In severe cases: fluid in the lungs and muscle twitching may develop. Seizures may occur and
are more common with more toxic cyano-pyrethroids.

Insecticides such as deltamethrin have extremely high levels of toxicity for most insects,
including tsetse, are very stable, and are only mildly toxic to mammals. They are, therefore,
relatively safe to handle and are less likely to have undesirable effects on other non-target
animals, particularly mammal and bird species. The properties of deltamethrin make it the most
suitable of all known insecticides for tsetse control. Currently, in the NWR, 67 flags are placed
along the main reserve roads – this will be expanded under this project at scout camp sites. The
flags are treated annually. The system has been tried for 2 years in NWR and has shown good
results.

Socio-economic
The project is small in scale and its contribution to NWR related tourism is not expected to
attract large numbers of tourists. Moreover, the type of tourism one can expect is mid- upper
market tourism with an emphasis on nature experiences and game viewing. Therefore, no major
impacts are expected on the local social and traditional organisation and behaviour over the 3
year implementation period.

A potential negative impact could be an increase in human-wildlife conflicts as a result of an
increase in animal populations in the reserve. Elephants are already considered a nuisance by
community members, as they tend to leave the reserve during harvest time and raid farmers’
crops. A long term solution to this will be addressed in the Reserve management plan.
Alternatives such as chilli fences, chilli briquettes and bee hive fences will be considered by
communities in partnership with the Reserve management team.
Assessment
The combined ecological impacts from the project are expected to result in a positive overall
balance.

The construction works and associated vegetation clearance cover a small proportion of the
reserve. The new construction projects involving a new area (1 reserve gate and 2 scout camps)
each cover less than 4 ha.

The new reserve gate will be at the Liwala river in the NW section of the reserve along the main
entrance road. Accessibility and reduced chance of erosion (i.e., not on a slope) are criteria for
gate site selection. As for the new scout camps it has been agreed that a matrix with possible
locations will be provided by DPNW together with pros and cons of each site. A final decision
about the locations will be made by WESM and DPNW based on the ESMF screening form of
each site.

Game viewing and management roads will be rehabilitated over existing old tracks - no new
roads will be opened thus ensuring the least amount of environmental disturbance.

As for the new GEF funded scout camp location, it was agreed that DNPW will develop a matrix
showing possible locations including their positive and negative impacts, after which a decision
will be made by DNPW and WESM following application of the ESMF screening form.

The proposed baseline data collection, reserve management plan, staff capacity building efforts
as well as improved law enforcement initiatives will lead to better protection of the reserve –
thus to the preservation of habitats, water retention and biodiversity. Fish stocks including Lake
Salmon in Lake Malawi and the Bua River system will be conserved on the long term thus
contributing to the survival of this important part of the Malawian economy.

For tsetse control, various methods are available including aerial spraying, sterile insect
technique, odour bait tsetse traps and targets. In the case of NWR, the method that generates the
least adverse impact will be applied: odour bait targets with deltamethrin. This insecticide falls
under class II (moderately hazardous) WHO toxicity classification. Deltamethrin is a synthetic
pyrethoid which are highly toxic to fish and possibly also to some birds and pollinating insects.
However, pyrethroids are low to moderate toxic to mammals, biodegradable and generally
considered the least harmful option in tsetse control. Careful adherence to mitigation measures
such as location of targets and staff health measures will be taken to avoid a negative impact.

Better Reserve protection may result in increased animal populations. The carrying capacity of
the reserve allows for an increase of various species.

With respect to social impacts, some individuals may lose their previous (illegal) access to the
reserve’s resources – this will be replaced by regulated access to reserve resources for a much
larger portion of the community through collaborative management zones. Community groups
will be assisted to adopt environmentally friendly livelihoods and sustainable management of
natural resources. Villagers, especially women, will benefit from village woodlots thus reducing
the walking distance to collect firewood.
The EMNWR Project has been planned in such a way that negative impacts on the environment
and the surrounding communities are expected to be minimal and positive impacts maximized.
Throughout project preparation, stakeholders at national and local level were consulted and
participated in the planning. The project has been designed in accordance with the laws of the
Government of Malawi and World Bank safeguard policies.

Figure 1 presents an overview of project activities that may generate adverse environmental and
social impacts.

Figure 1: Project Activities that may generate adverse impacts

       Environmental         Planned Activities     Environmental        Social
       Screening                                    Impacts              Impacts
       Environmental         Construction of        Increase in          Restricted
       Impact Assessment     new facilities         human                areas, could
       (EIA) including                              disturbances,        cause
       Environmental         Construct 1 scout      loss of trees and    antagonism
       Management Plan       camp of 6 staff        habitat in           with park
       (EMP).                families each          affected area        authorities
       EMP to be                                    Restricted
       prepared and                                 wildlife access to
       approved before                              resource
       works begin.                                 requirements
       Environmental         Linear                 Potential            Increased
       screening and         Infrastructure         erosion,             undesired
       application of        rehabilitation         soil/water loss.     human
       appropriate                                  Increased access     immigration
       mitigation            Rehabilitate 300       for illegal          into area.
       measures              km of existing bush    extraction of
                             tracks                 natural              Increased
                                                    resources in the     exposure to
                             Rehabilitate 200km     NWR.                 illegal
                             of existing gravel                          markets.
                             road inside the        Silting of
                             NWR                    streams.

                                                    Increased
                                                    wildlife
                                                    disturbance near
                                                    water holes and
                                                    feeding grounds.
                                                    Potential
                                                    destruction of
                                                    natural
                                                    vegetation and
                                                  habitat during
                                                  construction.
                                                  Increased
                                                  human impact
                                                  on vegetation
                                                  and wildlife
                                                  movements.
                            Rehabilitation of     Loss of habitat     None
                            facilities            in affected area    identified

                            Rehabilitate 1
                            scout camp
       No environmental     Increased law         Nil                 Reduced
       analysis required.   enforcement                               income from
                                                                      illegal use of
                                                                      natural
                                                                      resources
                                                                      from the
                                                                      Reserve
                            Increased fire        Nil                 Possible fines
                            management
                            control
                            Increased controls    Nil                 Possible fines,
                            on tree cutting and                       reduced
                            collection of                             access to
                            firewood in park                          natural
                                                                      resources
                            Controlled access     Nil                 Loss of
                            to natural                                income and
                            resources                                 food
       Environmental        Implementation of     May impact          Health risk
       screening and        tsetse control        vulnerable          for staff
       application of       program               species such as     handling
       appropriate                                fish and            pesticide.
       measures as          Expand and            amphibia.
       outlined in the pest maintenance of                            Reduced
       management           tsetse baits                              incidence of
       approach section of                                            sleeping
       the ESMF                                                       sickness in
                                                                      reserve and
                                                                      tourism staff
                                                                      and visitors.

In order to mitigate the adverse impacts that may be generated by the project, WESM will use
the ESMF and PF to guide implementation of appropriate mitigation measures. However, it is
expected that the combined ecological and socio-economic impacts of the project will be
positive.

There are no large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts that will be generated by the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

There are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts anticipated due to future activities in the
project area. Indeed, all project activities are expected to strengthen sustainable and effective
management of the Nkhotakota Wildlife Reserve and generate positive environmental and social
outcomes over the medium and long term.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The Grant Recipient has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework and
Process Framework to address the main considerations of the set of safeguard policies triggered
by the project.

Both frameworks will be applied in tandem by the Grant Recipient, the Wildlife and
Environmental Society of Malawi, under general oversight of the Government of Malawi
through its Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Culture and its Department of National Parks and
Wildlife.

The Grant Recipient’s capacity to implement and monitor the project’s safeguard tools is limited.
In order to strengthen their capacity, the Bank will provide ongoing training to WESM staff on
Bank safeguard policies and project specific safeguard tools throughout project implementation
to ensure the project remains in full compliance with Bank policies.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Key project stakeholders include:

   1. The Government of Malawi, specifically the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Culture
      and its Department of National Parks and Wildlife.
   2. The Wildlife and Environmental Society of Malawi.
   3. The Nkhotakota Wildlife Reserve Concessionaires – Tongole Lodge and Bua River
      Lodge owners and operators.
   4. Traditional Authorities and communities bordering the Bua River area of the Nkhotakota
      Wildlife Reserve
   5. Private sector tourism operators along the Bua River-Lake Malawi corridor in
      Nkhotakota.

Mechanisms for consultation and disclosure: Public consultations on the project document and
safeguard frameworks were conducted throughout project preparation as detailed in the ESMF.

The grant recipient has made the ESMF and PF publically available in country and both have
been disclosed in the InfoShop.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date


Note: GEF Medium Size Projects do not follow the standard
IL/GEF FSP project cycle and do not entail formal appraisal.


Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                12.28.2011
  Date of “in-country? disclosure                                             1.24.2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                              1.24.2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                                 NA
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                12.28.2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                             1.24.2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                              1.24.2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     Yes
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]     No [ x ]   N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or     NA
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]     No [ x ]   N/A [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a          NA
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate      Yes
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning            Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         NA
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the    NA
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to   NA
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if     NA
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the               NA
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been              NA
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?

OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the    NA
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:    NA
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                    NA
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the    Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer             NA
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]      No [ X ]       N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       The ESMF and PF are currently
public place in a form and language that are                 under review by the RSA and once
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     cleared will be disclosed both in
and local NGOs?                                              country and at the Bank’s InfoShop.

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ x ]     No [ ]        N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                               Name                            Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Cary Anne Cadman                                3 Dec. 2012
 Environmental Specialist:           Cornelie van der Feen                           3 Dec. 2012
 Social Development Specialist       Cornelie van der Feen                           3 Dec. 2012
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Alexandra Bezeredi                              3 Dec. 2012
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                     Magda Lovei                                     5 Dec. 2012
   Comments:
