                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA875
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Malawi                                   Project ID:                      P131648
                              Project Name:                  Second Additional Financing for the Third Social Action Fund Project (P131648)
                              Task Team Leader:              Ida Manjolo
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 07-Jun-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            28-Jun-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTSP                                    Lending Instrument:              Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                        Public administration- Other social services (100%)
                              Theme:                         Social safety nets (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               50.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     50.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective is to improve the livelihoods of poor and vulnerable households and to strengthen the capacity of authorities to
                              manage local development.

                              3. Project Description

                              1. The Second Additional Financing would focus on expanding Component 1 in its coverage, number of days, daily wage amount and number of
Public Disclosure Copy




                              projects per community including linkages to the COMSIP.

                              (a)       Component 1: Community Livelihoods Support Fund
                              (i)      Local Authority Window
                               Public Works Sub-Projects Program (US$42.755million).

                              2. The proposed AF would support a scale-up of the public works through financing the public works subprojects (PWSP) component. It would
                              increase coverage with to 385,000 Household (about 3 million people) over a period of one year. The Second Additional Financing for MASAF
                              includes provisions for Direct Support for up to 20 percent of the total beneficiaries from labor constrained households who will not be able to
                              engage in Public Work activities. These include children and elderly heads of households and household heads with disabilities and or chronic
                              illnesses. The current design and implementation of the MASAF already allows for the inclusion of HHs unable to work by requiring that the
                              attendance of a Household member be present at the work site for light activities. MASAF monitoring and evaluation estimates that this group
                              under its current implementation varies from community to community and can range from 5 percent to 15 percent of the participants and transfers
                              in a community. This group of direct support beneficiaries will be identified through the existing community based targeting mechanism at the local
                              level. The direct support beneficiaries will also receive same wages like that of the rest of the PW beneficiaries.

                              3. The World Bank proposes to contribute US$ 50.0 million through additional financing by scaling up public works programs of MASAF/Local
                              Development Fund (LDF) which will be able to cover cash transfer to 578,125 households and the associated capital costs and the costs of
                              administration and delivery. The IDA allocation includes PW payment budget of US$ 33.75 million (68 percent of total budget; 15 percent of
                              transfer budget for capital costs of public works (PWs), equivalent to US$ 6.75 million, 5 percent of transfer budget to cover administration cost for
                              implementing districts, equivalent to US$ 2.2; 5 percent of the transfer budget equivalent to US$ 2.25 million to support the complementary
                              COMSIP activities. In addition 10 percent of the overall budget equivalent to US$ 5 million would be allocated to cover the management and
                              administration cost of the Technical Support Team (TST) of the MASAF LDF.

                              4. The public works would benefit whole communities and a multiple number of community works would be conducted per community over this
                              period of time based on the operations and implementation manual of MASAF/LDF.

                              5. The public work activities will be implemented during the slack season of major livelihood/agriculture activities and when the beneficiaries have
                              the most need for additional income to cover their family needs including food and non-food expenditures and in puts for agricultural activities.
                              Following the existing implementation modality of MASAF, the public works activities supported through this additional financing will be
                              implemented in two cycles i.e. July – December 2012 and April – June 2013.


                                                                                                                                                                         Page 1 of 4
                                ii) Community Window (US$ 2.25 million)

                               6. To ensure the continuity of the complementary community saving activities and the culture of savings by communities encouraged in the
                               MASAF program an additional budget of UD$2.25 million would be allocated for the COMSIP component. This additional support will strengthen
                               the existing efforts and would ensure that the activities continue during the scaled up PW implementation. This component would continue to be
                               implemented through existing arrangements by the COMSIP Promotion Cooperative Union.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                b) National Institutional Strengthening (NIS) Fund (US$5 million)

                               7. The component will finance national-level cross-cutting issues aimed at improving accountability and transparency in the use of project
                               resources. It will have two subcomponents: (i) Technical Support Team (TST) to oversee project implementation, and (ii) Knowledge Generation
                               and Application to strengthen community participation in project implementation and to document community experiences with service delivery.
                               This component will facilitate the dissemination of national guidelines for use by Local Authorities and Community Organizations in project
                               implementation, and strengthen community-level fiduciary and accountability mechanisms.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               8. The MASAF 3 APL II, the Original Project, and the First Additional Financing are implemented in all the districts in the country. As a the second
                               Additional Financing will be scaling up the activities of the Public Works Subproject Program currently funded by the Original Project, the proposed
                               second Additional Financing will also be in all the districts.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)
                               Cary Anne Cadman (AFTSG)
                               Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                               Dalitso Kafuwa (AFTN1)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes             The various civil works financed under the project will have minor to moderate
                                                                                               impacts that will be localized. The MASAF 3 APL II ESMF is in place and still
                                                                                               applicable to address potential impacts and propose mitigation measures.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                         No
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes             The public works subproject (PWSP) component might support some sub-projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               that have some minor land acquisition and/or restrictions in access to resources or
                                                                                               livelihoods, with subsequent impacts on population movements and settlements.
                                                                                               The RPF for MASAF 3 APL II is in place and is still relevant to provide guidance on
                                                                                               the preparation of RAPs/ARAPs, whenever necessary.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                    1. The original project has an Environmental and Social Category B classification and this remains the same for the both the first and the
                                  Second Additional Financing. The original Project triggered safeguard policies 4.01 and 4.12. The same policies are triggered by the Second
                                  Additional Financing investments and will be addressed, in a similar manner and with the same tools as those prepared for the original project i.
                                  e., the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF was prepared and disclosed in country and in the Bank's
                                  InfoShop for MASAF 3 APL II in April 15, 2008. This ESMF had been re-disclosed in-country on May 28, 2010 and in the Bank’s InfoShop on
                                  May 27, 2010 and was used for the first. Additional Financing. As the proposed Additional Financing will only scale up the activities under the
                                  public works subprojects program (PWSP) of the Original Project, the same ESMF re-disclosed on May 25, 2012 in-country and on May 22,
                                  2012 at the Infoshop will be used to guide implementation of safeguards. The ESMPs produced to date have been disclosed in-country and at
                                  the InfoShop. The Second Additional Financing allocated for public works will target sub-projects that increase community assets and also
                                  those that enhance communities’ natural resource management awareness and skills. Nonetheless, an estimated amount to mitigate any
                                  identified social and environmental concerns will be included in sub-project budgets. In addition, the project has set aside resources for further
                                  capacity enhancement at all levels.

                                  2. Social impacts are expected to be positive, with project activities gradually leading to an improved quality of life for food-insecure and
                                  vulnerable groups by enhancing their access to social and economic opportunities. In addition to the advantages accruing directly to the target
                                  beneficiaries, there will be increased economic activity in the area surrounding the sub-project site and in the rural economy. Public works

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 4
                           beneficiaries will be selected through community-based participatory methods as in the case of the original project, which have been found to
                           reach the intended beneficiaries successfully, as confirmed in the MASAF 3 APL II public works program baseline analysis and the Beneficiary
                           Assessment (2012).

                           3. Due to the fact that small works might be required under individual subprojects that may lead to loss of access to assets, OP 4.12 was
                           triggered by the Original Project. Given that the Additional Financing would finance similar investments that might require small works that that
                           may lead to loss of access to assets, OP 4.12 is also triggered by the Additional Financing. To attend to the requirements of OP 4.12 under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           original Project, the borrower prepared a comprehensive Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), to guide the preparation of individual
                           resettlement action plans (RAPs) under individual sub-projects where necessary. To date there have been no subprojects funded from the
                           credit proceeds requiring land acquisition and thus no RAPs/ARAPs have been prepared. The RPF also facilitates the mainstreaming of
                           community involvement at each appropriate subproject implementation stage and provides detailed social safeguards policies and procedural
                           guidance. The same RPF will also be used to meet the requirements of OP 4.12 with respect to small works that may impact community access
                           to assets under sub-projects supported under the Second Additional Financing. All social issues will also be reported accordingly. This
                           instrument is to be applied in tandem with the ESMF for the Second Additional Financing investments. Ongoing support on the social
                           safeguards side will be provided during implementation of the Second Additional Financing in close collaboration with the Bank’s social
                           safeguards expert assigned to this Project. The RPF was re-disclosed in-country on May 25, 2012 and at the Infoshop on May 22, 2012.

                           4. The Second Additional Financing would focus on scaling up labor intensive civil works under the first component: (1) Community Livelihoods
                           Support Fund Component of the Local Authority Window. While the exact type and location of sub-projects will be chosen by communities,
                           possible kinds of sub-projects include but are not limited to:
                           (i) Forestry and Agro-forestry projects to increase area under forestry cover, agro-forestry and fruit tree production,
                           (ii) Construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of rural feeder roads and market access roads,
                           (iii) Drainage improvement including dykes,
                           (iv) Soil and water conservation activities; and
                           (v) Harnessing of water – construction and rehabilitation of reservoirs, and connections to gravity fed water schemes and kiosks.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            No significant indirect and/or long-term impacts associated with the project are expected.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             1. The ESMF provides a step-by-step description on how to identify sub-projects that might have potential environmental and social risks (e.g.
                           those under the Public Works Subproject Program component and under the COMSIP), and plan, implement and monitor the necessary
                           mitigation and/or preventive measures.

                           2. The Mid Term Review in January 2012 that negative environmental impacts that have resulted from the implementation of a few sub-projects
                           are localized, minimal, short term and can be mitigated. They include disturbance of soil from digging of foundations and pits, vegetation
                           clearing during site establishment, brick molding, and excavation of sand from river beds and quarrying for quarry stone which leaves scars on
                           the land that need rectifying.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           3. To curb observed weaknesses on compliance to environmental and social safeguards issues, training was instituted countrywide. The
                           mission noted that by August 2011, eleven subject matter specialists per district had been trained as trainers in environmental safeguards, to
                           enable them to cascade the training downwards to the extension workers who would then further train the stakeholders on the ground. Specific
                           points of training included:
                           a)         the ESMF and the RPF;
                           b)public awareness, environmental inspections;
                           c)         audits and monitoring of physical infrastructure;
                           d)checking that the community activities are in line with District Environmental Action Plans and
                           e)         guidelines for appraisal and enforcement mechanisms.

                           4. The District subject matter specialists who were trained are now aware and conversant with their requirements. They are also aware of the
                           project’s ESMF and RPF. The project screening process is done and the screening forms are in use. The project management committees are
                           appraised on cross-cutting issues including environmental issues prior to sub-project implementation, deliberate application of the
                           environmental safeguards has taken off although not in a uniform manner mainly because of the price increases of construction materials
                           causing subproject budget overruns. The budget overruns lead to identified mitigation measures not being undertaken fully. The Technical
                           Support Team of the LDF has included the cost of implementing the environmental mitigation plans as a separate cost item in the subproject
                           budget.

                           5. Experience from MASAF 3 APL II points to the need for improvements to the safeguards process to address a number of key issues that
                           may undermine the effective and efficient delivery of environmental and social management under the Project. These will include:
                           a)         Engage a consultant to assess and document compliance in environmental and social safeguards in existing projects;
                           b)Launch a Social and Environmental Audit and if any need for land is identified under MASAF’s subprojects then the guidance in the RPF will
                           suffice and RAPs will be prepared where necessary; disseminate the Findings of Social and Environmental Audit study; and, develop a
                           Safeguards Action Plan for implementing findings of the Social and Environmental audit report;
                           c)         A subproject screening process will be refined by streamlining and clarifying guidance. This will involve revising the screening
                           checklist (which will be included in the Operational Manual) to be much simpler and sector specific rather than the generic checklist used during
                           the original Project;
                           d)Ensuring the presence of a dedicated and well-trained safeguards team within TST for coordinating safeguards; implementation, monitoring
                           and reporting. This will be done through enhancing the capacity of the existing team and engagement of a safeguards consultant;
                           e)         Developing and enhancing capacity in implementing Local Councils to facilitate implementation of the safeguards process;
                           f)         Providing resources for implementation of safeguards mitigation measures at subproject level; and
                           g)Developing monitoring indicators for safeguards implementation and compliance.
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 3 of 4
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                               on potentially affected people.
                                The key stakeholders include: communities, civil society organizations, national and district level administration. Extensive consultations were
                              undertaken. The main issues raised were to do with the need for more time for information sharing, regarding projects, capacity building at
                              national, district and community levels on the ESMF, the RPF, development of ESMPs and RAPs, and monitoring of safeguards compliance.
                              On capacity building, the MASAF – LDF Technical Support Team started under the implementation of the original and the first additional
                              financing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                27-May-2010
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            28-May-2010
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             22-May-2012
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                27-May-2010
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            28-May-2010
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             22-May-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                 Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]

                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the         Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                 Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language         Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for      Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                 Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard       Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same           Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [    ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Ida Manjolo
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name:                                                                         Date:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz (SM)                                             Date: 07-Jun-2012




                                                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 4
