                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: 71898

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  1. Basic Project Data
  Country:                           Maldives                 Project ID:                     P130163
  Project Name:                      Ari Atoll Solid Waste Management Pilot Project
  Task Team Leader:                  Marinela Dado
  Estimated Appraisal Date:          July 25, 2012            Estimated Approval Date:        August 10, 2012
  Managing Unit:                     SASDI                    Lending Instrument:             Specific investment
  Sector:
  Theme:



  Financing (in USD Million)
      Financing Source                                                                                              Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                0.00
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                       0.00
      Other (Maldives Climate Change Trust Fund)                                                                       1.326
      Total                                                                                                            1.326
  Environmental Category:            A - Full Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project?        No


  2. Project Objectives
  The development objective of the project is to build technical and human resource capacity to effectively manage solid
  waste generated in selected inhabited islands of the Ari Atoll, thereby reducing the environmental risks to marine habitats
  and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The pilot project will develop and implement an integrated solid waste
  management (SWM) system in selected inhabited islands of the Ari Atoll and also build the capacity of the Island Councils
  and communities to manage solid waste.

  3. Project Description
  The proposed project will have three components that have been designed in consultation with the Government of
  Maldives (GOM), civil society and other stakeholders, as well as technical assessments undertaken and lessons learnt
  from the EU-financed, partially abandoned South Ari SWM Project.

  Component 1: Development and implementation of an island level integrated SWM system

  This component aims to build the institutional capacity of the Island Councils and communities in the five islands to plan
  and implement an island level integrated SWM program in order to minimize the environmental risks to the country's marine
  and terrestrial assets while reducing GHG emissions. In addition, support will be provided to the development of a
  strategy to operationalize the remaining EU-financed island waste management centers (IIWMCs) in the atolls of the
  Central Province. The project would support the following activities: (i) community participation in source segregation of
solid waste; (ii) implementation of an island level recycling and composting program at the IWMCs; (iii) institutional capacity
building of the Island Councils and communities for planning and managing an effective island level integrated SWM
system; and (iv) development of a strategy to operationalize the remaining EU-financed IWMCs in the atolls of the Central
Province.

Sub-component 1.1: Community participation in source segregation of solid waste

The inhabited islands that participated in the EU-financed South Ari SWM Project prepared island waste management
plans that called for community participation in the source separation of household solid waste prior to collection and
transport to the IWMCs. Although basic community awareness was initiated under that project, virtually no source
separation of household waste is taking place in the islands. This could be attributed to two factors: (i) inadequate
community commitment to participate in island level SWM; and (ii) lack of a waste transfer and disposal system for residual
waste from the inhabited islands for ultimate disposal. This sub-component is designed to address the lack of community
commitment to participate in island level SWM while Component 2 of the project will address the issue of the transfer of
residual waste from the IWMCs for ultimate disposal at the Thilafushi disposal facility.

This sub-component will create community awareness on the environment and public health implications of poor SWM in
the respective islands and solicit community participation for source segregation of household level solid waste. This will
be achieved through: (i) a capacity building program that involves strengthening community awareness and initiating active
community participation in source separation of waste at the household level; and (ii) an effective waste collection and
transport system in the inhabited islands. The program will be designed to involve the participation of all households in the
selected islands as well as the Island Councils.

Sub-component 1.2: Implementation of an island level recycling and composting program at the IWMCs

Because of the high population density in inhabited islands and the dispersed geography of Maldives, conventional
approaches to SWM are not applicable. Most inhabited islands have inadequate land available for solid waste disposal
and therefore off-island disposal is often the only available alternative. Ocean transport is the only mode of transport for
the transfer of disposable solid waste to an off-island facility. Since transport costs are prohibitively expensive in Maldives,
it is in the interest of any inhabited island to minimize the waste that would require off-island disposal. Approximately 70%
of the solid waste stream is composed of biodegradable organic matter and could be managed at the island level through
low cost, low technology composting at the IWMCs, thereby minimizing the amount of waste that would have to be
transported to an off-island waste disposal facility. The non-degradable residue would be baled and stored under a
protective cover at the IWMC site until the Thilafushi Island facility is rehabilitated.

The IWMCs that were constructed on inhabited islands presently do not have provision for composting. Hence, this
sub-component would finance: (i) the construction of a concrete pad for composting with a drainage system for leachate
collection at each of the IWMCs; and (ii) training of staff to undertake simple windrow composting at the IWMCs.

Sub-component 1.3: Institutional capacity building of the Island Councils and communities for planning and
managing an effective island level integrated SWM system

While GOM assigned the responsibility for SWM to the regional utility companies in six out of the country’s seven
provinces, an arrangement has not been made for the Central Province, which includes the capital island, Male’. SWM
services for the Central Province have been assigned to the newly created Waste Management Corporation WMC). The
Ari Atoll is part of the Central Province and therefore, SWM is WMC’s responsibility. However, the Island Councils are
responsible for intra-island SWM while WMC is responsible for inter-island SWM.

This sub-component will build the institutional capacity of the Island Councils and Island Offices to effectively manage
intra-island solid waste, including the development of a viable institutional mechanism for cost recovery through the
introduction of user fees.

Sub-component 1.4: Development of a strategy to operationalize the EU-financed IWMCs in the atolls of the
Central Province

Under the proposed project, the results – i.e., the development and implementation of an integrated SWM system in five
pilot islands – would subsequently be scaled up in the other inhabited islands of the Central Province. This
sub-component would support the development of a strategy to operationalize the remaining EC- financed IWMC in the
Central Province atolls. The key output of this sub-component is a strategy for operationalizing the remaining EU-financed
IWMCs in the atolls of the Central Province.

                                                             2
Component 2: Development of institutional arrangements and implementation of a waste transfer system for
off-island disposal of residual solid waste

The objective of this component is to develop an effective, working institutional model to transfer residual waste from the
participating islands of Ari Atoll to the Thilafushi Island facility and to demonstrate the use of this model for residual waste
transfer for all atolls of the Central Province. This would be achieved through the following activities: (i) development of a
viable institutional mechanism which could include a public-private partnership (PPP) for the transfer of residual waste to
the Thilafushi Island facility; (ii) development of a cost recovery mechanism for the residual waste transport system; (iii)
procurement of a barge and associated equipment for the transfer of residual waste; and (iv) transfer of residual waste from
the participating pilot islands to a regional SWM facility, like the Thilafushi site.

The Thilafushi facility has been identified by GOM as the ultimate disposal facility for solid waste in the Central Province
until other regional waste disposal facilities are established in the future. Therefore, the residual waste from the islands
participating in this project will use the Thilafushi facility for ultimate disposal of the waste. In the past, Thilafushi operated
as an "open dump" with no precautions taken to minimize adverse environmental impacts from solid waste disposal.
Recently, GOM assisted by the International Finance Corporation (IFC), privatized the operations and management of the
Thilafushi site. The private sector operator is contractually bound to improve the site's conditions and operations in order
to conform to guidelines on environmental safeguards of IFC's as well as GOM. While this project will not support nor be
involved in the operation of the Thilafushi site, the developer's legal obligation to conform to IFC's and GOM's
environmental guidelines renders the use of Thilafushi for residual waste disposal from islands participating in this project
acceptable.

The privatization of the Thilafushi facility provided for the rehabilitation of the site, and under current projections, the
process will take another 18 months. Until such rehabilitation is completed, the non-degradable residue from the IWMCs
in the five pilot islands will be baled and stored under a protective cover in the respective IWMCs. In the unlikely event that
the rehabilitation of the Thilafushi facility takes longer than anticipated and storage space for the baled waste becomes a
problem at the IWMCs, it is proposed that the baled waste would be transported to Thilafushi and stored on site until proper
disposal is possible.

The potential adverse environmental impact of the residual waste is significantly reduced when compared with mixed solid
waste because the organic fraction of the waste has been removed from the waste stream and subjected to composting at
the island level. Studies have shown that the removal of the organic fraction of the waste from the residual waste stream
reduces the pollution potential (as measured through the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of the waste) of the residual
waste stream by about 90%. Therefore, the adverse environmental impact of residual waste disposal from the
participating islands would be minimal compared to that of mixed waste disposal at the Thilafushi site at present.

Component 3: Project Management

The objective of this component is to establish an effective mechanism for project implementation, including monitoring and
reporting of the implementation progress. An existing Project Management Unit (PMU) in MOEE manages the
implementation of the IDA-financed Maldives Environmental Management Project (MEMP). While MOEE will have overall
responsibility for implementing and ensuring that the project objective is met, it will execute the project through the EPA.
The SWM Coordinator for MEMP in the PMU will be responsible for day-to-day technical coordination of this project with
support from EPA’s SWM staff. Also, implementation support would be provided by EPA staff posted at the Island Offices
of the five targeted islands through technical oversight and coordination among the participating Island Councils that will
have the primary responsibility for island-level implementation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
The project will cover five selected islands of the Ari Atoll. The islands of Dhigurah, Fenfushi, Ukulhas, Thoddoo and
Dhangethi within the Ari Atoll have been identified to serve as model islands for SWM and as demonstration sites for
expanding the island level integrated SWM system to surrounding inhabited islands. The first phase of the project will be
implemented in three model islands, i.e., Ukulhas, Dhigurah and Fenfushi. Thereafter, the pilot project will be expanded to
the islands of Thoddoo and Dhangethi in the Ari Atoll. Eventually, it is anticipated that all inhabited islands in the Ari Atoll
will participate in an atoll-based SWM system, although at this stage, such expansion is not part of the project due to time
and resource constraints.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

Darshani De Silva, SASDI

                                                               3
  Parthapriya Ghosh, SASDS

  6 .Safeguard Policies Triggered                        Yes           No      Explanation
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     X                    Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) will
                                                                               be triggered because the project will support
                                                                               composting, segregation, temporary storage
                                                                               and disposal of solid waste in existing IWMCs
                                                                               in the participating islands of Ari Atoll.
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                          X
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                   X
  Pest Management OP 4.09                                              X
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                               X
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                        X
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                  X
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                            X
  Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       X
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
  A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any
  potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  Environmental impacts: The Maldives is faced with the challenge of managing increasing quantities of solid waste, which is
  the country’s most visible environmental threat to the tourism and fishery industries. The technical, financial and
  institutional approaches adopted under the project will serve as a suitable model for future SWM in other inhabited islands
  of the Central Province. The project is classified under Safeguards Category "A" primarily to reflect the risks involved in
  SWM both at the island level and at the Thilafushi Island facility. Under the PPP contract, the private concessionaire of the
  Thilafushi Island facility is contractually bound to conform to IFC environmental safeguards. The project will involve
  community-based waste recycling and resource recovery facilities, composting of the organic fraction as well as off-island
  regional waste disposal at Thilafushi Island for residual waste. Because the country's ecosystems are fragile and the atolls
  are ringed by coral reefs that are among the world's richest in species diversity and aesthetic appeal, the operation of these
  facilities could generate further environmental impacts although the net environmental impact of the project will be strongly
  positive.

  Social impacts: In order to identify any adverse social and environmental issues, the client conducted an environmental and
  social due diligence (ESDD) study. The outputs include protocols for screening, guidelines for mitigation of environmental
  and social risks, a generic environmental and social management plan (ESMP) and guidance on the development of
  Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). The ESDD report indicated that social
  safeguard issues are non-existent. However, the generic ESMP includes a screening format to capture any safeguards
  related issues during implementation. The screening will be carried out before implementation begins and mitigation
  measures will be drawn up based on the ESMP.

  Since there are no indigenous communities in Maldives, OP/BP 4.10: Indigenous Peoples is not triggered. The ESDD
  findings do not suggest any involuntary taking of land and therefore OP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement has not been
  triggered.
  2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
  Due to the project’s nature, the social and environmental impacts of the project are expected to be positive, beneficial, and
  the project aims towards long-term environmental and social sustainability.
  3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.


                                                               4
As described above, the only project alternative considered is related to offshore residual waste disposal site, where it has
been identified the most environmental and economically acceptable would be to dispose at the Thilafushi SWM facility.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Because nature-based tourism is the primary driver of the economy, the economic and social well being of the population
depends largely on maintaining a high level of environmental integrity. Sound environmental management in Maldives is,
therefore, essential to ensuring continued growth and development. In recognition of such linkage, Maldives established a
regulatory and institutional framework for environmental protection in 1993 by enacting the Environmental Protection and
Preservation Act (EPPA). A National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) and an update to the EPPA were completed in
1999. Several NEAPs have been implemented and they have served as GOM's comprehensive framework for ensuring
environmental protection and sustainable development during the years of implementation.

Environment plays a key role in national development articulated in the Strategic Action Plan. A ministry responsible for
environment was established in 2004 with a mandate for environmental protection and management. The EPA was
established in December 2008 as the environmental regulator. While the institutional and regulatory framework for
environmental management in Maldives is in place, the institutional capacity for effective regulation and enforcement is
weak. One of the components of the IDA-financed Maldives Environmental Management Project (that is currently under
implementation) -- the capacity building program -- is addressing this weakness directly and good progress is being made
in implementing the component. One of the greatest threats to public health from environmental-related issues is the ad
hoc disposal of solid waste on the inhabited islands. It is envisaged that the Ari Atoll SWM pilot project will provide a model
for replication in other islands/regions of the Ari Atoll, the Central Province and even the entire country.

In order to identify adverse social and environmental issues, the client has conducted an environmental and social due
diligence (ESDD) study. As mentioned above, the outputs include protocols for screening, guidelines for mitigation of
environmental and social risks, a generic environmental and social management plan (ESMP) and guidance on the
development of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).

The Project Management Unit (PMU) in the Ministry of Environment and Energy will include an ESDD Coordinator who will
report to the Project Manager and will work closely with the SWM Coordinator. The ESDD Coordinator will be responsible
for overall implementation of the environment and social management plan and will liaise with other agencies at the island
level to implement safeguard mitigation measures, monitoring and evaluation of implementation and report on compliance
and status of performance indicators. In addition, EPA staff posted in the islands will guide and oversee the operations of
the IWMCs.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the project are the island communities of Dhigurah, Fenfushi, Ukulhas, Thoddoo and Dhangethi
within the Ari Atoll. The PMU conducted initial consultations with the island communities and Island Councils on the
proposed project, including the changes that would take place in waste collection, operationalizing the existing IWMCs and
disposal and safeguards that would be put in place. The consultation process is expected to continue while preparing the
initial environmental examinations for each IWC.

The draft ESDD was disclosed to public in December 28, 2011.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                   Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                      November 20, 2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                  December 28, 2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                   August 6, 2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive   NA
Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                   NA

                                                                 5
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              NA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          NA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           NA
  If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are
  to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
  NA

  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the
  project decision meeting)
  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                            Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]

  OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
  Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                          Yes [   ]        No [   ]   NA [ X ]

  Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on     Yes [   ]        No [   ]   NA [ X ]
  cultural property?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as              Yes [   ]        No [   ]   NA [ X ]
  appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the   Yes [   ]        No [   ]   NA [ X ]
  plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?           Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]

  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and            Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
  language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
  NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared    Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
  for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?           Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]

  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of           Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
  safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the          Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
  same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?



III. APPROVALS

  Signed and submitted by:                  Name                                                    Date
  Task Team Leader:                         Marinela Dado                                           July 21, 2012
  Approved By:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:          Sanjay Srivastava                                       August 9, 2012
  Comments:




                                                                    6
Sector Manager:     Herbert Acquay       August 10, 2012
Comments: Cleared




                                     7
