                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/01/2011                                 Report No.: AC6178
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P073036                  Original Project Name: Household Energy
                                              and Universal Access Project
Country: Mali                                 Project ID: P111018
Project Name: Additional Financing Mali Household Energy and Universal Access
Project
Task Team Leader: Koffi Ekouevi
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 16, 2008       Estimated Board Date: September 4, 2008
Managing Unit: AFTEG                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Power (87%);Public administration- Energy and mining (7%);Renewable energy
(3%);District heating and energy efficiency services (3%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%);Regulation and
competition policy (14%);Rural services and infrastructure (55%);Climate change
(3%);Land administration and management (3%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             35.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             3.86
                                                                        3.86
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed Additional Financing would support the initial development objective of
the Household Energy and Universal Rural Access (HEURA) Project which is to support
the Government of Mali’s efforts to increase the access of isolated low income
populations to basic energy services to help achieve economic growth and poverty
reduction targets, including those linked with the Millennium Development Goals
 (MDGs).

 The US$8.5 million Trust Funded Additional Financing of the Household Energy and
Universal Rural Access (HEURA) Project will have the same objectives as the original
HEURA project, which is to support the Government of Mali’s efforts to increase access
of isolated low income populations to basic energy services to help achieve economic
growth and poverty reduction targets, including those linked with the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs).

3. Project Description
The original Project Design with its three components remains unchanged. The
Additional Financing would support the original development objective of the current
project and would be implemented using the same framework and implementation
  arrangements as the original project.
  Component 1: Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening (US$2.76
million). The Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening component will
finance the Water and Electricity Regulatory Commission (CREE), the Directorate of
Energy (DNE), the National Directorate of Nature Conservation (DNCN), and the Rural
Energy Agency (AMADER). The World Bank Institute will provide technical assistance
in the design of
  capacity development activities based on project objectives and sector objectives as
outlined in the CAS.
  Sub-component A: Support to the CREE. This Additional Financing will help the CREE
redefine its mandate, reinforce its technical capacities in the area of contract oversight,
  monitoring and compliance more effectively. This is particularly important in view of
the recently failed privatization experience of EDM SA and the need to eventually
establish a more formal regulatory oversight mechanism once the rural electrification
initiatives are sufficiently scaled up. Therefore tailor made capacity building activities
and on-the job training will be a priority. A limited number of equipment (hardware and
software), strategic studies and workshops will also be financed.
  Sub-component B: Support to the DNE. The DNE is still a relatively fragile institution
with a weak administrative authority. Sector strategy and policy formulation, monitoring
  and evaluation, and impact assessment mandates of to DNE are still not being
adequately met. This Additional Financing will help the DNE conduct an institutional
audit to identify its strengths and weaknesses and to develop an action plan towards a
reinforced administrative and technical authority. A capacity building program for staff,
equipment, sector strategic studies, and workshops will be financed. Particular areas of
focus include knowledge and tools in policy formulation, monitoring, evaluation, and
impact assessment, demand side management and energy efficiency, biofuels project
development, energy and climate change issues, and generation, transmission, and
distribution master plans.
  Sub-component C: Support to the DNCN- The DNCN is playing an important role in
the supervision of woodland energy management activities of the household energy
component. In particular, the DNCN is ensuring that the control and monitoring systems
of the fuelwood rural markets are efficient and effective. Continuous efforts are needed to
strengthen the DNCN to be more efficient in policy and strategy development; and
monitoring and evaluation of activities in the forestry sector. In particular, the Additional
Financing will help finance the implementation of existing forestry legislation intended to
regulate the production, trade, and utilization of woodfuels. A capacity building program
mostly for regional staff, equipment, strategic studies and workshops will be financed.
  Sub-component D: Support to AMADER. The original project financed capacity
development of AMADER and equipment to enable it to become an operational Agency.
This Additional Financing will finance AMADER (i) to improve on its monitoring of
local private sector operators involved in energy services delivery; (ii) to develop more
innovative technical and managerial schemes to promote lower cost electrification
solutions; (iii) to promote additional productive uses of energy services in partnership
with the local banking system; (iv) to continue to remove barriers to the development of
renewable energy in line with the objectives of the GEF co-financed activities of the
original project; and (v) to reinforce output based mechanisms related to the energy
services delivery component. This subcomponent will also finance outreach and
partnerships initiatives at the national, regional, and global levels to attract more
financing for scaling up in a sustainable manner energy access expansion in Mali. A
strategic capacity development program will be financed as well as technical studies,
equipment, and workshops.
  Component 2: Energy Services Delivery (US$30.41 million)
  The Energy Services Delivery Component will finance the scale up of rural
electrification projects. The experience of the spontaneous bottom up projects has
demonstrated the potential of a large scale energy access project in Mali. Following the
  bottom up rural electrification approach spontaneous private initiative projects are
selected based on promoters’ ability to develop and operate a viable project with a fixed
investment subsidy (between 75-80% , US$500,000 max). Subsidies are established on
the basis of (i) number of customers to be connected during the first two years (ii) the
average tariff (iii) subsidy by customer connected (total investment/number of
  customers).
  Sub-component A: Scale up of Rural Electrification Projects. Through the Additional
Financing the Energy Services Delivery investments will be scaled up through the
extension of existing bottom up projects, the development of new bottom up projects,
  and the development of one top down project. It was estimated by the original project
that some 5-7 larger top down decentralized schemes, including two ongoing
decentralized
  schemes prior to the project will be developed. It turns out that the development of these
top down projects was difficult and very slow. In addition, they required the participation
  of foreign private sector investors that are slow to engage in deals in rural areas of Mali.
It was rather the extension of two existing larger decentralized concessions that was
  implemented. The original project attracted an impressive number of local private sector
operators through small scale projects. The Additional Financing will scale up the bottom
  up small scale projects with the implementation of only one top down larger project.
Through a separate financing from KfW, AMADER is developing the implementation of
two other top down larger projects.
  Sub-component B: Scale up of Multi-Functional Platforms Investments. The original
project has demonstrated that the Multifunctional Platforms are helping communities
have access to basic pre-electrification and helping to develop productive uses of energy.
This Additional Financing will finance a scale up of the Multi-functional platforms in
remote communities. A particular emphasis will be placed on partnerships with the local
banking system to develop micro-financing schemes to support the women’s associations
managing the Multifunctional Platforms.
  Sub-component C: Information, Education, and Communication (IEC). Implementation
experience with IEC through the original project indicated that a deepening of the
initiatives, their relevance to local communities, and demonstration workshops are
  important. The Additional financing will support tailor-made IEC initiatives mostly in
remote communities to support energy services delivery initiatives.
  Component 3: Household Energy (US$ 1.76 million)
  The speed of physical progress of the woodland management initiatives of the original
project is slow as many actors both local and central are involved and considerable
amount of time is needed to build consensus. Moreover, sustainability of these initiatives
is linked to the enforcement of forestry legislation, participatory approaches that are
elaborate in design and implementation. A strategic choice has been made to consolidate
initiatives of the original project and to scale up only those that have proven satisfactory
in their implementation.
  Sub-component A: Community-based Woodland Management. This sub-component
will finance (i) the consolidation of woodland management plans; (ii) small woodfuels
management activities by local communities and private operators; and (iii) a forestry
  information system. This sub-component will also finance specific activities initiated in
partnership with the DNCN to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework sustaining
  the woodfuel sector. In particular: (i) the delegation of tax collection to credible and
equipped communal institutions; (ii) guaranteeing a significant tax share to local
communities with proper village woodland management schemes; (iii) defining clearly
the roles and responsibilities of communes, the private sector, and NGOs in the
production, control, and trade of woodfuels; (iv) encouraging price incentives for the
  development of alternative fuels to wood energy; (v) ensure that control and monitoring
systems of fuelwood rural markets are efficient and effective; and (vi) diversification of
  productive activities in rural communities.
  Sub-component B: Interfuel Substitution and Household Energy Efficiency. This
subcomponent will finance: (i) the scale up of improved stoves; (ii) the scale up of
compact fluorescent lamps; and (iii) an information system on energy efficiency. A
review of the implementation of the original project indicates that initiatives on kerosene
stoves, LPG, wood briquettes, and evaporative air-coolers did not get an adequate
response from users. These initiatives will not be scaled up by this Additional Financing.
Only studies to further understand barriers to the adoption of these devices will be
financed.
  Sub-component C: Information, Education, and Communication. This sub-component
will finance promotional campaigns to support the consolidation of woodland energy
management initiatives and interfuel substitution and energy efficiency initiatives.

 The original project design with its three HEURA components remains unchanged. The
Trust Funded Additional Financing would support the original HEURA development and
would be implemented using the same framework and implementation arrangements as
the original project. The proposed Trust Funded Additional Financing will strengthen the
HEURA Component 1 (Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening) and the
HEURA Component 2 (Energy Services Delivery). No trust funded activities are planned
under the HEURA Component 3 (Household Energy).
 US$6.5 million will be provided from the Trust Fund to support Energy Small and
Medium Size Enterprises in Sub-Saharan Africa (ESME TF) which is funded by the
Government of Russia. The objective of the ESME TF is to foster local private sector
entrepreneurship and investment in the provision of energy services in remote, un-served
and under-served regions within a number of Sub-Saharan African countries.

  US$2 million will be provided from the Africa Renewable Energy Access Trust Fund
(AFREA TF) which is funded through a contribution from the Kingdom of the
Netherlands to the ESMAP CEIF (Clean Energy Investment Framework) Multi Donor
Trust Fund (MDTF) recipient executed and technical assistance window. The AFREA TF
is designed to complement and support ongoing World Bank renewable energy sector
operations in Sub-Saharan Africa, focusing on activities that (i) directly support and/or
create enabling conditions for increased renewable energy investments, (ii) and
expanding access to electricity related to renewable energy and (iii) help strengthening
and mainstreaming the application of gender sensitivity guidelines and tools in rural
energy services.

 Component 1: Capacity Development and Institutional Strengthening (US$1.60 million)

  The Trust Funded Additional Financing will provide capacity building, training and
technical assistance in order to further strengthen the technical and managerial capacities
of Mali’s rural energy service agency AMADER and other rural energy sector
institutions, such as local energy service companies (ESCOs).

  The project’s strategic capacity development program will therefore finance amongst
others technical studies, consultants, equipment, and workshops, with a particular focus
on renewable energies and productive energy uses. This component will also continue to
finance rural energy outreach and partnerships initiatives between AMADER and other
energy sector institutions at the national, regional, and global levels to attract future
financing to scale up, in a sustainable manner, energy access expansion and productive
energy uses in Mali. AMADER’s partnership initiatives that will benefit from capacity
building and technical assistance under the Trust Funded Additional Financing will
include the following partnerships: (i) Lighting Africa (a joint World Bank/IFC initiative
to mobilize the private sector to provide clean, affordable, and quality off-grid lighting to
people without access to electricity in Sub-Saharan Africa), (ii) Millenium Villages
Project Mali (a joint UNDP/Millenium Promise Mali/Columbia University Earth Institute
initiative for helping the Millenium Villages in the Segou region of Mali to fight poverty
at the village level through community-led development in view of achieving the MDG),
and (iii) Nyeeta Finance S.A. (a Malian micro-finance institution with the objective of
developing and testing target short and medium term loans for productive energy uses in
rural areas of Mali).

 Component 2: Energy Services Delivery (US$6.90 million)

 The Energy Services Delivery Component will continue to finance the scale up of rural
energy projects, in particular through the extension of existing bottom up rural energy
projects and the development of new bottom up rural energy projects with a particular
focus on renewable energies.

 The experience of these spontaneous bottom up rural energy projects to date has
demonstrated the potential of a large scale energy access project in Mali. Following the
bottom up rural energy approach spontaneous private initiative projects are selected
based on the promoters’ ability to develop and operate a viable project with a fixed
investment subsidy (between 75-80%, limited to US$500,000). Under the proposed Trust
Funded Additional Financing, grants from both the AFREA and the ESME Trust Fund
will be matched with private sector contributions of local ESCOs to increase access to
affordable and clean energy services in about 19 villages in 6 different regions in Mali.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The physical activities will be carried out in peri-urban and rural areas of Mali.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
   Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 Overall, the project is expected to have positive environmental benefits, World Bank’s
environmental and social safeguards will be complied with by the private sector operators
involved in decentralized energy services delivery. The proposed scale up under the
additional financing will not trigger any new social safeguard policy such as indigenous
peoples, or environmental ones such as natural habitats.

 Like the parent project, the global objective of Trust-funded Additional Financing of the
Mali HEURA project is to contribute to positive environmental and social impacts peri-
urban and rural areas of Mali. It is anticipated that there will be no major cumulative
and/or long term adverse impacts due to project activities. All rural energy sub-projects
under the HEURA Component 2 (Energy Services Delivery) will continue to undergo
social and environmental assessments to identify adequate mitigation measures in order
to help avoid or minimize adverse environmental and social impacts.
 Applicable World Bank environmental and social safeguards for this project will be
complied with by ESCOSs involved in decentralized energy services delivery, with
assistance from AMADER’s Environmental and Social Safeguard Unit.
 From an environmental and social safeguards point of view, the Trust Funded
Additional Financing is predicated on the fact that the project’s objectives and
components description remain unchanged. That is, the potential environmental and
social impacts of the envisioned activities, for the most part, are projected to be minimal,
site-specific and manageable to an accepted level. Similarly, because project components
remain the same, the proposed scale up under the Trust Funded Additional Financing will
not trigger any new safeguards policies.
 In spite of the benefits expected to accrue to local communities, in terms of easy access
to electricity and, by implication, improvement and their overall quality of life,
investments in energy access, sometimes, have adverse impacts on the biophysical and
socioeconomic environment, if proper mitigation measures are not in place. These
impacts might include air and noise pollution; land acquisition; loss of livelihood and
economic activities by project affected people; and impacts on cultural and historical
resources.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
It is anticipated that there will be no cumulative adverse impacts.

 Building on the existing safeguard mechanisms and frameworks established and
implemented by AMADER’s Environmental and Social Safeguard Unit under the original
project, it is anticipated that there will be no major cumulative, indirect or long term
adverse impacts. The project’s existing safeguard instruments are considered both as a
planning tool and as a means for a harmonious integration of the project in its bio-
physical and social environment. They can also be considered as a way to maximize the
positive effects on the same environment.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The global objective is to contribute to positive environmental impacts, it is expected that
only minor adverse impacts will occur. Both the energy services delivery and the
household energy components will undergo social and environmental assessments to
identify mitigation measures for issues that could result in long term impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
described. The safeguards for the original project are rated satisfactory and the project
had no
 negative environmental or social impacts. The additional financing will strengthen the
institutional arrangement for social and environmental management with the recruitment
 of an environmental expert at the project coordination unit. His main responsibility will
be to ensure that environmental and social measures are more adequately taken into
consideration in the processing of business plans for energy production.

 AMADER, through their Environmental and Social Safeguard Unit, will be the main
entity responsible for carrying the environmental and social function of this operation.
The main responsibility of AMADER’s Environmental and Social Unit is to ensure that
environmental and social measures are adequately taken into consideration in the
processing of business plans proposed by ESCOs and other local initiatives for rural
energy services delivery activities. In addition, the Direction Nationale des Eaux et
Forêts (DNEF) and the Direction Nationale de Contrôle des Pollutions et des Nuisances
(DNCPN) will ensure effectiveness of the implementation of proposed safeguards
measures and compliance with National and Bank safeguard policies.

 The project's Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the
project's Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will continue to be the guiding
documents in implementing the project's safeguard measures under the proposed Trust
Funded Additional Financing. Both frameworks are currently being implemented in a
satisfactory manner by the borrower. The project's safeguard implementation is rated
satisfactory since effectiveness of the original project in October 2004. The project's two
safeguard frameworks (ESMF and RPF) constitute a roadmap leading to subproject
specific Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs), Environmental Management Plans
(EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), whenever AMADER's screening process
reveals it is necessary that they are conducted, or that simple measures drawn from the
impacts and mitigations checklist are applied. In addition, the project will undertake a
social audit to assess the effective implementation of social mitigation measures during
the HEURA implementation.

  The project's ESMF devised standards methods and procedures specifying how future
subprojects whose location, number and scale are unknown will systematically address
environmental and social issues in the screening, categorization, localization, design,
implementation, operation and maintenance during the rural energy sub-project's
lifecycle. It includes: (i) systematization of environmental and social impact assessment
for all identified sub-projects before investment; (ii) procedures for applying safeguard
related checklists or conducting sub-project specific EIA/EMPs and RAPs, whichever or
the combination of which is deemed applicable. The ESMF thus provides sound
institutional arrangements outlining the roles and responsibilities of the various
stakeholder groups involved with the implementation and monitoring of identified
measures, along with capacity strengthening measures and sensitization awareness raising
campaigns targeting relevant actors closely involved with the project for better
implementation and monitoring of the project’s environmental safeguard measures.

 Similarly, the project’s RPF outlines the policies and procedures to be followed in the
event that project activities require land acquisition and/or lead to loss of economic
activities of project affected people. The RPF was prepared to minimize and mitigate the
potential negative impacts resulting from project investments and it provides the
overarching framework by which potential resettlement issues will be addressed. In
compliance with OP 4.12, the result of the social audit will serve as clear basis for
management of land acquisition issues in rural electrification operations which will
continue to be based on standard practices in this sub-sector and namely: (i) the respect of
sector regulations on land transfer for electricity production; (ii) the description of the
nature of land transactions and process of identifying specific project sites during
implementation; and (iii) the documentation of land transfers, when such new land
acquisition is not likely to result in involuntary displacement in full complaisance with
the OP 4.12 . Therefore, a resettlement or abbreviated resettlement plan consistent with
the disclosed RPF will be prepared and disclosed before subproject financing. The likely
scope of increased human and economic interactions as a result of increase access to
energy services in rural communities will be assessed. If this increase is also likely to
induce the spread of Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD), then appropriated
management measures will be included in the EMPs and RAPs of approved business
plans presented by ESCOs and other local initiatives for rural energy service delivery
activities with an appropriate reporting system regularly assessed during supervision
mission.

  The project’s ESMF and RPF were reviewed and cleared by the Bank. They were
disclosed by the Info Shop and in country on May 2, 2003 prior to appraisal of the
original project. During the preparation of the IDA Additional Financing, ESMF and RPF
were updated, reviewed and approved by World Bank safeguard specialists in 2008. Both
frameworks, the project’s ESMF and RPF, were re-disclosed in-country and in the Info
Shop.
  In addition to the project’s existing safeguard frameworks, safeguard related capacity
building, training, and technical assistance will continue to be part of project activities
under the HEURA Component 1. This will for instance include the strengthening of
safeguard specific indicators within AMADER’s existing monitoring and evaluation
system.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework and the Resettlement Policy
Framework were reviewed and cleared by the Bank. They were disclosed by the info
shop and in country on May 2, 2003 prior to appraisal of the original project. The
 borrower is currently implementing the original project within an Environmental and
Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework. These serve as
basis to screen all sub-projects. Sub-projects presented by private operators will continue
to be subject to environmental and social assessments based on the frameworks. In view
of potential land acquisition and/pr loss of access to resources, the government will
prepare the appropriate resettlement instrument based on recommendations of the
Resettlement Policy Framework. Technical support will be provided to strengthen the
systematic screening of sub-projects and the effective implementation of mitigations
 measures that might be necessary.

 Key stakeholders of the project include the PIU, Direction Nationale de la Conservation
de la Nature; Direction Nationale du Contrôle de la Pollution et des Nuisances; ESCOs,
Private operators and local communities. Through workshops and consultations,
environmental and social issues will continue to be addressed during the implementation
of the Trust Funded Additional Financing. ESCOs, other local initiatives and NGOs
involved in the project will continue to be subject to sensitization on national and Bank
safeguard policies and safeguard related risk mitigation measures, as well as take part in
the implementation of those measures.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/09/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/09/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              07/09/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/11/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/11/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              07/11/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Not applicable
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Koffi Ekouevi         03/10/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Amadou Konare         03/10/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni    03/10/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer   03/10/2011
  Comments:
