                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                               Report No.: AC6336


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/23/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mali                                Project ID: P124612
Project Name: Piloting Effective Early Childhood Development Services in Mali
Task Team Leader: Michelle J. Neuman
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTED                         Lending Instrument: Learning and
                                             Innovation Loan
Sector: Pre-primary education (50%);Health (30%);Other social services (20%)
Theme: Education for all (50%);Child health (30%);Nutrition and food security
(10%);Global food crisis response (10%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       0.00
        Rapid Social Response Program                                  2.00
                                                                       2.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed grant will support the Government of Mali to respond to crises by developing cost-
effective early childhood development services for vulnerable children in rural areas. The
Development Objective of the grant is to enhance the quality of early development and learning
environments for 3-5 year olds in pilot rural areas (Segou and Mopti).

 Specifically, the project aims to: (i) improve stimulation, health, and nutrition of infants and
toddlers through parenting education in the target communities; (ii) integrate informal early
childhood development opportunities in communities for children from birth to age six; (iii)
protect the health, nutrition, welfare, and school readiness of preschool-age children in ECD
centers; and (iv) strengthen capacity for management, monitoring and evaluation of ECD
interventions at central and local levels.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
1.     The proposed program for RSR support will have two components: (1) Integrated early
childhood health, nutrition, and education services in rural areas; and (2) Capacity development
for management, monitoring, and evaluation of ECD interventions.
 2.     Component 1 - Integrated early childhood health, nutrition, and education services in
rural areas ($1.5 million # Recipient-executed): The project will test the effectiveness of a
variety of affordable, feasible, and sustainable approaches to prevent the deterioration of young
children#s outcomes during the current crises. The Government of Mali will work with two
implementing partners # the Aga Khan Foundation and Plan Mali # in the regions of Mopti and
Ségou. Two pilot regions have been selected to allow comparisons of lessons learned across two
different contexts and to inform the development of a national ECD program targeting
vulnerable young children. The specific interventions will target children from 0 to 6, through
parenting education, community programs, and ECD centers:

 (a) Improve early stimulation and nutrition for infants-toddlers through parenting education:
Taking advantage of the window of opportunity for promoting children#s healthy nutrition and
development, this intervention will focus on activities that combine early stimulation with health
and nutritional inputs for children under age 3. Parents and other family members with infants
and toddlers will be supported in their caregiving roles and responsibilities, using new parenting
education modules developed with support from UNICEF-Mali. Working with community
health workers and other resource persons (e.g., traditional birth attendants), parenting education
will cover themes including: prenatal/postnatal health visits, assisted births, nutrition, exclusive
breastfeeding, proper hygiene, and early stimulation. Parent education sessions will be reinforced
with breastfeeding counseling and cooking demonstration groups. The interventions will focus
on providing information and encouraging positive parenting and caregiving practices. Children
who are identified with moderate malnutrition or health issues (i.e., worms, parasites) will be
referred to other services for treatment.

 (b) Integrate informal early childhood opportunities into community settings: To reach young
children who are not in formal preschools, this intervention will support ECD activities (e.g.,
dissemination of parenting information and materials) in places where families congregate,
including literacy groups, women#s gardens, health centers, and community-based savings
groups. Specifically, themes that are core to early childhood development and parenting #
including early stimulation, nutrition, and health activities # will be integrated into existing
services for women and families to ensure that the most vulnerable and marginalized children
benefit from support. Given the low levels of maternal literacy, integrating ECD modules into
ongoing adult literacy programs is a promising two-generational strategy. In coordination with
local health services, the project will ensure that children receive crucial health and nutritional
inputs (e.g., deworming, immunization, anti-malarial and micronutrient campaigns). A variety of
mechanisms # including radio # will be used to disseminate information and support to
determine the best #entry points# for reaching the children under age 6.

 (c) Promote preschoolers# health, nutrition, and school readiness: To address the unmet
demand for preschool provision, communities will be sensitized and supported in the
establishment of new community-based ECD programs in homes or community buildings. In
existing community-based ECD centers (Centres de Development de la Petite Enfance) for 3 to 6
year olds, the project will improve facilities to ensure children#s basic health and safety,
including access to water, sanitation, and safe outdoor play areas. The rehabilitation of the
facilities will involve minor works (repairs, plastering, painting, etc.) with minimal
environmental impact, which will be regulated by national and local laws and regulations. To
improve quality, the project will build the capacity of pedagogical advisors to train locally-
recruited educators and also facilitate the development and use of learning materials. Capacity-
building of both ECD and primary educators will help strengthen children#s transition from the
ECD centers to primary schooling. The approach will be to coordinate and strengthen existing
services, and where necessary, fill in gaps. To promote sustainability of community-based ECD
centers, the project will encourage positive deviance. Community members will visit centers in
different villages and learn from successful management approaches.

 3.    Component 2 # Capacity development for management, monitoring, and evaluation of
ECD interventions ($500,000): This component would support the MEALN and decentralized
government authorities to manage, monitor and evaluate the pilot, as well as strengthen their
capacity to develop and implement a scaled-up national program in response to future crises,
based on lessons learned.

  (a)    Capacity-building to support a national program ($250,000 # Recipient-executed): This
sub-component will cover: (i) capacity-building to the MEALN and decentralized government
entities (from education, health, social development, and child protection) on data collection and
reporting on young children and ECD services; (ii) knowledge-sharing activities of the national
ECD network, comprised of the main governmental and non-governmental stakeholders working
on the scale up of effective ECD interventions; (iii) technical assistance to design a scaled-up
national program that will support vulnerable children and families based on lessons learned
from the pilot.

  (b) Technical assistance, research, and evaluation ($250,000 # Bank-executed): The
following activities will be Bank-executed in close collaboration with the Government of Mali:
(i) technical assistance and capacity-building in the coordination of the project, procurement, and
financial management within the Division of Preschool and Special Education; (ii) targeted
studies to inform the project implementation (e.g., a baseline assessment in both target regions);
and (iii) action-research to evaluate the effectiveness of the piloted approaches through a
partnership with Malian universities.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will pilot activities in rural areas of two regions of Mali: Segou and Mopti.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The project will not have adverse social impact as its aim is to address the vulnerability of young
children by helping to improve their cognitive, social and health outcomes. As it is only planning
on improving existing ECD facilities, and resort to at-home care centers, there will be no
environmental impact of the project on natural habitats, physical or cultural resources or
indigenous people. But, considering the common lack of updated land registry in some rural
areas, the project will ensure that, before any rehabilitation works starts, the partner in charge of
rehabilitation work obtain a rehabilitation right signed by the mayor or any relevant authority
(#attestation de donation de la commune#).

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
       Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                                      X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   05/19/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   N/A

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                       Ms Michelle J. Neuman                                05/23/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                             05/23/2011
      Comments: No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should
      project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult
      ASPEN.
    Sector Manager:                         Mr Peter Nicolas Materu                              05/23/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
