                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/29/2011                                   Report No.: AC6488
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Mali                                Project ID: P124054
Project Name: ML-Strengthening Reproductive Health
Task Team Leader: Aissatou Diack
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 8,       Estimated Board Date: December 6, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Population and reproductive health (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             30.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve access to and use of quality
reproductive health services by women 15 to 49 years old, in selected regions of Mali.
Interventions would target the urban poor, peri-urban areas and rural regions with the
worst reproductive health indicators. The project would complement the activities
supported by other donors.

3. Project Description
The project would have three components: (i) Strengthening Supply and Quality of
Reproductive Health Service (US$ 7.5 million); (ii) Strengthening Demand for
Reproductive Health Services (US$ 15.6 million); and (iii) Project Management,
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and Policy Dialogue (US$ 6.9 million).

 Component 1: Strengthening Supply and Quality of Reproductive Health Service (US$
7,480,500). This component would have three subcomponents.

 Subcomponent (i) Financing of an RBF Pilot (US$1.85 million). This sub-component
would help design, implement, and evaluate an RBF pilot in the region of Koulikoro. The
preparation of this pilot was initiated about two years ago with support from the
Netherlands who helped inform stakeholders about the design, and prepared the
instruments for contracting and verification.

 A total population of about 120,000 women of childbearing age would be covered over
a period of three years with a package of reproductive health services that include modern
family planning, prenatal care (with nutrition and anemia control), safe delivery and
postnatal care. RBF indicators would have a large focus on reproductive health, but they
would also include other services (such as child visits, immunizations, adolescent
services, tuberculosis, and malaria), to ensure that health care facilities do not neglect
other services.

 As shown in other countries, RBF increases the motivation and accountability of service
providers to achieve results. RBF credits would be paid to provide cash at facility level to
cover the local costs of delivering the services (i.e. outreach, supervision, purchasing of
small equipment, essential drugs and supplies, in-service training, etc.). The results
achieved against defined targets would be regularly verified by an independent third party
to avoid the #numbers game# in which health workers may report higher services than
actually provided. Social accountability would also be strengthened through the enhanced
participation of communities in the planning and implementation of community-based
activities, using tools such as community score cards and disclosure of information on the
use of RBF incentives in health facilities.

 The MOH and local authorities (mayors, presidents of rural communities) would
contract specialized consulting services to: (i) supervise contract implementation and
monitor the results; and (ii) build the capacity of the MOH teams implementing the pilot
at the central and district level. The detailed rules for spending these RBF credits would
be defined in the Operational Manual. The Manual would describe the implementation
details for the RBF model, including: (i) institutional arrangements; (ii) criteria for
payments; (iii) assignment of roles and responsibilities for the verification and control of
results for payment and auditing purposes; (iv) penalties and sanctions for fraud; (v)
management and data collection tools; and (vi) rules for the use of funds. Details on the
RBF design are provided in annex 7.

  Subcomponent (ii) # Improving the supply of contraceptives (US$2.0 million). To
reduce stock-outs, the staff of the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Medicines and
about 600 staff managing pharmacies at the district level would be trained in inventory
management, including the use of a logistical information system. The project would also
finance a buffer stock of essential commodities including long-term contraceptive kits
(intra-uterine devices and implants).

 Subcomponent (iii) # Capacity building in reproductive health and obstetric care
(US$3,630,500). This subcomponent would support (i) the in-service training of doctors,
nurses and midwives in family planning and reproductive health; (ii) the training of
midwives, nurses, and doctors in family planning and obstetrical care; (iii) kits for normal
deliveries and Caesarean sections, essential commodities, blood banks, and equipment
including delivery tables and solar lamps for delivery rooms, basic furniture and medical
equipment; and (iv) minor repairs and painting to improve the quality and privacy of RH
and delivery services. This is important because pregnancies that result in complications
which cannot be addressed by skilled birth attendants need attention and treatment at
well-staffed and equipped health facilities, where mothers and newborns that might
otherwise die can be saved.

 This component would finance RBF credits, consultant services, goods and works.

 Component 2. Increasing Demand for Reproductive Health Services (US$ 15,619,500).
This component would have three subcomponents.

 Subcomponent (i) - Strengthening outreach services and behavior change
communication (BCC) interventions and (US$13,507,500). The first subcomponent
would consist in the contracting of experienced NGOs, private providers and outreach
teams to promote the use of contraceptives and RH commodities.

  The MOH has a long experience of working with NGOs. Many large ones have a
sustained track record in reproductive health in Mali. These include: (i) Association
Malienne pour la Planification Familiale (an NGO with offices in 7 regions and currently
supported by the Netherlands); (ii) Association pour le Soutien du Développement de la
Population (which works in 5 regions plus Bamako); (iii) Population Services
International (an international NGO with a network of more than 50 clinics that help with
training and supervision); (iv) Marie Stopes International (which collaborates with more
than 60 community health centers in Koulikoro, Mopti, and Bamako); and others. There
are also a large number of local NGOs who work in association with the international
ones and help them expand their coverage. This network of NGOs has a strong
management capacity, allowing them to expand their geographical scope if receive
financing.

 In close coordination with the MOH at the central level and with the regional and
district health directorates, the contracted NGOs would develop a two-pronged strategy.
First, they would increase demand through community #relays# that would be trained in
RH and FP and would mobilize women to attend immunization services, encourage them
to use post-partum and neonatal services, and educate them on the benefits of family
planning. The #relays# would also help expand the community-based distribution of
contraceptives. Second, NGOs would provide RH and FP services by: (i) partnering with
the CSCOM and CSREF structures and training their doctors, nurse midwives, and
auxiliary midwives in RH and FP; and (ii) by expanding the use of mobile teams
(consisting of a medical doctor and nurse midwives) to provide outreach services to
distant communities. They will also liaise with high schools and madrasas (Islamic
schools) to implement RH programs in collaboration with UNFPA and USAID who are
active in this area.

 Specific messages and approaches to respond to the needs of youth would be prepared,
and behavior change intervention would also target men as they have a significant role in
the decision-making process of using RH services by women. Local radio programs,
theater, talks, interpersonal contacts, peer education would be used to convene the
messages and contribute to behavior change.

  Subcomponent (ii) # Improving financial access (US$1,612,000). This subcomponent
would: (i) provide technical assistance to strengthen the management and financing of
district #Fonds de Solidarité Local# # Local Solidarity Funds, which finance women#s
transport costs incurred when delivering in a hospital (details in Annex 8); and (ii)
support a pilot voucher scheme to increase the demand for institutional deliveries. The
voucher scheme would finance the provision by the government of : (i) cash transfers to
beneficiaries residing in a selected geographical area to facilitate access to child delivery
services, all in accordance with the provisions of the Voucher Scheme Manual; and (ii)
technical assistance to manage these activities. The municipalities chosen would already
have a reasonable supply of obstetric care which would be further strengthened during
year 1 of the project. The pilot would start in the second year. Details are provided in
Annex 9.

 Subcomponent (iii) Promoting a Family Planning-conducive environment (US$500,000)
would help strengthen advocacy, coordination and communication activities by a
National Coalition for Population Control that includes representatives of government,
civil society, local authorities and religious leaders. This will promote a policy
environment conducive to family planning.

 This component would finance consultant services, operating costs, and workshops.

  Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and Policy
Dialogue (US$ 6.9 million). This component would support: (i) project management by a
Coordinating Unit reporting to the Secretary General, including the contracting of
individual consultants and a Fiduciary Agency that would provide procurement and
financial management services; (ii) the regular measurement of the indicators in the
results framework; and (iii) a Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) in 2012, Health
Facility Surveys in 2012 and 2016, and human resources surveys. It would also support
training and equipment to improve the performance and accuracy of the routine health
information system through which most intermediate indicators would be measured.

 An impact evaluation would be conducted to evaluate the relative effectiveness of
different implementation mechanisms (RBF, vouchers schemes, classic input-based
interventions, and behavior change interventions) in achieving targeted indicators, which
will allow by project midterm review to inform which strategies work best and should be
scaled up.

 This component would finance consultants, training, and goods.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will be implemented in four regions: Koulikoro, Sikasso, Segou and Bamako
(periurban areas). However, several activities such as the nationwide communication
campaign on RH will have a national coverage.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant or irreversible impacts due to the anticipated future activities in
the project area.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
A potential negative environmental impact can be associated with the handling and
disposal of medical and health waste such as syringes and material used for delivery of
pregnant women (delivery kits) in health facilities covered by the project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Key activities include training of health workers and staff delivering health services in
the adequate handling and disposal of medical waste and construction of adapted
incinerators.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry of Health has elaborated and shared with the Bank in June 2011 a Medical
Waste Management Plan with an emphasis was put on capacity building and
implementation mechanisms of such plant. While the MOH has dedicated a team to
coordinate the implementation of this plan, its activities will be funded by WHO, the
Nordic Development Fund, UNDP and IDA.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Medical Waste Management Plan will be shared with the press and key stakeholders
such as NGOs and associations of community health centers during a workshop held in
Bamako on August 25, 2011. Press releases and radio talks followed through to ensure
dissemination at the national level.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/25/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/05/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/29/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                                                                09/29/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Maman-Sani Issa                           09/07/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                    Mr John F. May                                09/07/2011
  Comments: This ISDS is approved.
