                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6026


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/08/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mali                               Project ID: P122826
Project Name: Bamako Water Supply Project
Task Team Leader: Matar Fall
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 28,      Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTUW                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan
Sector: Water supply (100%)
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):          70.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                      0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The overall objective of the proposed project is to support the GoM#s efforts to increase access
to sustainable water services in Bamako.
 This objective will be achieved through: (i) expanding water transmission, storage and
distribution capacities, and facilitating access to services through programs for constructing
social water connections and public standposts; and (ii) supporting the implementation of the
urban water sub-sector reform and strengthening capacities to deliver and manage services.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project would comprise of three components: (i) water transmission and storage
component, (ii) water distribution component, and (iii) institutional support and capacity
building component. The first and second components would ensure that the additional water
production capacity for Bamako (144,000 m3 per day) contribute to increase access to low
income beneficiaries through household connections and standposts and improved quality of
service for those already connected to the water distribution network. The third component
would support the ongoing urban water sector reform, which is a key element of the
sustainability of the services.
 Component 1 - Water Transmission and Storage component (US$37.26 million): This
component would finance (i) the expansion of the water storage infrastructure by approximately
20,000 m3 by installing two groundwater storage tanks in Bacodjicoroni; (ii) provision and
installation of the Bacodjicoroni-Badalabougou water transmission main; and (iii) provision and
installation of the Bacodjicoroni-Kalaban-Faladié water transmission main.
 Component 2 - Water Distribution component (US$30.26 million): This component would help
to (i) expand the water distribution networks, and (ii) expand access to piped water by installing
household connections and standposts on the right bank of the Niger River.
 Component 3 - Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$2.48 million): This
component would include the following activities:
 (a) Institutional support to the urban water sub-sector institutions, including: (i) assistance to
the newly established public Asset Holding Company (SOMAPEP) related to coordination and
project management, financial management, procurement, audits, communication and
organization; (ii) development of new business plans/ financial models for the urban water
sector; (iii) technical audits of the performance contracts of SOMAPEP and SOMAGEP; and (iv)
relevant technical assistance and studies.
 (b) Capacity building assistance for SOMAPEP and Ministry of Energy and Water staff
involved in sector reform, and development of regulatory skills of the Regulatory Authority
(Commission de regulation de l#electricite et de l#eau, CREE).
 (c) Environmental and social management of the project and capacity building for safeguard
requirements.

D. Project location (if known)
The project intervention zone is the right bank of the Niger River in Bamako. The specific
locations of the large civil works infrastructure (water reservoirs and water transmission mains)
are known but specific areas of intervention for the extension of secondary and tertiary water
distribution networks will be determined by detailed technical studies.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
SOMAPEP, the Asset Holding Company, which will be the project implementation agency, is a
newly established company formed with mainly former staff of the Ministry of Energy and
Water. An institutional study financed by AFD is underway to define the organization and
staffing of the project coordination unit within SOMAPEP which would be responsible for the
implementation of the Kabala Investment Program. The Borrower’s institutional capacity in
addressing safeguards issues will be assessed under the said study and technical assistance will
be provided to SOMAOEP under the IDA project to strengthen environmental and social
capacities and ensure successful implementation of safeguards requirements.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Demba Balde (AFTCS)
   Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN)
   Mr Taoufiq Bennouna (AFTEN)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    Planned activities will likely have environmental impacts that would trigger OP 4.01. During
project preparation, the Borrower will prepare a full Environmental Assessment for the whole
Kabala Investment program including the IDA funded component. The terms of reference
(TORs) of the EA study have been reviewed by the Bank.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                       X
    -
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    Planned activities may require rights-of-ways for the extension of water distribution
networks and minimal land acquisition for water production facilities. As part of the EA, the
Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) in order to identify ways to
address social issues at stake (land acquisition, resettlement, and loss of economic activities or
restriction of access to sources of livelihood).
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                      X
    The Kabala Investment Program would extract additional water resources from the Niger
River which is an international waterway. In line with the NBA agreement (Charte de l#Eau), the
GoM will notify the executive secretariat and provide technical data requested.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 11/24/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
     The EA and the RPF will be prepared and disclosed in the country and at the Bank Infoshop
   prior to appraisal.

1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Matar Fall              06/08/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   06/08/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad      06/08/2011
   Comments:
