                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/08/2013                                  Report No.: AC6870
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P081704                 Original Project Name: Agricultural
                                             Competitiveness and Diversification
                                             Project
Country: Mali                                Project ID: P130873
Project Name: Agricultural Competitiveness and Diversification Project
Task Team Leader: Yeyande Kasse Sangho
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 23,        Estimated Board Date: March 28, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: AFTA1                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (55%);Other industry (15%);Crops
(10%);SME Finance (10%);General public administration sector (10%)
Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (61%);Infrastructure services for
private sector development (17%);Rural markets (11%);Other Financial Sector
Development (11%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             20
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            2.00
                                                                       2.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The PDO of the parent project is to enhance the performance of supply chains for a range
of agricultural, livestock and fishery products for which Mali has a strong comparative
advantage. This objective remains unchanged with the Additional Financing but, focus
will be made on private sector development (with emphasis on scaling up investment
projects), and access to funding and commercial infrastructure, as opposed to technology
development and demonstration, rural roads and technical assistance support that
received the lion's share of the funding during the previous phase.

3. Project Description
The components also remain unchanged though funds allocation will differ.
 Component 1: Promotion and dissemination of irrigation, post-harvest and value
  adding technologies (US$ 12.3 million)
  The overall objective is to upgrade the technical, commercial and organizational
performances of (i) private agriculture enterprises (in the fields of agriculture and
livestock production, and agro-processing), and (ii) Inter-Professional Organizations
(IPOs). Specific objectives are (i) the dissemination of agriculture and livestock
production, and agro-processing, technologies, (ii) the institutional support to IPOs, and
(iii) the training and capacity building of service providers serving targeted V/Cs.

  Sub-component 1.1: Promotion and dissemination of new technologies (Matching Grant
Program-MGP)- US$10.413 million
  In line with the technology dissemination and private sector promotion objectives, the
backbone of this sub-component is the portfolio of sub-projects to be financed under the
Matching Grant Program (MGP). Two hundred (200) new sub-projects are planned to be
financed as part of the MGP. The size of these sup-projects will be much larger than
during the initial phase. It will fall in the continuum between the micro-enterprises
(typically those that were financed during the initial phase) and bona fide SMEs. Almost
half of the sub-projects will concern agriculture production (95 over 200) and about one
fourth (55 over 200) agro-processing, storage and marketing. Animal production will
account for 15%, and service providers and artisans for 10%. The average matching grant
per sub-project will be $29,000. It is expected that 20 micro-enterprises financed by the
MGP will increase in size to become bona fide SMEs: 6 in irrigated production, 10 in
agro-processing and 4 in animal production.

  Sub-Component 1.2.: Strengthening of capacity of V/C Inter-Professional Organizations
(IPOs) and service providers (US$ 1.893 million)
  The objective is to strengthen the capacity of targeted V/C IPAs, as well as those of
private and public service providers, so that production, storage and marketing activities
all along the value chain attain a greater level of performance. It will fund activities such
as market studies and commercial promotion of Malian products on external markets,
access to commercial information on the part of investors, and upgrade of the quality of
Malian products so that they meet the required external standards.
  The challenge will be to support the creation of an enabling environment for investors,
through: (i) transforming IPOs into efficient organizations under sound governance
systems, with both efficient and effective management and adequate representativeness
vis-à-vis V/C actors, and (ii) the emergence of strong cadre of service providers who can
bring to bear the required operational expertise on investment operations; this will be
predicated on the continued capacity building of service providers so that they offer the
relevant practical expertise to investors at affordable costs.

 Component 2: Improvement of performances of agricultural supply chains (US$
2.9million)
 It aims to increase the volume and value of Malian agriculture and livestock products
marketed on the domestic, regional and international markets by supporting the creation
of an enabling environment in the project-targeted V/Cs, and ensure that commercial
infrastructure are managed as private entities.
 .
 Sub-Component 2.1: Commercial promotion and access to information (US$1.262
million)
 The objective is to lay the groundwork for diversification of markets for Malian
products and increased access of the professionals to the required market information.
Activities to be financed concern inter alia: (i) market knowledge: organization of
commercial visits to West Africa and the Maghreb, collection of data on the domestic
market for potatoes, onions and papayas, as well as on the domestic and regional markets
for animal and meat products, commercial tests for papayas on national urban markets,
and marketing tests for shallot powder and dried mango on the European market, (ii)
access to information: upgrade of the system for collection and monitoring of commercial
data, and systematic tally of results for each campaign
 Sub-Component 2.2: Development of Value-Chains (V/Cs)and commercial promotion
(US 0.840 million) The objective is to improve the performance of selected value chains.
Activities to be financed concern inter alia: (i) support training of 20 Malian high level
staff on value chain approach ; (ii) realization of commercial tests ; (iii) diffusion of
knowledge on V/CS ; (iv) commercial promotion: participation in commercial events at
regional and international levels, and (v) promotion of three brands for fresh and dried
mango.




 Sub-component 2.3 Quality improvement of products and services (US$0.490 million)
 Its objective is to improve the competitiveness of Malian products and improve their
access to markets with high quality requirements. The activities to be financed are mainly
related to: (i) quality of goods: dissemination of information concerning quality standards
and requirements to meet these standards, as well as corresponding training of
entrepreneurs; attention will be in particular on laboratory (LCV) accreditation,
strenghting laboratory LTA to provide training to promoters, certification of enterprises
and packaging of products, setting up national capacity to assess and monitor quality
(auditors), and (ii) quality of services: training of service providers as regards quality
standards to be adhered to, strengthening of the project ACDP participant enterprises in
their negotiations with partners.

 Sub-Component 2.4: Management of commercial facilities(US$ 0.261 million)
 Particular attention will be given to setting up an efficient management of the facilities
upgraded and/ or constructed under sub-component 4.1. The objective will be to design
appropriate management systems under Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), ensuring
thereby that the facilities are managed as private entities and gradually transferred over to
private operators. The sub-component will consist of the following activities: (i) prepare
the studies regarding the required management systems, (ii) negotiate management
delegation contracts with interested private sector operators, and (iii) ensure that socio-
environmental safeguards are adhered to, concerning staff employment and socio-
environmental aspects.
 Component 3: Access to financing and MGP management (US$ 2.9 million)
 The objective is to improve access to funding of operators in the agriculture, livestock
and fishery V/Cs targeted by the project. Improving access to funding is a key element
for the viability and sustainability of private investments, in complement to the matching
grant funding designed as an incentive to cover the risks of initial operations.

  Sub-Component 3.1: Management of the Matching Grant Program (US$ 1.150 million)
  The objective of this sub-component is to ensure an efficient management of the MGP
for the benefit of the promoters of sub-projects financed under Sub-Component 1.1. The
challenge is to ameliorate the management and contents of the sub-project portfolio of the
Innovation and Investment Fund. This will be achieved particularly through appropriate
selection of promoters and increased assistance to them, with a view notably to help
micro-enterprises transform into larger SME-type enterprises. The activities to be
financed concern: (i) the revision of the operational manual, (ii) the upgrading of sub-
project processing standards and procedures, including the use of high-performance
computer packages, (iii) the capacity building of service providers regarding the design
and preparation of sub-projects, and (iv) the preparation of a sub-project technical audit at
the end of the project.

  Sub-Component 3.2: Technical Assistance (US$ 1.690)
  Technical assistance under Sub-Component 3.2 aims at providing support to promoters
to access commercial funding, and to efficiently manage and make full use of the
Guarantee Fund created under the project. The activities to be financed are: (i) to provide
technical support to entrepreneurs as they apply to commercial banks for funding, (ii) to
strengthen the financial management capacity of these entrepreneurs, including financial
reporting, (iii) to build the capacity of commercial banks' staff so that they better
understand agriculture development, including development of the attendant financial
instruments (e.g., risk sheets for targeted V/C products), and (iv) to manage the
Guarantee Fund and ensure that it be transferred over to appropriate institutions when the
project terminates.


 Component 4: Market-oriented infrastructure (US$ 2.9 millions)
 The component aims to upgrade existing commercial facilities, construct new ones and
ensure that they are managed as private entities.

  Sub-Component 4.1: Construction of commercial facilities
  The overall objective is to upgrade existing commercial facilities and construct new
ones. The upgrading concerns existing facilities, particularly the Bamako export
terminal (PLAZA) and the multi-marketing platforms of Sikasso and Niono. The new
facilities consist of two marketing platforms for vegetables designed for the local markets
(Kayes and Mopti), a cold storage for potatoes (Kati) and for meat (Mopti, Ségou and
Sikasso), a processing and packaging center for shallots (Bandiagara), a small animal
slaughtering house (Konna), and six small market areas for mango and meat (in different
producing locations). For each facility, the funding will cover: (i) the preparation of the
required feasibility studies, including procurement plan and socio-environmental
analysis, (ii) the construction costs, and (iii) the follow-up of contractors' work as part of
the construction process.


  Component 5: Project management and M&E; US$ 2.0 million.
  The AF supports the continued funding of the PCU and the extension of the contracts
with TA operators for project field implementation. The focus of this component is on
transferring project management to relevant V/C structures and government bodies as
project implementation unfolds. Major attention is placed by the PCU to develop the
suitable PPPs required to achieve that objective.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The civil works (construction or rehabilitation of commercial infrastructures) will be
located in several known communes (Bamako, Sikasso, Niono, Kayes, Mopti, Kati,
Ségou, Bandiagara and Konna) but the new facilities' sites are not yet determined. Also,
neither the locations nor the exact sites, for the construction of mango and meat small
market areas, are known. However, it is anticipated that almost all the new facilities will
be installed in agglomeration in the vicinity of source of inputs (power, water) and feeder
or export roads.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS)
   Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Activities to be supported through sub-component 1.1 (Promotion and dissemination of
irrigation, post-harvest and value adding technologies through the matching grant
program) and sub-component 4.1 (Market-oriented infrastructure) are likely to impact
natural environment of their locations as well as socio-economic dynamics. Given the
potential scale of impacts anticipated to not be critical or high, the project is classified
category B and three safeguard policies have been triggered: OP 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment; OP 4.09 on Pest Management; and OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
The adverse impacts will be related to: (i) potential loss of natural vegetation; (ii) hygiene
and sanitation risks due to inappropriate handling of wastes; (iii) pollution and
intoxication from accidental release of chemical (pesticides, fertilizers) in the natural
environment; (iv) land acquisition / use conflict; (v) nuisances (noise and odor) to
surrounding settlement. But, the environmental and social analysis carried out through
the approved safeguard instruments (ESMF, RPF) revealed no potential large scale,
significant or irreversible threat and risk to the receiving environment of the foreseen
sub-project locations.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
In the long run, expansion of irrigation scheme and the up-scaling of agro-processing
enterprises may induce an increasing pressure on water resources through direct uptakes
and/or pollution from sewage or any other residual waste. Preventive measures such
sensitization of producers and entrepreneurs will be developed during the implementation
of the project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During the implementation of the original project, the project coordination unit (PCU) set
up a two-folds mechanism for the execution of the safeguard measures: the M&E
specialist has been designated to coordinate the execution of safeguard activities, and an
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed with the National Directorate for
the Control of Pollution and Nuisances (the ''DNACPN'') for the monitoring of some
indicators and the follow-up of the implementation of sub-projects' safeguard
compliance. This help to rate the overall safeguard implementation moderately
satisfactory. The Additional financing will keep the same approach but an environmental
and social specialist will be recruited to fill the gap of expertise within the PCU.

 Both the PCU and the DNACPN have not enough experience of capacity – building in
environmental and social issues of such agribusiness project. Furthermore, National
institutions in the sector of food processing are not experienced in hygiene and sanitation
normalization and control aspects. The project will thus support capacity building in
these domains.

 The screening procedure approved through the disclosed Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will ensure an early stage identification of
environmental and social impacts; Environmental and Social Management Plans will be
prepared during project implementation. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
provides guidance on the preparation, consultation, disclosure and execution of
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) as and when necessary during project implementation.
Further, the investments under sub-components 1.1 and 4.1 will be processed only on
entitled piece of lands.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Producers and small size entrepreneurs of agriculture sector, financial institutions,
Hygiene and sanitation promotion structures, communes, professional organization and
inter-professional organizations (IPO), as well as potential affected people (PAP) are
concerned. The stakeholders that will be consulted in the preparation of the safeguard
documents will include the direct beneficiaries and potentially affected people (producer
organizations and agribusiness associations) and the various agricultural, environmental,
social, and health agencies.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/15/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/15/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/31/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/15/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/15/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/31/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/15/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/15/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/31/2013
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                              Date
Task Team Leader:                     Ms Yeyande Kasse Sangho                           01/18/2013
Environmental Specialist:             Mr Maman-Sani Issa                                01/17/2013
Social Development Specialist         Ms Salamata Bal                                   01/17/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                             01/21/2013
  Comments: The appraisal stage ISDS, as revised by me, is cleared. Don't forget to fill in the
  disclosure dates.
Sector Manager:                      Mr Martien Van Nieuwkoop                             01/04/2013
  Comments: Yeyande, this is fine, please go ahead; thanks, Martien
