                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: AC6818



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 23, 2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mauritania                           Project ID: P107940
                                              Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Gas to Power Project
Task Team Leader: Moez Cherif
Estimated Appraisal Date: 7-Oct-2013          Estimated Board Date: 29-Oct-2013
Managing Unit: AFTG2                          Lending Instrument: Partial Risk Guarantee
Sector: General Energy Sector (60%)
        Oil & Gas (40%)
Theme: Infrastructure Services for Private Sector Development (100%)
Borrower (US$m.): 0.00
IBRD Guarantee (US$m.): 0.00
IDA Guarantee (US$m.): 80.00
GEF Amount (US$m.): 0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.): 0.00
Other financing amounts by source:

Environmental Category: A
Simplified Processing                Simple [ ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project        Yes [ ]                   No [X]


B. Project Objectives:

The Project's development objective is to expand reliable, cost-efficient and environmentally
sustainable electricity supply for Mauritanian households and industry as well as export to
Senegal and Mali.
C. Project Description:

The overall project consists of (i) an upstream gas part including the Banda offshore gas
production, transmission and processing infrastructure, and (ii) an associated downstream power
part including power generation and transmission infrastructure, as described below.

The Mauritanian government intends that the Banda gas will be used primarily to feed a 300
MW power plant in Nouakchott by 2015/16. The project envisions a new transmission line
connecting Nouakchott to Nouadhibou and Tasiast (site of the Kinross gold mine). The project
could export 80-100 MW to Senegal and Mali through the existing OMVS (The Organisation de
Mise en Valeur du fleuve Sénégal transmission line links the power networks of Mali, Senegal
and Mauritania to the Manantali hydropower plant in Mali) transmission line. These exports are
the object of ongoing discussions between the governments of Mauritania, Senegal and Mali.
Power generation may be developed in two phases: a first dual fuel power plant of up to 180
MW that can run on either heavy fuel oil or natural gas, to be followed by a combined cycle gas
turbine plant of up to 120 MW. Current estimates indicate that the first phase could start
generation by the end of 2014, whereas the second phase would start operating in 2016.

The Bank PRG would guarantee payments for gas purchases by the power plant company SPEG
to the Banda gas field joint-venture operated by Tullow Oil. MIGA is also assessing providing
guarantees to the project, including termination payment under the gas supply agreement
between SPEG and Tullow.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):

The Banda gas field is located at approximately 75 km offshore of Nouakchott. The gas
infrastructure will include sub-sea production, a gas pipeline linking the field to the shore, a gas
processing plant to be linked to the power plant. The site of the gas processing terminal will be
located 14 km north of Nouakchott and 6 km from the beach, in the same area as the associated
Nouakchott plant. The associated transmission line will interconnect the Nouakchott and
Nouadhibou power grids, with a spur to the Tasiast gold mine.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:

The environmental policy of Mauritania is defined by the National Strategy on Sustainable
Development (NSSD) (2006) and its operational action plan: NEAP (2006). These tools are
intended to achieve the following goals: consistency with the PRSP, and a better integration of
environment and the concept of sustainable development into sectorial policies. These policy
documents also reflect the first initiative to integrate environmental issues and natural resource
management policy in the fight against poverty. Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
(ESIAs) are applied only in Bank and some development partner projects.

SEGOP led the preparation of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) of oil
and gas development in Mauritania in 2011 and the study found some key weaknesses in the
government’s safeguards management capacity. Acknowledging these findings, the Bank is
supporting GoM’s safeguards management capacity through targeted technical assistance.
Private sector participants, on the other hand, are used to applying Bank Group standards in their
projects. During implementation, it is expected that Tullow Oil will be responsible for
implementing the upstream gas-related ESIA, whereas SPEG will hire an experienced operation
and maintenance contractor who will also be in charge of implementing the downstream power-
related ESIA. The ESIA and other related documents would detail the potential risks of adverse
impacts associated with the different activities that will be supported by the project.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Robert A. Robelus (AFTN2)
Salamata Bal (AFTCS)
Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain why)                                 Yes           No           TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental                            X
and Social Risks and Impacts
The project components: offshore gas wells, gas pipeline mostly offshore (plus 6 km onshore), the gas
treatment plant, and the associated new power plants and the new transmission line are likely to have
adverse impacts on the terrestrial and marine environment. It is critical to identify all the potential impacts
and minimize the same during project planning, preparation, construction and
operation. ESIAs will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed for the upstream (offshore wells, gas
pipeline, gas treatment plant) and downstream (power plants, transmission line) facilities.
PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                          X
The clients will establish safe and healthy working conditions for their employees, promote fair treatment,
non-discrimination and equal opportunity, promote compliance with national employment and labor laws,
protect workers, especially vulnerable groups, will not employ children and avoid the use of forced labor.
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                          X
The clients will avoid or minimize impacts on human health and the environment by reducing pollution
from project activities. Promote more sustainable use of natural resources such as water and energy and to
reduce project-related greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                                X
The clients will anticipate and avoid impacts on human health and safety of nearby communities,
personnel and property.
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                         X
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared and disclosed in-country and in the Bank’s
Infoshop. When the final site for the power plants and the transmission line has been selected and it has
been identified that people will be affected a RAP will be prepared and disclosed in-country and in the
Bank’s Infoshop before any construction activity will start.
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                             X
Management of Living Natural Resources
Project activities may encounter sensitive land and marine ecosystems, including natural habitats. Suitable
safeguard management plans will be developed as part of the ESIA if the Natural Habitats policy is
triggered.
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                                  X
   There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
Performance Standards (please explain why)                                                Yes               No             TBD
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                                    X
Project activities may encounter sensitive physical cultural resources issues. Suitable management plans
will be developed as and when necessary during project implementation

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be
   disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared:

       19-June-2013

B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
   preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

       Tullow Oil has prepared terms of reference for the Banda gas infrastructure Environment and
       Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and has selected a reputable specialized firm to undertake
       it (ERM); the ESIA is in progress and is expected to be finalized and approved by end of
       May 2013.

       SPEG has commissioned a preliminary ESIA for its project, which has been completed by
       Tractebel, the same company that has undertaken the SPEG feasibility study, but SPEG is
       now in the process of hiring a separate firm to undertake a new ESIA that is expected to start
       by end of April 2013. The Bank team has reviewed the SPEG preliminary ESIA and the
       Tullow Oil ESIA terms of reference, and will ensure that final ESIAs and any relevant
       Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and/or Resettlement Action Plan
       (RAP) are prepared in accordance with Bank Performance Standards and Mauritanian law
       and regulations.

       The ESIA for the Banda Gas field, marine gas pipeline and the central gas processing facility
       (the upstream gas ESIA), and the draft ESIA for the associated two gas-fired power plants
       and the new transmission line (the downstream SPEG ESIA) and the RPF will be prepared,
       approved and disclosed at least 60 days before Board submission, in country and at the
       Bank’s InfoShop as per indicative schedule below:

       Final Upstream gas ESIA:
       Disclosed for public consultation:                    March 2013
       Date of Receipt by the Bank                           April 2013
       Disclosure In-country and at Infoshop                 May 2013

1   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
   Draft Downstream SPEG ESIA and RPF:
   Disclosed for public consultation:    June 2013
   Date of Receipt by the Bank           June 2013
   Disclosure In-country and at Infoshop July 2013

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Moez Cherif          04/23/2013
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Alexandra Bezeredi   04/23/2013
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Meike van Ginneken   04/23/2013
   Comments:
