65143
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
(FCPF READINESS PREPARATION)
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 4, 2011
I. BASIC INFORMATION
FCPF Readiness activities relate to strategic planning and preparation for REDD+. Specifically,
countries prepare for REDD+ by:
i.  assessing the country's situation with respect to deforestation, forest degrac ation,
conservation and sustainable management of forests and relevant governan :e issues;
ii.  identifying REDD+ strategy options;
iii.  assessing key social and environmental risks and potential impacts associated with
REDD+, and developing a management framework to mitigate these risks rand
potential impacts;
iv.  working out a reference level of historic forest cover change and greenhouse gas
emissions and uptake from deforestation and/or forest degradation and REDD+
activities, and potentially forward-looking projections of emissions; and
v.   designing a monitoring system to measure, report and verify the effect of tye REDD+
strategy on greenhouse gas emissions and other multiple benefits, and to m:nitor the
drivers of deforestation and forest degradation, as well as other variables relevant to
the implementation of REDD+.
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant will finance some of this preparatory work; it will not
finance any physical investments or pilot projects on the ground.
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Mexico                        Project ID: P 120417
Additional Project ID (ifany):
Project Name: FCPF Readiness Preparation
Task Team Leader: Laurent Debroux
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2013    Estimated Board Date: To be determined
Managing Unit: LCSAR                   Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset/TF Grav.
Sector: Forestry (AT)
Theme: Climate Change (81)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
FCPF Readiness Fund Amount (US$m.): US$3.6 million
FCPF Carbon Fund Amount (US$m,): To be determined
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing          Simple [X              Repeater
Is this a transferred project  Yes [                 No [X]


65143
B. Objectives [from section 2 of R-PP Assessment Note]:
1.    The overall, long-term objective of the proposed World Bank/FCPF eng .gement in
Mexico is: to help Mexico reduce carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation,
sustainably manage forests, and conserve and enhance forest carbon stocks (REDD+) in a
socially and environmentally sound manner, while accessing international financiai incentives
for local forest users, thereby helping to mitigate climate change at a global level.
C. Description [from section 3 of R-PP Assessment Note]:
2.    The policies, programs and other interventions Mexico intends to implemen: to reduce
emissions from deforestation and forest degradation will be defined through studies and
consultations during the readiness preparation phase. The potential strategy optionz currently
under consideration faIl into five main categories: (i) improvement of forest management
through community capacity-building; (ii) improvement of coordination between fore;t activities
and other activities (livestock, agriculture, tourism, etc.), (iii) removal of barriers to investment
in forest management, (iv) further definition and enforcement of forest user righ-:s, and (v)
development of sustainable agriculture and other economic options for communities. It is likely
that ongoing programs such as PROCYMAF and PES would serve as a cornerstone of the REDD
strategy, with improvements to be defined through studies and public consultations during the
preparation phase. Since most forests in Mexico are owned by communities, most RE )D actions
in Mexico would likely be implemented at community level on a voluntary basis.
3.    The specific REDD preparation activities Mexico intends to carry out in pieparing its
Readiness Package are described in the R-PP, and include: stakeholder consultations, analytical
work, capacity-building, and a strategic assessment of environmental and social impacts (SESA).
These activities would be funded by the FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant of $3.6 million and a
US$9.01 million grant from the Government of Norway in addition to the Mexican government's
own contribution.
The US$9.01 million grant from the Government of Norway would finance all activities related to the Reference
Level and the Measurement, Reporting and Verification system, while the proposed PCPF grant would focus on
Consultation and Participation, Design of REDD Strategies, Readiness Management Arrangements, anc the
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment. The grant from Norway would be implemented by UNDP and
FAO,
2


65143
D. Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known):
The Readiness Preparation Grant will not finance physical investments or pilot project; on the
ground. Among other things, the Grant will finance a number of analytical and diagnostic
studies as well as a series of participative meetings and workshops with stakeholders. While
Readiness Preparation is conceived as mostly strategic planning at this stage, it is impcirtant to
note that key policy and regulatory precedents are being set at the readiness phase that may have
downstream impact at the national level once the national REDD+ strategy is ready to be
implemented.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
The Federal Government established the Intersectoral Commission on Climate Change (CICC,
Comision Intersectorial de Cambio Climatico). Within the CICC, the Government created a
REDD+ Working Group which coordinates REDD+ related issues with the various mi -listries
involved in land use topics, indigenous peoples rights, and other sectors involved, wity the
intention to mainstream public policies for REDD+.
In the process of designing the national REDD+ strategy, CONAFOR promoted the participation
of key stakeholders in a open format (seminar) that led to the legal establishment of tht CTC-
REDD+ (Comite Teenico Consultivo sobre REDD+) on May 13, 201 O, composed by a wide-
range of civil society organizations and the additional participation of the Secretary of
Environment and Natural Resources as well as other relevant government agencies. TI-e minutes
of a formal agreement in the CICC-REDD+ Working Group recognizes the CTC-REDD+ as the
civil society multisectoral forum operating as a liaison for the governmental CICC-RE[)D+
Working Group.
Though the CTC-REDD+ is formed by active representatives of NGOs, producers'
organizations, private sector and academia, participation has involved mostly national level
organizations. Up to date, participation in the CTC-REDD has been open and in a volmntary
basis. Most meetings have taken place in Mexico City. The CTC-REDD is chaired by a civil
society representative elected by the members. CONAFOR is planning to strengthen the CTC-
REDD+ to ensure greater participation of organizations representing grassroots local f:rest
communities in the institutional structure for planning and implementing REDD+ in order that
these communities and ejidos are able to provide inputs directly. Additionally, CONAFOR has
been promoting and supporting the creation of regional and state level CTCs-REDD+ :o ensure
ample participation by grassroot organizations, in the priority regions for REDD+. CO NAFOR
plans to strengthen these CTC-REDD+ platforms at the national, regional and local level by
ensuring participation of stakeholders (in some cases through financial support) in order to be
points for consultation on the SESA, the preparation of the ESMF and the overall design of the
national REDD+ strategy.
2 The CTC-REDD started working since 2008 as a subgroup of the CTC for the Payment for Environmental
Services Program, but it was formalized as a separate CTC until 2010.
3


65143
CONAFOR has knowledge and experience in applying the social and environmental safeguards
policies of the Bank through a number of Bank-financed projects such as PROCYMAF I and II,
the GEF COINBIO as well as the Payment for Environmental Services (PES) and the GEF
Biodiversity Endowment Fund. CONAFOR also counts with an in-house team of soci l
specialists in the department of social participation that have a long-standing active engagement
with regional and local communities, ejidos and Indigenous Peoples in the forestry sector.
In addition, CONAFOR is developing a communications strategy to disseminate infonnation
widely and to support the consultation process through existing platforms. For Indigenous
Peoples, CONAFOR will coordinate with the Comision Nacional de Desarrollo para los
Pueblos Indigenas (CDI) to implement a national consultation process. CONAFOR will use
other formal advice bodies (like the Consejo Nacional Forestal, Consejos Estatales Forestales,
Consejo de Desarrollo Rural Sustentable and Consejos de Desarrollo Sustentable) as consultation
platforms.
Given the complexity of the institutional arrangements at various levels, it is importani for
CONAFOR to strengthen its institutional capacity by recruiting additional human resources that
could smoothly coordinate these various platforms at the policy and multi-stakeholder levels.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Mi Hyun Bae (Social Scientist, LCSSO)
Ricardo Hernandez (Sr. Environmental Specialist, LCSEN)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant will, in part, support the country's activities to identify
the potential risks associated with REDD+ and to identify mitigation options. In order to do this,
the Grant will finance a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) in order to
integrate key environmental and social considerations into REDD+ Readiness by combining
analytical and participatory approaches. The SESA allows: (i) social and environmentl
considerations to be integrated into the REDD+ Readiness process, in particular the REDD+
strategy; (ii) stakeholder participation in identifying and prioritizing key issues, assessment of
policy, institutional and capacity gaps to manage these priorities and recommendations, and
disclosure of findings in the REDD Country's progress reports on Readiness preparation; and
(iii) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to be put in place :o manage
environmental and social risks and to mitigate potential adverse impacts.
It is envisioned that the safeguards policies mentioned below may be triggered in the REDD+
Readiness process.
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)       Yes        No       TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                    X
As part of the REDD readiness preparation, the country will assess key social and
environmental risks and potential impacts associated with REDD+, and develop a management
framework to mitigate these risks and potential impacts.
4


65143
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)      Yes       No       TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                           X
Given that the REDD strategy will likely work both within existing protected areas as well as
other forest habitats of varying significance, OP 4.04 will apply. If the REDD strategics are
successful, the impacts on critical forest habitats are expected to be positive, neverthelcss SESA
will evaluate the possible risks associated with strategic options on forest habitats withn PA as
well as other sensitive forest habitats under private or communal control. The Natural Protected
Areas System (SINAP), managed by CONANP who has been actively participating in the REDD
strategy preparation process is responsible to ensure any activities within the NPAs are
compatible with their management plans. The National Biodiversity Commission (CONABIO)
produced a map of "Priority Areas" and "Gap Analysis" of areas not included in the SINAP (and
therefore not protected by a decree and management plan) which will be included earl3 in the
participatory planning process to ensure key policy and regulatory recommendations from the
readiness phase will take into account and report on downstream impacts during the national
REDD strategy implementation. CONANP and CONABIO will screen any activities proposed in
these areas. During the implementation phase monitoring activities. will be established Lo ensure
that critical natural habitats are not adversely affected. The ESMF will include provisi:ris to
assess possible impacts prior to any actions being undertaken on the ground.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                    X
The REDD+ Strategy is expected to build largely on the experience of CONAFOR in the
implementation of the Community Forestry, Payment for Environmental Services and
Sustainable Forest Management Certification programs. During the REDD preparation phase,
these and other forestry and rural development initiatives will be evaluated in order to insure
lessons learned are incorporated early in the design and assess key social and environmental risks
and potential impacts associated with REDD+ are considered in the ESMF.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
CONAFOR will review the applicability of this policy during the Readiness process, tz.king into
account pest management needs in relation to any wood treatment issues that might be linked to
sustainable forestry initiatives and associated industries.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Mexico created the first government authority to protect Physical Cultural Resourc ,s in 1808
(Junta de Antigiiedades). The current legislation was passed in 1972 (Ley Federal sobfe
Monumentos y Zonas Arqueoldgicos, Artisticos e Histdricos). It mandates any chance- 'ind to be
reported to the closest civil authority, which will in turn inform the federal authority, Instituto
Nacional de Antropologia e Historia. Since the FCPF preparation grant will not finance physical
investments on the ground and is mostly strategic planning at this stage, the need to trigger this
OP will be assessed during preparation and mitigation and management measures will be
included in the ESMF as appropriate.
Indi genous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                        X
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared in compliance with the
Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP 4.10). The IPPF will be a specific chapter of the Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF). Under this policy, Indigenous Peoples
communities potentially affected by the REDD+ Strategy must be consulted in a culturally
appropriate manner and their "broad community support" will need to be acquired. Moreover,
Mexico has also committed to Comply with its obligations under ILO Convention 169 on
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples.
5


65143
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)        Yes        No        TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                     X
The Government has indicated that the REDD strategy would not involve any physical
displacement and that participation in REDD activities will continue to be on a strictly voluntary
basis (as CONAFOR's current programs). A Process Framework will be prepared as a specific
chapter of the ESMF in order to manage the potential risk of restriction of access to forest
resources, for example in the case of protected areas.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                          X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                     X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                              X
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues.in Bank-                   X
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)
III. SAFEGUARDS PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for review meeting of REDD Country's mid-term progress report at which
time the ISDS may be updated as needed: June 2012          ,
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
needed. The specific studies and their timing3 should be specified in the initial I.SDS
and/or updated ISDS:
The main safeguard instrument to be applied during the readiness phase is the SESA, which
focuses on a continuous participatory process that influences the REDD+ strategy design from
the perspective of stakeholders that may be directly affected by the proposed REDD m,asures.
The SESA process will assess during the readiness phase the social, environmental, legal and
policy issues identified by key stakeholders, for which a series of diagnostic studies wi [be
carried out and consulted upon.
In order to start this process, CONAFOR carried out a regional SESA workshop in Bacatar,
Quintana Roo (April 9, 2011) and a National SESA Workshop in Mexico City (May 17-13,
2011) with the objective to further inform the public about CONAFOR's plan for designing a
national REDD+ strategy and carry out an initial issue scoping exercise with key stakeholder
groups. These two workshops provided key stakeholders with an opportunity to provic e
CONAFOR with a comprehensive overview of the specific issues and concerns that aflct them
in order to be considered during the readiness phase. The two SESA workshops also called for
the participation of additional key stakeholder groups at the regional and state levels thit were
3 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal Ii) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to poten:ially affected
persons.
6


65143
not sufficiently represented in the CTC-REDD+. A Workshop Proceedings was prepared and
disseminated to stakeholders on May 24, 2011 (Bacalar) and May 30, 2011 (Mexico C"ty) by
CONAFOR reflecting the inputs and feedback received from the key stakeholder groups in these
two SESA workshops. Each SESA workshop and meeting will be documented for follow-up.
Furthermore, Mexico carried out a series of workshops in different regions for the dissemination
of REDD+ related information and to obtain feedback from relevant local stakeholders In these
series of workshops CONAFOR presented among other things, the results of the natioral SESA
workshop, the SESA matrix and CONAFOR's responses to the main issues identified by the
participants. Finally, CONAFOR asked for feedback on the answers and suggestions on how to
address their main preoccupations.
Based on the stakeholders' inputs of the issue scoping exercise, CONAFOR is preparing a SESA
Workplan to specifically strategize on a way forward into the SESA process throughout the
readiness preparation phase taking as a foundation the stakeholder discussions carried out in the
workshop. The SESA workplan will be a self-standing document that will contain specific
operational guidance on the next steps and activities, the specific linkages with the ove -all
national REDD+ strategy design and specific components of the R-PP, the specific isst.es and
studies to be carried out, budget, institutional arrangements and timeline. This SESA W Vorkplan,
that will be disseminated and commented upon by stakeholder groups prior to its finali..ation,
will be a live document subject to revision as the design of the national REDD+ strategy
evolves. The communications strategy will also support the SESA process in terms of
information dissemination on the specifics of the strategic options, risks and benefits, to
strengthen participatory platforms and process, and also to raise awareness about the o"erall
national REDD+ strategy.
As part of the SESA process, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
will be prepared for downstream impacts once the national REDD+ strategy is being
implemented. The ESMF is one of the specific outputs needed for the R-Package. Any identified
gaps to manage risks and potential impacts in relation to relevant World Bank's safegu ard
policies should be identified along with the strategy options to feed into the preparation of the
ESMF. Subsections of the ESMF will include:
a. Environmental Assessment (OP4.01) to assess key social and environmental risks and
potential impacts associated with REDD+, and the appropriate course of action to
mitigate these risks and potential impacts.
b. Natural Habitats (OP/BP4.04) to evaluate the possible risks associated with strategic
options on forest habitats within PA as well as other sensitive forest habitats under
private or communal control, with special reference to CONABIO's map of "Priority
Areas" and "Gap Analysis".
c. Forests (OP/BP4.36) to evaluate the possible risks associated with options on forest
management and conservation, building largely on the experience of CONAFOR in the
implementation of the Community Forestry, Payment for Environmental Services and
Sustainable Forest Management Certification programs, to develop the appropr ate
provisions avoid or mitigate these risks and potential impacts.
d. Pest Management (OP4.09) when/if CONAFOR's review of the applicability o? this
policy during the Readiness process determines any account pest management needs in
relation to any wood treatment issues that might be linked to sustainable forestry
initiatives and associated industries , a pest management plan will be included E.s part of
the ESMF.
7


65143
e. Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP4. 11) if the assessment during preparation
determines the need to trigger this OP, the ESMF will spell out the institutional
coordination mechanism set in place to ensure the Anthropology Institute (INA -1) is
involved as the law on monuments states, in the management of measures includled in the
ESMF to appropriately deal with any chance find or other issues.
f. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) (OP4.10) for managing ponsible
negative and positive impacts to Indigenous Peoples communities affected by the
REDD+ Strategy. Indigenous Peoples' "broad community support" on the REIDD+
Strategy will need to be acquired. Moreover, Mexico has also committed to comply with
its obligations under ILO Convention 169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples of [ree, prior
and informed consent.
g. A Process Framework (OP 4.12) for managing the potential restriction of acces; to forest
resources.
The ESMF will provide a framework to manage and mitigate -including the institution al
arrangements, responsibilities and resources-, the potential environmental and social impacts
related to specific projects and activities (including investments and carbon finance transactions)
in the context of the future implementation of REDD+.
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:                                                 Date
Environmental Safeguards Specialist  Ricardo Hernandez  0  O 3  l
Social Safeguards Specialist     Mi Hyun Bae       0     q
Task Team Leader:                Laurent Debroux        O 0 4
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Glenn Morgan       C /    20
Comments:
Sector Manager:                  Ethel Sennhauser     O 0  2 2 .
Comments:
8


