                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC829
Date ISDS
                           13-Jul-2012
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Mexico                  Project ID:             P131709
 Project Name:                Coastal Watersheds Conservation Project (P131709)
 Task Team Leader:            Adriana Moreira
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 04-Mar-2013                Estimated Board Date: 30-May-2013
 Managing Unit:               LCSEN                   Lending Instrument:     Specific Investment Loan
 Focal Area:                  Multi-focal area
 Sector:                      Forestry (40%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%),
                              Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20 %)
 Theme:                       Biodiversity (30%), Climate change (30%), Other environment and
                              natural resources management (20%), Participation and civic engageme
                              nt (10%), Other rural development (10%)
 Financing (in USD Million)
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          239.88
     Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                            39.52
     Total                                                                                       279.40
 Environmental Category       B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No

 B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
 The project’s global environmental objective (GEO) is the same as the project’s development objective
 (PDO): To promote integrated environmental management of selected coastal watersheds as a means to
 achieve biodiversity conservation benefits, increase climate change resilience, and enhance sustainable
 land use.

 C. Project Description
 Overview:

 Through coordination between four key institutions, and the application of a landscape approach to
 watershed management, the proposed project will leverage co-financing of US$239,886 million to
 ensure the effectiveness of protected areas (1,180,985 ha, including 258,199 ha of marine areas) and

                                                  1
increase their connectivity through conservation and sustainable management of watersheds totaling
1,609,337 ha inhabited by some 5 million people. The project will develop a collaborative mechanism to
replicate best practices in at least 200,000 ha in other watersheds throughout the country. Preliminary
estimates indicate that the activities included in the project could reduce carbon emissions on the order
of 16.406 MtCO2e after twenty years.

The project will be financed by a GEF grant of US39.518 million and US239.886 million in cofinancing
from Government and other donors, including an ongoing World Bank US$350 million SIL for
CONAFOR to ensure sustainable use, restoration and expansion of Mexico’s forest resources which
aims to strengthen social resilience to climate change in Mexico and to lead the international effort for
REDD+. Other agencies involved will provide budgetary funds and support from bi-lateral sources in
the adaptation to climate change. The FMCN will raise funds from private donors.

Project Components:

Component 1. Consolidation of protected areas (GEF: US$11.399 million; Co-financing: US$55.292
million).

The project will extend the support of the Fund for Protected Areas (FANP) to ten protected areas (two
new and 8 existing) in selected watersheds aiming to improve their management effectiveness.
Management in these selected areas will be strengthened through provision of equipment, staff training
emphasizing mitigation and adaptation to climate change, and strategies to build social support for
integrated watershed management. Sustainable financing plans will be prepared and implemented.
Co-financing from bi-lateral agencies will ensure that adaptation measures are incorporated into
protected area planning and that capacities are developed to reduce vulnerability of ecosystems and
livelihoods. GEF endowment funds included in this component (US$10.568 million), and 1:1 matching
funds raised by FMCN, will be added to the existing FANP capital and the interest generated will be
channeled to implement protected areas annual operating plans. CONANP fiscal funds will complement
this investment through financing of personnel, operating expenses and Management Programs.
Non-endowment funds included in this component (US$0.831 million matched by FMCN) will support
fundraising, replicating the strategy that allowed FANP to exceed the 1:1 match required by the prior
project.

Component 2. Promoting sustainability within watersheds (GEF: US$20.590 million; Co-financing:
US$145.590 million).

The project also takes a landscape approach outside of protected areas. Within each watershed, the
conservation of forest fragments will be supported through direct PES to land owners. Around these
fragments, areas essential to reduce deforestation pressure on forest fragments will be eligible for
support to improve management of agro-ecosystems. Communities will receive support to reduce GHG
emissions thr ough forest conservation, reforestation and sustainable forest management. Activities in
this component are multi-focal (CCM, LD and SFM). They will focus on conserving forests through
PES, reducing pressure for land use change, improved land management and soil conservation in
degraded areas, and avoided deforestation. The GEF endowment contribution will also ensure
engagement in perpetuity in these areas. In previous GEF projects in Mexico, this stable financial basis
has been essential to leverage substantial investments from public and private sources. Since only the
interest from the endowment is used, the area directly financed by GEF is limited. Its value rests in
presenting tangible results within a scalable strategy that invites additional investment and assures
continuity. The project th erefore will incorporate considerable matching funds, which would not
otherwise be leveraged.

                                                  2
CONAFOR will support PES in eligible sites in the selected coastal watersheds. With GEF SFM support
the Biodiversity Fund endowment would be increased (GEF US$9.091 million and a 1:1 match from
CONAFOR), the interest from which will enable direct cash payments to land owners in these sites that
would otherwise not be eligible for PES. Without GEF support only eligible sites within the 6
watersheds would receive PES support, and co-financing of multiple-service strategies would not be
possible. GEF funds will allow CONAFOR to: (a) co-finance PES for multiple services, (b) cover
adequately the 6 watersheds with PES over multiple federal administrations. They will also enable
land owners/users to have additional support to reduce pressure on forests from the surrounding
landscape. CONAFOR will provide technical support to forest owners receiving PES as part of the
World Bank supported Forest and Climate Change Project.

In addition to forest PES, local communities will receive support to improve agro-ecosystems and adopt
SFM practices in the surrounding degraded lands, thus reducing pressure on the forests while improving
livelihoods. FMCN will channel non-endowment resources (US$8.756 million from GEF in CCM) to
qualifying local organizations that provide on-site technical support, capacity building and investment
in sustainable forest management in communities that wish to apply for sub-grants. The sub-grant
selection will be the responsibility of the Project Committee supported by the reviews of external
experts, following the procedures of the FMCN.

Component 3. Strengthening capacities for monitoring land use, biodiversity, watershed management
and climate change (GEF: US$3.561 million; Co-financing: US$13.479 million).

Through GEF funding the project will ensure that community monitoring on deforestation and
biodiversity degradation is established in the six watersheds and implemented over the long term
according to the protocols that are being developed as part of the baseline in two of the watersheds.
CONAFOR will verify community data to ensure compliance of forest cover for PES, while CONANP
will assist communities in protected areas in monitoring deforestation and biodiversity degradation.
Carbon stocks will be estimated in community plots with the technical support of CONAFOR and
project funds, building on the Norwegian-funded Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV)
project under CONAFOR. CONAFOR and INE will also assess carbon stocks in soils and relate these
stocks to land degradation in the watersheds. Baseline data will be stored in CONABIO and CONAFOR
databases to allow for periodic evaluation of project impact. In addition to biodiversity and carbon,
communities will measure water quality and quantity (financed through co-financing) using the Global
Water Watch (GWW) methodology, expanding the experience from two to six watersheds. Data will be
available in the GWW site (www.globalwaterwatch.org). INE will support the integration of data to
promote a watershed perspective. It will work on a detailed map of land uses and socioeconomic
variables in each watershed, including local capacities and livelihood indicators, to help generate
effective intervention strategies (including capacity building) and strengthen adaptive management over
time.

Project support will allow integrating measures of four ecosystem services (biodiversity, carbon stocks,
water quality and quantity) in six watersheds and relating these measures to land uses, livelihoods and
local capacities within each watershed. Combining community-based and national monitoring strategies
will help insure that the current piecemeal approach to monitoring is transformed into a comprehensive
system that provides constant feedback for integrated watershed management nationally.

Component 4. Piloting innovative mechanisms for inter-institutional collaboration and promoting social
participation (GEF: US$3.969 million; Co-financing: US$14.727 million).


                                                  3
This component aims to: (i) strengthen inter-institutional collaboration and stakeholder participation
mechanisms and (ii) ensure effective project implementation. With respect to strengthening
collaboration and participation at the local level, participatory fora will be established to develop and
oversee integrated land management plans. These participatory mechanisms could build on existing
CONAGUA Watershed Councils, CONANP Advisory Councils, or Planning Committees for State
Development. Sub-committees could o perate as needed in specific regions. Inter-municipal
arrangements, such as the successful Inter-municipal Initiative for the Integrated Management of the
Ayuquila River, will be explored as a means for coordination. This component is linked to the first
component of the Mexico Forest and Climate Change Project SIL promoting cross-sector coordination,
since participatory fora in each watershed will serve to align investments from different sectors.
Additionally, project and counterpart funds will support a learning community bringing together
organizations working to conserve watersheds. FMCN will draw on its experience supporting such
communities. Participatory fora in each watershed will define topics for learning and exchange.
Advances in the project and the learning community will be published and disseminated to benefit other
watersheds. At least five watersheds (200,000 ha) in addition to those targeted by the project are
expected to adopt lessons.

In terms of project management, the framework for multi-institutional oversight and collaboration is an
innovative design combining the strength of four institutions. To ensure smooth implementation, the
project will support the establishment and functioning of the various project inter-institutional structures
including: (i) a Project Committee, modeled after the successful Technical Committee of the FANP,
with members representing CONANP, CONAFOR, INE and FMCN, to supervise and coordinate
project components; and (ii) a Project Coordinating Unit (PCU).

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project has identified 15 watersheds along the Gulf of California and 9 watersheds along the Gulf of
Mexico selected on the basis of highest priority according to ecosystem and conservation characteristics,
local capacities, matching funds and inter-institutional collaboration. This resulted on a Project’s area of
1,180,985 ha (including 258,199 ha of marine areas) inhabited by some 5 million people.

The pre-selected watersheds along the Gulf of Mexico and the Gulf of California show high variability
between watersheds, degradation being more prevalent along the Gulf of Mexico. Within the
transformed landscape, 59.9% is devoted to cattle ranching, 39.2% to agriculture and 1% is urban.
Increasingly, natural ecosystems will yield to competing land uses: the expansion of low intensity cattle
ranching, slash-and-burn agriculture, sugar cane, hydro-electric dams, as well as coastal unplanned
development. Negative externalities derived from these land use changes include high carbon emissions,
significant loss of biodiversity, high erosion and other land degradation effects, and unsustainable
livelihoods for the communities that live within the watersheds.

To reverse these trends, a multi-institutional effort is necessary along with participation strategies to
build the social support required for integrated watershed management. This process will require the
engagement of local communities to substitute negative practices for sustainable activities, particularly
within the natural protected areas comprised in such watersheds. The presence of several ethnic groups
in many of the selected watersheds will require preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Plan.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project builds on the coordinating efforts of four institutions: CONANP, CONAFOR, INE, and
FMCN, all of them with long track records in their areas of expertise including Bank’s and GEF

                                                    4
 financed projects.

 CONANP manages 174 protected areas representing 12.92% of the Mexican territory. Its budget has
 increased from US$0.1 million in 1994 to US$90 million in 2011. CONANP, in partnership with the
 FMCN has managed in the last 15 years two of the GEF grants to Mexico to support priority protected
 areas and has developed in the process a strategy to address safeguards. FMCN manages the Fund for
 Protected Areas (FANP), established in 1997 with an endowment of US$16.48 million, and channels its
 income either to protected area operations, or to local partners for conservation programs supporting the
 protected areas. While the FMCN provides project oversight and raises additional funds, CONANP
 ensures that funds are used for strategic conservation activities incorporating a safeguard perspective.
 As of 2011, the number of protected areas supported by the FANP has increased to 23; with a second
 GEF grant of US$31.1 million in 2002 and contributions from 13 other donors FANP increased its
 capital to US$75.89 million. During a decade of implementation of these GEF financed projects,
 CONANP and FMCN have developed a successful participation strategy to comply with Bank’s
 safeguards, comprising sustainable development plans to manage possible restrictions in the use of
 natural resources and to promote the engagement of indigenous peoples located in the natural protected
 areas in conservation activities. After 15 years of operation, this strategy is fully embedded in
 CONANP’s and FMCN’s practices.

 CONAFOR has ample experience in promoting sustainability. Regarding payment for ecosystem
 services (PES), the Mexican Forest Fund within CONAFOR is the largest PES fund in Latin America.
 Local governments, NGOs, and private entities provide counterpart resources to the Fund. Over the past
 eight years, CONAFOR has supported 1,008,858 ha with PES in the watersheds along the Gulf of
 Mexico and the Gulf of California. CONAFOR estimates that these areas harbor 28.5 million tons of
 accumulated carbon. In 2006, the World Bank provided CONAFOR a US$45 million loan and a GEF
 US$15 million grant. With these funds, CONAFOR improved the targeting of its PES program, piloted
 a market-based system (with direct cash payments combined with technical assistance to land owners),
 and established an endowment (the Biodiversity Fund) for long-term financing of PES for
 biodiversity-friendly land management systems in sites with globally significant biodiversity and
 low-income populations. Under these projects CONAFOR has been building its expertise in managing
 Bank’s safeguards.

 INE will be responsible for the establishment of monitoring and evaluation and jointly with CONANP,
 FMCN and CONAFOR will develop and implement the GEF Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool
 and monitor performance against project goals. The project team will provide support and further
 assistance as necessary during supervision to assure good implementation of Bank safeguards policies.

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Ricardo Hernandez Murillo ( LCSEN )
 Kristyna Bishop ( LCSSO )


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered ?     Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP           Yes             Given the essentially environmental
 4.01                                                     conservation characteristic of the project, a
                                                          category B is proposed. The proposed project
                                                          will support an innovative multi-institutional


                                                   5
                                              collaborative framework to achieve results
                                              across four GEF focal areas: (Biodiversity
                                              (BD), Climate Change (CCM), Sustainable
                                              Forest Management (SFM), and Land
                                              Degradation (LD)). Strengthened management
                                              of new (2) and existing (8) protected areas
                                              along six key watersheds will enhance
                                              biodiversity protection. Therefore, its
                                              outcomes are expected to be highly positive.
                                              The project may support small-scale activities
                                              in the protected areas to be created or existing
                                              PAs such as demarcation, trails, preparation of
                                              management plans, etc. An environmental
                                              screening mechanism will be established to
                                              assess possible negative impacts of such
                                              small-scale activities and to propose means to
                                              avoid them or mitigate them. Proper
                                              consultation will be applied as part of project
                                              financed studies for the creation of new
                                              protected areas according with principles of
                                              OP 4.01. The project will not cause physical
                                              resettlement; however, some restrictions may
                                              be necessary to protect core areas within the
                                              NPA; accordingly, a Process Framework
                                              would be prepared.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes       The project is likely to trigger the policy as it is
                                              expected to have positive impacts on the
                                              quality of critical natural habitats. The EA will
                                              ensure the policy is addressed appropriately.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes       All impacts on forest systems are expected to
                                              be positive. Project’s component 2 will focus
                                              on avoiding deforestation through: PES,
                                              improved land management for reducing land
                                              use change, soil conservation in degraded
                                              areas, and better forest management. As a
                                              result, this safeguard is likely to be triggered.
                                              The EA will ensure the policy is addressed
                                              appropriately.
Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP   Yes       There is a potential of historical sites and/or
4.11                                          archeological findings within the defined
                                              project’s area. The Environmental
                                              Management Framework will include relevant
                                              provisions to mitigate any potentially adverse
                                              impacts and procedures for the protection of
                                              "chance findings." Such provisions will
                                              follow guidelines defined by the National
                                              Institute for Anthropology and History (INAH)


                                          6
                                                        regarding historical sites and/or archeological
                                                        findings.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           Yes            Initial screening has identified several ethnic
                                                        groups within some of the project’s
                                                        pre-selected watersheds. Therefore, an
                                                        Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared
                                                        to ensure that they are not negatively affected
                                                        and that they participate in project’s benefits.
                                                        A social assessment and consultation process
                                                        will be conducted following safeguards
                                                        guidelines. The national legal framework
                                                        related to indigenous peoples’ rights will be
                                                        taken into account. A participation strategy
                                                        will be prepared to be conducted during project
                                                        implementation as part of the IPP, following
                                                        the experience of the two previous GEF
                                                        projects.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     Yes            The project’s activities will not involve
                                                        physical resettlement. However, there is a
                                                        potential of nonphysical displacement as a
                                                        result of regulatory activities, consolidation of
                                                        protected areas and other activities mainly
                                                        related to conservation management within
                                                        NPA. To avoid or mitigate negative impacts a
                                                        Process Framework will be prepared
                                                        comprising screening and impact assessment
                                                        mechanism. Following the successful
                                                        experience of previous GEF projects,
                                                        sustainable development action plans will be
                                                        prepared to address potential impacts.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No
 Projects on International Waterways     No
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

    Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
 A. 30-Aug-2012

    Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
 B. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
    Safeguard-related studies are already being prepared and are expected to be finalized by appraisal,
    planned for mid-October, 2012.

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:              Name: Adriana Moreira


                                                  7
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards                   Name:                                                   Date:
Coordinator:
Sector Manager:                       Name:                                                   Date:



1
  Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.




                                                             8
