                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/18/2011                                    Report No.: 65757
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Mexico                               Project ID: P123760
Project Name: Mexico Forests and Climate Change Project
Task Team Leader: Laurent Debroux
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 10,        Estimated Board Date: January 31, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: LCSAR                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Forestry (60%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%)
Theme: Climate change (50%);Other rural development (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           300.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      383.00
         Climate Investment Funds                                        42.00
                                                                       425.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
Project Development Objective is: to support rural communities in Mexico to sustainably
manage their forests, build social organization, and generate additional income from
forest products and services including the Reduction of Emissions from Deforestation
and Degradation (REDD+).

 The project would help consolidate and improve CONAFOR#s incentive programs for
community forestry and environmental services, and utilize them as key elements of the
national REDD+ strategy. It would also help strengthen CONAFOR as a world-class
forest agency, promote the alignment of rural development policies and programs, and
pilot innovative REDD+ approaches in two Early Action areas.

3. Project Description
1.     Component 1. Policy Design and Institutional Strengthening. (IBRD US$30m,
and FIP US$11.66m grant). This component would aim to strengthen CONAFOR as a
leading forest agency worldwide, foster cross-sector collaboration among public
agencies, and improve the quality of private technical assistance available to
communities.

 2.     Subcomponent 1.1. Monitoring and Evaluation. (IBRD US$5m, and FIP US$2m
grant). This subcomponent would provide technical assistance and finance operating
costs to (i) strengthen CONAFOR#s monitoring and evaluation systems by revamping
databases, strengthening CONAFOR#s remote sensing and geographic information
capacities, and strengthening CONAFOR#s technical capacity to better measure the
outcomes of CONAFOR#s investments in the field; (ii) design and pilot a comprehensive
REDD+ monitoring, reporting and verification system by developing tools to monitor the
environmental, social and economic impacts of REDD+ pilot projects in REDD+ Early
Action Areas, analyzing community-based monitoring techniques, and designing an
impact evaluation strategy for the activities to be carried out under Part 3 of the Project;
and (iii) monitor results and carry out strategic evaluations of the FIP Forest Investment
Plan. See also Annex 1 on Monitoring and Evaluation.

 3.      Subcomponent 1.2. Policy Design, Participatory Processes, and Knowledge
Sharing. (IBRD US$12.5m and FIP US$5m grant). This subcomponent would provide
technical assistance and finance operating costs to carry out analytical works and
workshops to improve public policies and public programs by (i) carrying out studies and
workshops to draw lessons from ongoing environmental services and community forestry
programs in the Borrower#s territory, and propose adjustments to CONAFOR#s
Operating Rules to achieve, inter alia, greater integration and synergies amongst said
environmental services and community forestry programs; (ii) carrying out studies related
to policies and programs related to forestry, agriculture, livestock, and other economic
activities in rural landscapes to achieve, inter alia, greater integration and synergies
amongst said policies and programs in rural landscapes; (iii) carrying out studies and
workshops to design innovative REDD+ approaches to pilot in REDD+ Early Action
Areas under Part 3 of the Project; (iv) carrying out workshops, communication and
outreach activities to facilitate the successful implementation of the Project (including on
social and environmental safeguards issues); (v) disseminating information and carrying
out consultations with indigenous peoples and other forest communities on REDD+,
sustainable forest management, and related issues; (vi) carrying out workshops for
indigenous, local communities and other stakeholders in the management of forest
landscapes in REDD+ Early Action Areas under Part 3 of the Project; and (vii) carrying
out local and international learning activities, including South-South learning initiatives,
and disseminating and exchanging lessons and experiences on REDD+ and on the
implementation of the FIP Forest Investment Plan.

  4.     Subcomponent 1.3. Strengthening of CONAFOR and Cross-Sector Coordination.
(IBRD US$12.5m and FIP US$1.66m grant). 3. Provision of goods and technical
assistance (including training) and financing of Operating Costs to (i) modernize
CONAFOR#s administration and advisory capacities, and promote the sharing of good
practices and technologies; (ii) support the overall management of the Project, including
the carrying out of coordination, reporting, fiduciary and safeguards related activities;
(iii) foster cross-sector coordination between CONAFOR and other agencies of the
Borrower involved in rural development at the federal level (such as, inter alia,
SEMARNAT, SAGARPA, CONANP and PROFEPA) by creating joint databases with
SAGARPA and SEMARNAT, and streamlining the administrative framework for
community-based forest management.

  5.    Subcomponent 1.4. Improvement of Private Advisory Services to Communities.
(FIP US$3m grant). This subcomponent would provide technical assistance (including
training) and finance operating costs to (i) train a roster (padrón) of qualified
professionals to be hired by Communities and/or Ejidos (following the procedures set
forth in Section III of Schedule 2 to the Loan Agreement) to advise said Communities
and/or Ejidos in the preparation and implementation of the activities under Part 2 of the
Project; (ii) design and implement a service provider quality accreditation and
certification scheme for the qualified professionals referred in Part 1.4.(i) of the Project.

  6.    Component 2. Consolidation of Priority Community-Based Programs at National
Level. (IBRD US$270m). This component would provide support to Communities/Ejidos
to help them combine sustainable forest management with socio-economic development,
enhance the contribution of forests to climate change mitigation and adaptation, and
generate additional income opportunities for Communities and Ejidos, making
sustainable management more economically attractive. This would be achieved through
five CONAFOR programs as described in the following paragraphs.

 7.     Procymaf. Component 2 would support: the carrying out of activities to promote,
strengthen, and consolidate community institutions and local development processes for
the collective and sustainable management of forest resources including, inter alia: (a) the
carrying out of participatory rural appraisals, (b) the elaboration of land-use zoning plans
(ordenamientos territoriales comunitarios), (c) the development and strengthening of
community statutes to regulate the use of collective forest resources, (d) the carrying out
of community-to-community seminars and other knowledge sharing activities among
Communities/Ejidos at different levels of organization, (e) the provision of support to
participatory surveillance committees to enforce compliance with management plans,
community statutes, and social and environmental safeguards, and (f) the carrying out of
workshops and training courses for Community/Ejido members and staff of community
forestry enterprises on technical aspects of forest management, silviculture,
environmental sustainability, business administration, and transformation and marketing
of forest products and services.

 8.     Prodefor Component 2 would support: the carrying out of activities to support
forest Communities and Ejidos strengthen their capacities to manage productive forests
sustainably including, inter alia: (a) studies to prepare environmental impact assessments
and forest management plans based on official regulations needed to obtain government
permits for extraction of timber and non-timber forest products; (b) silvicultural activities
aimed at ensuring forest regeneration and improvement of forest productivity and carbon
sequestration; (c) activities to improve and modernize forestry technologies used by
community forestry enterprises to increase their efficiency, competitiveness and add
value to their timber and non-timber products; and (d) technical assistance activities to
assess compliance with environmental and social safeguards, and conduct evaluations to
certify the environmental and social sustainability of forestry interventions based on
national and international standards.

 9.      Cadenas Productivas. Component 2 would support: the carrying out of activities
to promote and strengthen forest value chains established by community forest
enterprises to add value to their forest products, expand access to markets, and improve
competitiveness including, inter alia: (a) legal registration of community forest
enterprises and inter-community value chains; (b) studies to prepare strategic business
plans, process engineering, and investment feasibility assessments; (c) purchasing of
industrial processing equipment to integrate community forest enterprises into value
chains; (d) purchasing of office equipment [for community forestry enterprises?]; and (e)
activities to improve marketing of forest products and services, and strengthen the growth
of community forestry enterprises.

 10. PSAB. Component 2 would provide: (a) payments to Communities/Ejidos in
exchange for the provision of environmental services which benefit people other than the
land users in the PSAB Areas such as, inter alia: (i) services generated by forest
ecosystems in the provision of water, the prevention of disasters, and the protection of
infrastructure from damages caused by hydrological phenomena; (ii) services generated
by forest ecosystems in the conservation of biodiversity; and (iii) services generated by
forest ecosystems in the capture of carbon; and (b) grants to Communities/Ejidos
providers of Environmental Services to complement the payments for such services made
to such provider by a private purchaser of Environmental Services in the PSAB Areas.

 11. Programas Especiales. Component 2 would support: the provision of technical
assistance and payments to Communities/Ejidos for (i) the carrying out of activities to
restore ecosystems in degraded areas including, inter alia, reforestation, soil conservation,
agroforestry, and forest fire prevention activities; and (ii) the carrying out of activities to
restore and conserve ecosystems in coastal watersheds and other areas with high
deforestation rates including, inter alia, forest conservation, sustainable forest
management, reforestation, agroforestry, and forest fire prevention activities

  12. Annex 2 summarizes the selection process and eligibility criteria that apply to the
five programs supported under this Component. It also provides an overview of all
CONAFOR programs with a focus on eligible activities and beneficiaries for the five
programs supported under the project. Although these five programs are also accessible
to small private landowners, Bank resources would only support community initiatives.

 13. Component 3. Innovation for REDD+ in Early Action Areas. (FIP US$30.34 of
which 14m grant and US$16.34m loan). This component will promote the design and
piloting of new approaches for REDD+, initially in two Early Action areas located in the
State of Jalisco and in the Yucatan Peninsula, and selected for their learning and
replication potential. It will contribute to the alignment of forest, agriculture and livestock
policies and programs for integrated landscape management.
 14. Subcomponent 3.1. Policy Innovation and Cross-Sector Harmonization (For
information, costs covered under Component 1.2). This subcomponent would provide
technical assistance and finance operating costs to design innovative REDD+ approaches
to be piloted in REDD+ Early Action Areas under Parts 3.2 and 3.3 of the Project
including, inter alia: (i) the alignment of forestry, agriculture and livestock policies and
incentive programs managed by CONAFOR and SAGARPA and improvement of the
overall carbon balance in rural landscapes in the Borrower#s territory; (ii) the tailoring or
customization of CONAFOR#s forestry incentive programs and adjustment of the
eligibility criteria and procedures of said programs to promote REDD+ practices at the
community and landscape level; (iii) the supporting of the emergence of new local
governance agents such as local technical agents (ATLs) and local development agents
(ADLs) allowing for a broader spatial integration at the municipal, watershed or
landscape level; and (iv) the development of specific operational rules for the
implementation of Part 3.3 of the Project.

 15. Subcomponent 3.2. Building Capacities for Landscape-Based Management in
REDD+ Early Action Areas. (FIP US$7m grant). This subcomponent would provide
technical assistance (including training), goods and finance operating costs to (i)
strengthen the capacities of ADLs and ATLs, (ii) assist Communities and/or Ejidos and
other local stakeholders in the REDD+ Early Action Areas identify and implement
innovative REDD+ initiatives; (iii) establish coordination mechanisms to effectively
develop and implement participatory regional land-use plans and identify landscape level
strategies for REDD+; (iv) enable integrated cross-sector action in support of sustainable
economic activities in productive landscapes; (v) assist Communities and/or Ejidos and
legally established associations of Communities and/or Ejidos to implement REDD+
activities; (vi) coordinate efforts for monitoring and evaluation of REDD+ benefits; and
(vii) identify lessons learned in REDD+ Early Action Areas to scale up REDD+
landscape initiatives to other regions

 Subcomponent 3.3. Community Investments in REDD+ Early Action areas. (FIP
US$7m grant and US$16.34m loan). This subcomponent would provide financing to
Communities and/or Ejidos and/or legally established associations of Communities
and/or Ejidos to carry out demand-driven community-based REDD+ subprojects in Early
Action Areas, as prepared and implemented with the technical assistance of local
technical agents (ATLs) and local development agents (ADLs) that would be provided
under Subcomponent 3.2, and in accordance with the eligibility criteria and procedures
that would be defined under Subcomponent 3.1.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project#s Component 1 (policy design and institutional strengthening) will support a
number of institutional and policy-related coordination efforts to align multi-sectoral
priorities on the ground vertically and horizontally. In other words, it means that these
multi-level and multi-sectoral coordination and alignment aim at improving the delivery
of CONAFOR technical assistance programs that is comprehensive on the ground and
enhances the manner in which indigenous peoples and other local communities can
access these programs, as well as the achievement of its environmental impacts derived
from increased capacity to plan and carry out sustainable forestry and landscape best
management practices.

 The project#s Component 2 (supporting demand-driven grants to communities through
existing CONAFOR programs on activities regarding community forestry and
environmental services) will have national coverage. An estimated 4,000 indigenous
peoples and other local communities are expected to benefit from these grants. The
community forestry role as an entry point to communities through its focus on social
capital strengthening activities will contribute to develop landscape planning instruments
to orient the rest of the investment programs to converge and contribute to advance their
community strategies. In addition to supporting community sustainable forest
management and income generation activities, the grants will finance activities related to
marketing, training, certification, and forest management plans.

 The project#s Component 3, to be supported under the Forest Investment Program
(FIP), will focus on two Early Action areas located in the State of Jalisco and in the
Yucatan Peninsula. It will contribute to the alignment of forest, agriculture and livestock
policies and programs for integrated multi-sectoral management in priority forest
landscapes and will promote the role of landscape management agents. While this is the
component which poses the largest environmental challenges, it is also the most
promising since it promotes an integrated approach to landscape management. These
regional approaches also include multi-sectoral coordination with other agencies such as
SAGARPA and CONABIO, among other, for a comprehensive and coordinated delivery
of technical assistance support.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN)
   Ms Mi Hyun Bae Mbayo (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 No long-term or large-scale negative environmental impacts are anticipated thus the
project is classified as environmental risk category B. Due to the complexity of the
Project, the Safeguards Advisory Team (SAT) will retain review and clearance authority
over safeguards for this Project throughout preparation and implementation.

 The main indicator of the project#s environmental impact will be the reduction of
deforestation and forest degradation through the incorporation of new forest areas under
sustainable forest management (currently only about 8 million hectares, or 60% of the
forest with timber potential that are under legal management). The aim would be: (i) to
incorporate about 1 million hectares per year; ii) to expand the number of certified forest
communities, from about 800,000 hectares to 1.6 million hectares of certified sustainable
forest management; and iii) to increase the community conservation areas, the area under
payments for environmental services, particularly under Fondos Concurrentes, which
support local mechanisms with counterpart funding.

 Two decades of Bank operations in the forestry sector in Mexico have contributed to
good environmental practices in the proposed areas of intervention. Project activities
include community-based land use planning and forest management including the
harvesting, processing and marketing of timber and non-timber products, as well as the
protection of and payments for environmental services. The project does not include
commercial plantations, agriculture and livestock expansion, or road building or
maintenance.

 A Social Assessment was carried out by CONAFOR in order to conduct a
comprehensive review of and gather knowledge on the socio-cultural context of the
proposed project areas. Specifically, the SA was carried out for Components 1, 2 and 3
and the key elements included: (i) legal review; (ii) socio-demographic baseline; (iii)
identification of key stakeholder groups; (iv) culturally appropriate consultation
processes; (v) potential positive and negative impacts; (vi) process for conducting free,
prior and informed consultations and acquiring the broad community support.

  Some of the key findings of the Social Assessment involve (i) the role of women in
forest management; (ii) the identification of indigenous peoples in the project context;
(iii) broad participation; (iv) out-migration; and (v) social conflicts.. In terms of gender,
according to Procuraduria Agraria statistics, there are approximately 600,000 women
registered in the Program of Land Certification accounting for about 15% of the land
registered as ejido (16 million hectares) as compared to only 1% some 35 years ago.
Women have increasingly become managers of their parcel agrarian and forests lands by
default through inheritance and absence of the male. There is a tendency of social
exclusion and triple discrimination for being poor, women and indigenous peoples.
Based on these numbers, women participation in the ejidos' governance structure is still
limited and, most often, the decision-making process overlooks the specific socio-
economic and cultural importance of forest resources to women. The project will
promote a gender inclusive approach.

 Regarding indigenous peoples, Mexico has strong domestic legislations for recognizing
their distinctive rights. Mexico has ratified ILO Convention 169 on Indigenous and
Tribal People. However operationally, Mexico applies the concept of ejidos (community
unit which may often be composed of indigenous peoples and other local communities
alike) and communities on the ground. This is a reflection of the socio-cultural context of
Mexico where many ejidos and communities are not homogenous. In the project context,
this poses an operational challenge on how to ensure the distinctive treatment of
indigenous peoples in regards to CONAFOR#s programs at the same time without
excluding non-indigenous communities and ejidos. CONAFOR will mobilize the Social
Technical Team (Gerencia de Coordinacion y Concertacion) to accord indigenous
peoples distinctive attention that is consistent with ILO Convention 169. CONAFOR
will coordinate closely with CDI (Comision Nacional de Desarrollo para los Pueblos
Indigenas) to ensure that the consultations are carried out not only at the national and
regional levels, but also at the local level, including traditional authorities as well as to
monitor the project implementation. CONAFOR will put in place a mechanism to assess
and verify the broad community support/ consent of Indigenous Peoples to a proposed
community driven project where applicable. Pending in Congress is a Bill on
Consultations with Indigenous Peoples (Anteproyecto de Ley de Consulta), which when
passed will regulate culturally appropriate and adequate consultations with indigenous
peoples. It is important both to recognize indigenous peoples as distinct group (to comply
with OP4.10), and to ensure that such recognition will not exclude other non-indigenous
communities and ejidos.

  CONAFOR will establish Practical Guide for systematically documenting consultations
and disseminating of information across all three mechanisms (SIL, FIP, FCPF) in a
timely manner.

  Out-migration of indigenous peoples and other local community areas is a growing
trend, which bring about a number of social, political and economic implications. For
example, it affects the ejido governance structure as the ejidatarios are migrating to other
parts of the country and overseas in search of better economic opportunities. Youth often
leave to seek education and other career opportunities and few of them return to their
home communities to continue the traditional occupation. As men who hold land rights
(ejidatario) migrate, women are left to shoulder the economic responsibility of working in
the land without exercising the right.

  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
  The Environmental Assessment (EA) Report and the Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) were submitted to the Bank and disclosed on the web. The safeguards
triggered are: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP4.04),
Forests (OP/BP4.36), Pest Management (OP4.09) and Physical Cultural Resources
(OP/BP4.11). Based on the EA, the EMF will focuses on mainstreaming good
environmental practices in Component 2 and enabling the institutional arrangements
within CONAFOR for screening and scoping of community investments. The
subcategories that will be financed under Component 3 will be any of the ones currently
financed by the different promotion programs supported by the SIL under Comp 2. The
Operational Manual will detail the procedure/criteria to define the incorporation in the
abovementioned subcategory list/catalog, of any new activity identified during
implementation, as long as its not included in the negative list of the Env Framework and
allowing for the environmental screening/scoping described for new activities, in said
Framework.


  Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) is triggered to guide the implementation arrangements
proposed in the EMF to anticipate the possible impacts of activities supported by the
project on Natural Protected Areas or any other relevant natural habitats identified in the
National Commission for Biodiversity (CONABIO) Terrestrial Priority Regions and Gap
Analysis reports. Natural Habitats protection measures are included in the EMF, to
incorporate criteria in the call for and evaluation of proposals (no activities that would
imply conversion of natural habitats (especially forests) will be supported by the project)
and through the implementation of a coordination mechanism with the Natural Protected
Areas Commission to ensure any activity developed in the buffer zone of a protected area
is consistent with the respective Area Management Plan, and is monitored by the
Protected Area administration, the Federal Attorney for the Environment (PROFEPA),
SEMARNAT and CONAFOR.

  Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
  Forest policy is supported by the legal requirement of the Forest Management Plan
approval, which SEMARNAT will not issue forest operations in Natural Protected Areas
core areas and would require CONANP and/or CONABIO#s assessment prior to
authorizing activities in the buffer zone of Natural Protected Areas or critical habitats; the
promotion of best forest management practices through the technical manuals developed
under the previous Community Forestry, and the creation of incentives and support to
further advance FSC (Forest Stewardship Council) type certification and markets for
certified products.
  The Bank-supported projects in Mexico have contributed to the development of these
regulations and capacity both in the government and civil society, landowners and
technical service providers since the creation of the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
and the launching of the Community Forestry project in the mid 90s. The main indicator
of the project#s environmental impact will be the reduction of forest degradation and
achieving zero deforestation through the incorporation of new forest areas for sustainable
forest management (currently only about 8 million hectares, or 60% of the forest with
timber potential that are under legal management). The aim would be: (i) to incorporate
about 1 million hectares per year, which will demand streamlining, reviewing standards
and enforcement of the licensing process, including for tropical forest (Non-timber forest
products and wildlife management areas are subject to evaluation and approval of
management plans to ensure sustainability of their use, which will also need streamlining,
reviewing of standards and enforcement of the respective licensing processes.
 ; ii) to expand the number of certified forest communities, from about 800,000 hectares
to 1.6 million hectares of certified sustainable forest management; iii) to increase
community conservation areas, the area under payments for environmental services #
particularly under #Fondos Concurrentes# - which support local mechanisms with
counterpart funding, and the forest areas protected by Wildlife Management Units
(UMAs).

  Pest Management (OP 4.09)
  A Pest Management Plan, that includes: Pest Management Practices, Legal and
Institutional Framework, Procurement of Pesticides, Improving Capacity and Practices,
Monitoring and Evaluation in the EMF, which present detailed guidelines to screen the
proposed products and practices to be supported by the project for silvicultural
treatments, insect and disease pest management for timber production, agroforestry and
other activities, including processes within the transformation facilities which may use
chemical products #including fungicides-, for the treatment of timber. Procurement of
pesticides or other agricultural chemicals under the project will follow Bank guidelines.
If these are included, the use of pesticides will be guided by an Integrated Pest
Management Plan and health and safety provisions, as required under the policy.
Additonally, the EMF includes the legal framework and provisions to ensure good
practices in health and safety issues in the sector.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
 No large infrastructure works will be financed by the project, but some remodeling or
new facilities for the forest communities may require relatively small works and there is a
possibility of chance finds at any construction site. The EMF, based on the respective law
(Ley de Monumentos y Sitios Arqueológicos) will guide the project team to follow the
appropriate conduct in reporting and following up on any such case. CONAFOR should
contact the state delegation of the National Instituto of History and Anthropology (INAH)
who has designated personnel to explore and determine possible monuments or
archeological sites discovered during civil works in the field.

 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)
 The Project will work through existing CONAFOR demand-driven grants programs to
provide technical assistance and financial support directly to indigenous peoples and
other local communities. The project prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) that recognizes indigenous peoples as a distinct group under OP4.10
and under Mexican national legal framework. Noting that the nature and scope of
activities under Component 1 (institutional modernization), Component 2 (demand-
driven grants) and Component 3 (regional approaches under the FIP) differ from one
component to another, the IPPF includes specific sections describing operational
procedures per Component. The draft IPPF was disclosed publicly prior to project
appraisal on October 31, 2011, and revised incorporating the outcomes of the ongoing
consultations with stakeholders and articulating further the specific guidelines on
culturally appropriate consultations as well as mechanisms for acquiring broad
community support of affected indigenous peoples. The IPPF also includes criteria for
preparing individual Indigenous Peoples Plans, when required, for demand-driven grant
projects; and for assessing and verifying indigenous peoples# broad community support
to projects.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
 CONAFOR has confirmed that the Project will neither finance small community
infrastructure (such as rural roads) nor displace indigenous peoples or other local
communities (such as campesino and agrarian communities). A Process Framework was
prepared by the Project to comply with the OP4.12, which will ensure that there are
adequate and culturally appropriate consultations and participation of indigenous peoples
and other local communities in the unlikely event of any possible restriction of access to
natural resources originated by project activities within and outside of protected areas.
Protected areas (reservas naturales, reservas de la biosfera, etc.) and biodiversity
corridors are particularly relevant because conservation and biodiversity objectives will
need to be combined fully with the planning of the natural resource use and management.
The draft PF was disclosed publicly in country prior to the project appraisal on October
31, 2011, The draft PF was discussed on November 10, 2011, with participants of the
focus group meeting. CONAFOR revised the PF integrating the comments of participants
of the focus group meeting as well as the Bank. The revised PF was disclosed on
November 18, 2011.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project's Component 1 will support a number of institutional and policy-related
coordination efforts to align multi-sectoral priorities on the ground improving the
delivery of CONAFOR technical assistance programs that is comprehensive on the
ground and its environmental impacts derived from increased capacity to plan and carry
out sustainable forestry and landscape best management practices.

 The project#s Component 2 will support demand-driven grants to communities through
existing CONAFOR programs including community forestry, productive chains and
payment for environmental services. The community forestry role as an entry point to
communities through its focus on social capital strengthening activities will contribute to
develop landscape planning instruments to orient the rest of the investment programs to
converge and contribute to advance their community strategies.

 The project#s Component 3, to be supported under the Forest Investment Program
(FIP), will focus on two Early Action areas located in the State of Jalisco and in the
Yucatan Peninsula. .It will contribute to the alignment of forest, agriculture and livestock
policies and programs for integrated multi-sectoral management in priority forest
landscapes and will promote the role of landscape management agents.. While this is the
component which the poses the largest environmental challenges it is also the most
promising since it promotes an integrated approach to landscape management.
 Overall, the project activities aim to provide direct benefits to indigenous peoples and
other local communities through existing CONAFOR programs in the form of demand-
driven grants. Key anticipated impacts were discussed above.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
CONAFOR has commissioned an Environmental Assessment (EA) which describes the
legal framework, institutional design and performance, capacity and track record and in
the field conditions relevant to the projects compliance with the safeguards policies. The
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) builds on almost two decades of
experience of CONAFOR in the implementation of good environmental practices in prior
IBRD and GEF operations. These operations have contributed to build capacity in the
institution and have produced a series of manuals to promote good management of the
forest and soil and biodiversity conservation practices, both at the government level and
in the communities that own over 70 percent of the forests in Mexico.

 CONAFOR updates the operational rules of the participating program every year based
on inputs from its technical committees as well as from the different consultative bodies
that have accompanied the operations, in some cases since the 1940s. Operational rules
incorporate criteria like land use planning, integrated watershed management to promote
effective incentives to good management practices and local/regional initiatives to better
manage landscapes, protected areas and productive mosaics.

 The Project will be coordinated by an Operational Committee comprised of managers
responsible for Community Forestry, Environmental Services, Sustainable Forest
Management Promotion, Productive Chains, Forest and Soil Restoration, Planning,
Evaluation and Financial Management. This committee will appoint designated liaisons
to oversee fiduciary aspects and safeguards.

 No environmental impacts beyond the current guidelines and regulations have occurred
in the past and no additional impacts are expected from the activities included in the
design of the current operation. The EMF incorporates a recommendation to include
industrial health and safety principles in the training curricula for technical service
providers, since CONAFOR#s programs supported by the Bank have contributed to
improve the management of the forest and extraction practices and more communities
have developed capacity to transform timber into more elaborated products in their own
facilities. As in the current operations, SEMARNAT (the Ministry responsible for
Environmental Impact Assessment and Permits at the federal level) will continue to
participate regularly in the technical committees. SEMARNAT is responsible for
screening and scoping both the program design and the particular proposals from the
communities to ensure, among other things, that any activity in the buffer zone of a
Natural Protected Area is consistent with the relevant management plan for said area and
they will inform the National Commission for Protected Areas to monitor any such
activities.

 Component 1 focuses on capacity building and offers the opportunity to mainstream
environmental concerns in CONAFOR and in training programs for technical service
providers. Component 2 will finance existing programs like Community Forestry and
Payment for Environmental Services which have been financed by the Bank since they
were launched in 1997 and 2003, respectively. Deriving from these experiences, the EMF
incorporates additional provisions for the new programs: Productive Chains and Special
Programs which focuses on landscape management #including productive landscapes-,
which triggers the environmental safeguards to guide forest management, activities
around protected areas, the potential use of pesticides and any chance finding of physical
cultural resources.

 The EMF will be disseminated to the relevant consultation bodies (Consejo Nacional
Forestal, Consejo Técnico Consultivo, Consejo de Desarrollo Sustentable) and discussed
in a meeting convened by CONAFOR to receive feedback from forest communities#
organizations, academia and CSOs.

 The project is consistent with the Bank Forest Policy OP4.36. It will only support
community-based forest management, and all activities will need to comply with the
national legislation and good practices on sustainable forest management plan. Some of
the community forestry operations in Mexico are already certified under the FSC or
equivalent standards, and the project will assist more communities to reach certification
standards. According to the EMF, community forestry operations will be eligible for
project support only once the community forest management plan has been approved by
SEMARNAT, which requires baseline information and good management practices.

 Forest policy is supported by the legal requirement of the Forest Management Plan
approval, which SEMARNAT will not issue for forest operations in Natural Protected
Areas core areas and would require CONANP and/or CONABIO#s assessment prior to
authorizing activities in the buffer zone of Natural Protected Areas or critical habitats; the
promotion of best forest management practices through the technical manuals developed
under the previous Community Forestry, and the creation of incentives and support to
further advance FSC type certification and markets for certified products.

 CONAFOR has extensive experience working with indigenous peoples and other local
communities CONAFOR will hire a safeguards specialist that will coordinate with the
relevant areas of the institution, including the Social Technical Team located in the
Gerencia de Coordinacion y Concertacion. The involvement of the Social Technical
Team is critical for the project as it involves a substantial scale-up in activities, includes
new mechanisms such as the FIP and the need to coordinate REDD+ activities financed
by the FCPF under one forest and climate change agenda. The social team will be
integrated in the project#s Operations Committee and will be provided commensurate
resources through the annual budgeting. This unit has an ongoing engagement with
indigenous peoples, women and youth in the context of the CONAFOR programs while
cooperating with other federal agencies such as CDI (Comision Nacional para el
Desarrollo de los Pueblos Indigenas) and other state governments. CONAFOR#s
institutional capacity will be further strengthened and additional human resources will be
added to follow and manage social processes at multiple levels.

 CONAFOR and the Bank are working together to devise a comprehensive set of social
and environmental assessments, consultations, and safeguards instruments that cover the
entire Forest and Climate Change agenda, while also meeting the specific requirements of
the SIL, FIP and FCPF instruments. Existing grievance mechanism at the national,
regional and local levels will be used to manage potential conflicts and disputes at
different levels.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project is meant to benefit a large number of indigenous peoples and other local
communities throughout the country. CONAFOR is building on lessons learned from the
Community Forestry model and payment for environmental services to enhance activities
such as community-to-community workshops and other events to assist in this process of
developing land use plans and community strategies that will serve as an umbrella for the
technical and feasibility assessment for the sector investments. Promotion is based on
good governance practices, strengthening social organizations and promoting income
generating activities through sustainable forest management.

 The project will continue to support existing CONAFOR programs which many
communities and civil society organizations support in general. However, it will
significantly scale up previous Bank engagement, promote innovation, engage in
thematic areas that are still open for debate and not fully familiar to local communities,
especially REDD+. The project will also be associated, directly or indirectly, with new
initiatives that attract high interest globally such as the FIP and the FCPF. Significant
efforts will be undertaken for stakeholder groups at various levels to understand the
objectives of the different mechanisms as well as the different processes of participation
(such as the National CTC-REDD, the regional CTCs-REDD, the SESA Follow-Up
Group, etc.) and those that are already in existence (Consejo Forestal at the national and
regional levels, for example).Stakeholder groups will be afforded specific representation
and/or roles in the different processes and how these processes contributing to the project
activities and design of the REDD+ strategy. CONAFOR has assessed the different
participation platforms and is developing a consultation strategy and also a
comprehensive communications strategy that aligns the objectives of the FCPF, SIL and
FIP as part of the country#s forest and climate change vision. CONAFOR has carried out
a thorough assessment of the different participation processes, their representativeness of
different stakeholder groups (or lack thereof) and their specific objectives in vis-à-vis the
comprehensive consultation strategy at various levels. The project plans to strengthen
these participatory platforms through capacity building.

 A number of information dissemination efforts were carried out during project
preparation at the national, regional and local levels with a wide range of stakeholder
groups (indigenous peoples and other local communities, regional organizations and state
governments, among others). Specifically, 6 regional workshops were carried out in the
States of Jalisco (Mascota, Ciudad Guzman and Autlan), Campeche (Campeche),
Quintana Roo (Chetumal) and Yucatan (Merida) between August and September of 2011
in order to seek feedback and comments from a wide range of stakeholders on the
national REDD+ process as well as on the FIP Investment Plan. A comprehensive multi-
level communication and information dissemination strategy is being developed. The
plan will coordinate the information among the various mechanisms (FCPF, SIL and FIP)
and create the basis for a process of consultation with a wide-range of stakeholder
groups, including indigenous peoples and other local communities as well as small
private land owners (pequenos propietarios). In addition, CONAFOR presented the
entire forest and climate change package at the meeting of the National CTC-REDD
(composed of civil society, indigenous peoples and campesino organizations) on October
13, 2011, for stakeholders# feedback and inputs. Due to the large size of the country,
institutional capacity and coordination to roll out, upscale and maintain the information
dissemination flow will be strengthened.

  CONAFOR will prepare a comprehensive methodology applicable across the three
mechanisms (SIL, FIP, FCPF) for guiding information dissemination and consultations
with stakeholders, when required. The methodology will include specific activities,
timeline, budget, staffing, etc. In addition, CONAFOR will prepare a Practical Guide for
documenting consultation processes and activities as well as a dissemination protocols
that socially and culturally adequate. In terms of direct engagement on specific issues, a
Protocol for Dialogue will be prepared, in coordination with the Social Communications
Unit, to manage and address specific concerns and issues from civil society and
indigenous peoples# organizations in a systematic manner across all three mechanisms
(SIL, FIP and FCPF) that a consultation process alone may be unable to address.

 With regards to social safeguards, the Indigenous Peoples policy (OP4.10) and the
Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP4.12) have been triggered to tailor project benefits
and/or address potential impacts on indigenous peoples and to manage potential
restriction of access to natural resources, respectively. The project will not finance any
community infrastructure such as community roads.

  In compliance with the Indigenous Peoples policy (OP4.10), a comprehensive Social
Assessment was prepared and disclosed in country on October 27, 2011. CONAFOR
Social Technical Team will update the Social Assessment to reflect comments received
from external stakeholders in order to guide future preparation of Indigenous Peoples
Plans, when required.

 The project is designed as demand-driven grants to indigenous peoples and other local
communities (such as campesino and agrarian communities). The project will benefit
indigenous peoples while respecting their social and cultural traditions. A draft
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared and disclosed in country
on October 31, 2011 and disseminated to the members of the CTC-REDD, which
includes indigenous peoples and campesino organizations, on November 1, 2011. . The
draft IPPF#s key elements include: (i) key findings of the social assessment; (ii) how the
proposed institutional arrangements and grievance mechanism will take into account
indigenous peoples# issues; (iii) type of incentive programs/subprojects, potential
positive and negative impacts; (iv) the proposed framework for ensuring free, prior and
informed consultations; (iv) the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to be prepared under the
IPPF; and (v) the monitoring and reporting and disclosure arrangements. The draft IPPF
was discussed a day-long focus group meeting held on November 10, 2011, with
participants of the focus group meeting (UNAM-Universidad Nacional Autonoma de
Mexico, CDI-Comision Nacional para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Indigenas, COLPOS-
Colegio de Postgraduados, UAEM-Universidad Autonoma del Estado de Morelos,
Rainforest Alliance, CONABIO and other organizations with expertise in the subject).

  CONAFOR revised the IPPF integrating the comments of participants of the focus
group meeting as well as the Bank. To highlight, the IPPF includes (i) a summary of
issues raised by stakeholders during the project design; (ii) the criteria for preparing
specific Indigenous Peoples Plans, when required; (iii) a mechanism for CONAFOR to
assess and verify broad community support of indigenous peoples for community driven
projects; and (iv) guideline to ascertain the voluntary nature of land donations by
individual families from the community, in the exceptional circumstances when it occurs.
The revised IPPF will be further disseminated to indigenous peoples through the Consejo
Consultivo of CDI as well as to other national level indigenous peoples organizations
(such as ANIPA) and councils (such as the CONAF).

 No physical resettlement or land acquisition is expected under the project. However, in
compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP4.12), a draft Process
Framework (PF) was prepared to guide any unanticipated restriction of access to natural
resources due to project activities (within and outside of protected areas). The draft PF
was disclosed in country on October 31, 2011, and disseminated to the CTC-REDD,
which includes NGOs, indigenous peoples and campesino organizations on November 1,
2011. The draft PF was discussed on November 10, 2011, with participants of the focus
group meeting. CONAFOR revised the PF integrating the comments of participants of
the focus group meeting as well as the Bank.

 All three social safeguards instruments (SA, IPPF and PF) are available on
CONAFOR#s website and at the World Bank#s Infoshop. These instruments will be
further disseminated to the relevant stakeholders at the national level.

 In the background that Mexico#s profile in the REDD+ process is evolving domestically
and internationally, CONAFOR will intensify dialogue with key stakeholder groups such
as Indigenous Peoples and women. While the criticisms and demand may vary from
group to group, CONAFOR will develop a Protocol for Dialogue, in coordination with
Social Communications Unit in CONAFOR, to address specific concerns from civil
society and indigenous peoples organizations.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/04/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/29/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/03/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/29/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/03/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/04/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name            Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Laurent Debroux             11/16/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo   11/16/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Mi Hyun Bae Mbayo           11/16/2011
Additional Environmental and/or                                    11/16/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan             11/16/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Ethel Sennhauser            11/16/2011
  Comments:
