                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/23/2011                                      Report No.: AC6469
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Mexico                              Project ID: P123367
Project Name: Rural Savings and Credit Sector Consolidation
Task Team Leader: Harideep Singh
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 1, 2011     Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSAR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Banking (45%);SME Finance (45%);Other social services (10%)
Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (25%);Rural markets
(25%);Regulation and competition policy (24%);Rural non-farm income generation
(13%);Indigenous peoples (13%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           100.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                   109.62
                                                                    109.62
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the project is to support: (a) consolidating the savings and credit sector
entities; and (b) deepening financial inclusion in marginal areas of Mexico.

3. Project Description
The project has four main components:

  (a) Consolidation and strengthening sector institutions. This component consists of:
(i) technical assistance to about 385 sector entities; (ii) technical assistance to about 20
federations, supervision committees, and deposit protection funds; (iii) studies and
database creation; (iv) communication and dissemination activities;

 (b) Broadening access to financial services and products. This component expands
access to financial services and products through four main lines of action: (i) expanding
membership base in existing entities (825,000 new members); (ii) mainstreaming new
clients in municipalities where there are no others points of access to financial services
through agency banking (5,000 access points covering about one million new clients);
(iii) expanding the range of financial products offered to members by entities (an
additional 70 entities), and to entities by BANSEFI (about 20 entities receiving a line of
credit); and (iv) creating a demand for financial services (and incentive for membership)
through an integrated financial education initiative;

 (c) Strengthening BANSEFI capacity for entity/sector support. This component
consists of: (a) maintaining the efficiency of the technology platform to continue to
perform at the existing level; (b) training BANSEFI staff; and (c) building the BANSEFI
brand through a communication initiative; and

 (d) Strengthening core project management/implementation teams by providing
expert consultant services for, and supporting supervision of, project activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project has a national coverage, but the actual area of operation would depend on the
location of the entities supported by the project. While broad criteria for selection of
locations has been determined, within these selected locations, participation will be
limited only to eligible entities (those which are either certified under the law or are
classified as B/B+ entities indicating readiness for certification). The approach to
technical assistance under the project will be demand-driven. The entities in the marginal
rural areas and technical service providers are required to communicate and interact with
each other to reach a mutual agreement on the working arrangements for each TA
contract. The work plan provided in the proposal of each technical service provider will
include a list of entities with whose management it has reached an agreement to work.

 The location of the entities which receive technical assistance under the project and their
area of operation will determine the physical areas relating to which the IP Safeguard
Policy gets triggered. The actual determination of the areas will be done during project
implementation, and only after the award of technical assistance contracts can
participating entities be identified and the location/area of operation of these entities,
where the IP Safeguard Policy becomes applicable, be known. At this stage, therefore,
neither the technical assistance providers nor the entities to be assisted by the project or
their location are known. Premature disclosure could result in disseminating the IP
Framework in areas where the project may have no intervention at all, possibly raising IP
community hopes for participation in the project.

  The locations are expected to be known by October 15, 2011 when the technical
assistance assignments are expected to be awarded. This date is almost firm since the
procurement has already been initiated. The section on the IP Framework, which is
embedded in the Project Operational Manual, will be disclosed at the office of each
project-assisted entity before the TA assignment commences, on the website of each
technical assistance provider, and on the BANSEFI website.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSAR)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project promotes the expansion of financial services in marginal rural areas. This is
to be achieved through technical assistance to the savings and credit entities to deepen
penetration and outreach in rural marginal areas. There is no line of credit or investments
under the project which are targeted to beneficiaries at the individual or community level.

 As identified during implementation of earlier projects, indigenous people from a
variety of ethnic groups represent almost 20% of the rural population in marginal areas.
The main issue, namely, ensuring that the project benefits this population, is being
addressed by developing and implementing an appropriate social strategy to assist the
managements of the entities to provide access to financial services to IP populations.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has prepared an IP Framework to address the IP Safeguard Policy issues.
The Framework details have been discussed in Section 5. The preparation of the IP
Action Plans and their implementation will be done by the technical assistance providers.
BANSEFI will monitor the overall implementation of this component, including
compliance with IP Safeguard Policy through a review of the plans, and monitoring of
their implementation, directly and through a verification firm.
 The core team for the outreach component in the earlier operation has eight solid years
of experience in deepening outreach in rural marginal areas in Mexico. This team is fully
aware of the requirements of the Bank Safeguard Policy as it relates to Indigenous
Peoples, and is particularly sensitive to its compliance when dealing with the technical
assistance providers in their strategy formulation, implementation, and reporting. This is
demonstrated by the results achieved under the earlier project relating to IP and women
group share in new membership.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The projects triggers OP 4.12, Indigenous Peoples, and follows a framework approach.
Therefore IPPs will be prepared during implementation to ensure that indigenous peoples
in the project#s areas benefit from the project and their rights are respected as established
on the Mexico#s National Constitution, the Indigenous Peoples Law and the ILO 169
Agreement signed by Mexico.

 An improved social strategy has been designed building on the experience of the
previous two phases of PATMIR and taking into account the evaluation conducted during
preparation, which provided with lessons-learned and recommendations, and the
outcomes of the four regional consultations and one national level consultation. As
established in the PATMIR I and II evaluation: (a) close to 20% of the new membership
hailed from IP communities; (b) the program has benefited indigenous population
without causing any negative impacts; and (c) the program has designed products
specifically appropriate for indigenous peoples# needs and are culturally suitable. The
consultations provided indigenous peoples# perspective towards the project.

 Because the project operates under a demand-driven approach IP Plans will be prepared
once the alliances to provide formal financial services are established between TA
consultant and the entities. These plans will identify means to address barriers preventing
indigenous peoples# participation in financial services and will establish specific goals to
benefit indigenous population following a participatory approach.

 To ensure that adequate capacity is in place for preparation and implementation of IP
Plans, the bidding documents for the selection of TA consultants will require such
capacity to be demonstrated. This activity will be incorporated into the project#s
implementation plan. The TA to strengthen the entities will incorporate the adoption of
the social strategy to provide financial services to poor rural population with a focus on
indigenous groups and women.

 The social strategy will consist of the following elements:

 #      Consultant ToR: The Terms of Reference of the TA consultants working with the
selected entities will have preparation of IP Plan and women actions as a specific area of
work to reach the proposed new membership goal, with shares of at least 10% IP and
30% women.
 #      Alliances: In establishing alliances with entities, the TA consultants will identify
entities predominantly in rural localities within established population threshold of less
than 100,000 inhabitants to achieve at least 70% of new membership target from
medium, high and very high marginality areas.

  #     Indigenous Peoples Plan: The TA consultants will prepare IP Plan covering their
respective alliances. The IP Plan preparation will incorporate a consultation process with
potential IP members as well as their local leaders and authorities. For this purpose, they
may consult CDI too, which has agreed to provide support as would be feasible. The IP
Plan will be implemented by the consultants based on the outreach strategies prepared by
them, including the design of culturally compatible financial products and appropriate
technical tools. The consultants will also provide training, financial education and
dissemination materials.

 #       Women Actions: The TA consultants will support the assisted entity in the
development and implementation of women actions including: group creation, special
services, and financial education and dissemination materials for each one of these
activities.

  #     Financial Education: The TA will include the establishment of methods and tools
to inform the communities and potential members about the benefits of becoming a
member, their obligations, the role of the financial entities, the financial products offered,
and their advantages, among others. Appropriate programs will be developed for
financial education of indigenous peoples and women.

 #     Training Promoters: Men and women in rural areas prefer direct communication
because it facilitates their understanding of financial services, rights and responsibilities,
and favors trust-building. Bilingual promoters, knowledgeable of the local culture and
capable of speaking indigenous languages, would be trained by the TA consultants to
perform this task.

 #      Communication: The project#s communication component will support social
strategy through broad communication initiatives such as radio, caravans, printed
materials, and local newspapers. The project team will continue publishing its monthly
bulletin on the component to disseminate results and share field experiences.

 #     Institutional Coordination: The recent moving of the outreach component core
implementation team from SAGARPA to BANSEFI will facilitate coordination and
complementarity with other financial programs in BANSEFI servicing poor population
such as L@ Red de la Gente.

 #     Monitoring and Evaluation: The M&E will incorporate tracking progress in
achieving membership goals for women and indigenous population. The project team will
continue collecting and analyzing information on entities (based on financial data
provided by the consultant) on a quarterly basis, which will also include periodic
members# satisfaction surveys. Moreover, an independent firm, focused on quality
control and corroboration of new membership creation, will verify the achievements
comprising names, addresses, ethnicity and gender of the new membership since these
are the foundation for the consultant payment. This assessment will be useful to validate
achievement of social strategy goals.

  Disclosure Aspects. As indicated above, the approach to technical assistance under the
project will continue to be demand-driven. The institutions in the marginal rural areas and
technical service providers are required to communicate and interact with each other to
reach a mutual agreement on the working arrangements for each TA contract. The work
plan provided in the proposal of each technical service provider will include a list of
institutions with whose management it has reached an agreement to work. At this stage,
therefore, neither the technical assistance providers nor the institutions to be assisted by
the project or their location are known.

  The locations are expected to be known by October 15, 2011 when the technical
assistance assignments are expected to be awarded. This date is almost firm since the
procurement process has already been initiated. The section on the IP Framework, which
is embedded in the Project Operational Manual, will be disclosed at the office of each
project-assisted entity before the TA assignment commences, on the website of each
technical assistance provider, and on the BANSEFI website. Premature disclosure could
result in disseminating the IP Framework in areas where the project may have no
intervention at all, possibly raising IP community hopes for participation in the project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/22/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/25/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              07/25/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Harideep Singh          07/22/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist       Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz   07/13/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan         05/26/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Ethel Sennhauser        07/22/2011
  Comments:
