                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6471


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/10/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mexico                               Project ID: P126487
Project Name: Modernizing the National Meteorological Service to Address Variability
and Climate Change in the Water Serctor in Mexico (MOMET)
Task Team Leader: Javier Zuleta
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20,        Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: LCSEN                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%);Irrigation and
drainage (20%);Flood protection (10%)
Theme: Water resource management (50%);Climate change (30%);Natural disaster
management (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           105.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                           0.00
                                                                           0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of the National
Meteorological Service to meet the increasing demand for weather and climate information in
order to improve water resources management and support sustainable development in the face
of climate change.

 The Project will enable SMN to enhance its effectiveness as a modern organization that
provides reliable, useful and timely information on meteorology, climatology and
hydrometeorology and align SMN#s service and products with its international commitments.
This will support decision making in a range of sectors, including the water sector, agriculture
and other productive sectors, to increase productivity, support sustainable development, and
protect life and property from the effects of natural disasters of hydro-meteorological origin.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project will support increasing the pool of skilled meteorologists and climate scientists
available to SMN, either as in-house staff or as contractors. It will provide technical and
analytical support to support improvements in SMN#s capacity to communicate data and
forecasts to its clients. It will finance rehabilitation of current weather and hydro-climate
observation networks, as well as the acquisition of new radars and instrumentation to measure
atmospheric and soil humidity, so as to improve the scope and quality of weather, hydrology and
climate information. It will finance the acquisition and/or development of new technologies and
models to help SMN improve its data base management and the accuracy of its weather,
hydrological and climate forecasts. Actual and future knowledge products to better understand
hydro-climatic processes and trends in Mexico for planning and policy decision purposes will be
supported through the creation of the National Climate and Environment Forecasting Center
(CENPAC) with participation of national and international scientific institutions. Finally, it will
support SMN#s strategy for decentralizing its functions by financing the development of five
Regional Centers to carry out data collection, analysis, and forecasting, with particular emphasis
on providing early warnings for storms and flash floods to strengthen civil protection.

D. Project location (if known)
Improving weather and climate information and forecasting will contribute to increase
productivity of water and various other sectors and to strengthen disaster risk management and
vulnerability reduction. Most of the institutional development and technical activities will take
place in the SMN HQ in Mexico City, while the construction of the Regional Centers,
rehabilitation of weather stations, radars or other observation instrumentation will be nationwide.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
CONAGUA has knowledge and experience in applying the social and environmental safeguards
policies of the Bank through a number of Bank-financed projects, through the #Gerencia de
Calidad del Agua# which will also be the responsible unit for environmental compliance of the
SMN investments.

 SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

 The Project#s social and environmental impacts are expected to be largely positive. Improving
weather and climate information and forecasting will contribute to increase productivity and to
strengthen disaster risk management and to reduce vulnerability. The Project is not expected to
have negative social or environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated. Therefore, the Project is
classified as a Category B. The Safeguards triggered are OP/BP 4.01, Environmental
Assessment and OP/BP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement.

 The Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) policies are listed as
To Be Determined to allow for further analysis to be conducted and a decision made prior to
Appraisal.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSHH)
   Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    The National Meteorological Service has identified the activities that may potentially raise
any concerns regarding environmental impact and safety, and has started the preparation of 4
instruments:
     i) Environmental and Social Assessment of activities and infrastructure with work location
known prior to Appraisal. (ongoing activity)

     ii) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared for any
works with unknown locations prior to appraisal and include a detailed description of
interventions already defined, and the parameters of interventions and infrastructure that is still
to be determined including a positive and negative list of activities. It will essentially include a
detailed description of the procedures for conducting the Environmental Assessment of any
future not identified activity to comply with the National Law and Bank standards model ToRs
and the linkages with existing Guidelines and Manuals which regulate CONAGUA and SMN.
The ESMF will provide a framework to manage and mitigate - including the institutional
arrangements, responsibilities and resources- the potential environmental and social impacts of
future Projects activities.

     iii) Environmental and Social Management Plan for the implementation of the Framework,
which includes the applicable legal framework and the institutional arrangements for screening
and scoping of the listed activities, to comply with the Mexican Law and all contractual
commitments under this project. It will include also the evaluation, mitigation and compliance
provisions, including the standard clauses for contractors and supervising firms when applicable.

     iv) Environmental and Social Screening and/or Impact Assessment of a reduced number
activities (6 to 12) which the SMN has already identified, including detailed specifications and
location. This report will contribute to better understand and identify gaps in the institutional
framework and in implementation capacity and will include recommendations for its
strengthening.

     The ToR for the above mentioned activities include the need to describe characteristics,
specifications, location and operation requirements for: Radars, Upper atmosphere observation
gauges, Meteorological Stations and Hydrometric Stations

     Security ranges, management, collection and final disposal of equipment, batteries and any
material or hazardous substances contained or used in the operations of equipment (ie. mercury,
lead, acids, PCVs) should be documented and where required the design of a management plan
or contract with a certified service provider for its removal and disposal will be required.

    Finally, the ESA will complement the review of the Mexican legal framework, with a
consultation with specialists on the relevant international treaties which regulate the operation,
removal and final disposal of equipments and substances to harmonize with the provisions of the
EMP and provide feedback to the SMN. These instruments will be ready by September 30th,
2011.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No        TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
    As the impacts of the proposed project activities on natural habitats are yet unknown the
policy is listed as TBD.As some meteorological stations could be located in protected areas and
the exact locations and potential impact of the construction of Regional Centers are yet
unknown, screening criteria to avoid negative impacts in Natural Habitats will be included in the
ESMF.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
    Projects activities will not include forest management. Screening criteria to avoid negative
impacts in Forests will be included in the ESMF.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
    The project will not procure pesticides nor result in their increased use.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                      X
    As part of the preparation, the SMN will assess the risks and potential impacts on physical
cultural resources. The ESMF will include procedures to address and to mitigate these risks and
potential impacts and include procedures to address any chance finds during works.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
    In the unlikely event that civil works would require land acquisition no works would
encroach on indigenous peoples# territories.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    No land acquisition or involuntarily resettlement is anticipated, however, OP/BP 4.12,
Involuntary Resettlement is triggered as a precautionary measure in connection with construction
of the Regional Centers and location of additional radar or other observation instrumentation to
assess potential land acquisition and resettlement needs. A Resettlement Policy Framework will
be prepared and consultation and disclosure will take place prior to Appraisal.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
    Projects activities will not involve any dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
    Projects activities will not take place in international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X
    Projects activities will not be conducted in disputed areas.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 11/30/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                   Mr Javier Zuleta                                                          07/12/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                                        08/04/2011
      Comments: Francis Fragano signed on his behalf
    Sector Manager:                     Ms Karin Erika Kemper                                                     08/09/2011
      Comments: Enos Esikuri signed on her behalf.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
