                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6294


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/02/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Middle East and North Africa          Project ID: P126506
Project Name: Arab World Initiative for Financing Food Security
Task Team Leader: Julian A. Lampietti
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 17,          Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: MNSSD                           Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (34%);Ports, waterways and
shipping (33%);Agricultural marketing and trade (33%)
Theme: Global food crisis response (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                           0.00
                                                                           0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The higher-level objective of the AWIFS is to minimize the impact of high food prices on the
livelihoods of poor urban and rural residents in Arab countries. In order to achieve this higher-
level objective, the objectives of the regional program are to: (1) support governments in the
design of effective social safety nets that mitigate the adverse impacts of high and more volatile
food prices on poverty; (2) increase agricultural productivity growth and market participation to
support rural incomes; and (3) improve food import logistics to facilitate the pass-through of
international prices into the domestic economy at a lower cost. The project development
objectives at the project-level will be tailored to the specific needs of each project.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Component 1: Strengthening social safety nets. This component would support countries in: (i)
building effective social safety net systems for crisis preparedness; (ii) consolidating existing
fragmented safety net programs for more effectiveness and results, including reducing overlaps
and bridging coverage gaps; (iii) linking social safety nets to interventions that build human
capital and improve people’s productivity; and (iv) building community interventions to improve
access to services for the poor, generate short-term employment, and contribute to community
assets. Examples of potential policy and investment activities include: developing targeted and
conditional cash transfer systems; implementing public workfare programs; supporting the
subsidy value of food stamps; and financing school feeding costs.

  Component 2: Strengthening agricultural production and marketing systems. Arab countries can
take steps to increase food production at home, even with the constraints imposed by the limited
availability of water and land. In this context, an export-oriented agricultural development
strategy centered on high value crop production is generally the most effective way to valorizing
scarce arable land and water resources and ensuring food security through improved incomes. To
these ends, the AWIFS would support production-linked reforms and investments in research,
extension and water management coupled with improved efficiency of domestic markets. The
initiative’s strategic focus on promoting high value crop production for domestic and export
markets would not exclude productivity-enhancing investments related to staple crops where a
clear economic case can be made. Eligibility criteria would be designed such that public support
is geared towards investments generating the highest returns regardless of the nature of the
underlying production system. Examples of potential policy and investment activities include:
national and regional competitive financing for research grants programs; building the capacity
of national and regional research centers; developing a pluralistic approach to delivering
extension and advisory services; increasing incentives for irrigation water conservation among
farmers; improving the performance of irrigation services; and improving the efficiency of
domestic markets.

  Component 3: Reducing exposure to food import price volatility. Modern procurement methods
and efficient import logistics infrastructure could generate substantial savings in food import
costs. Import supply chains are important because they are a critical element of costs and price
formation that affect both producers and consumers. One cost effective way to generate savings
is to improve management of national and/or regional physical grain reserves and facilities
through better procurement procedures and practices. There are also many potential investments
- in transportation, logistics, and storage - that can reduce the time and cost of importing food.
Improved monitoring of world and regional cereal supply and demand would help Arab
countries foresee price shocks and allow them to adjust imports accordingly. Arab countries
could further manage price risks by making better use of financial risk-hedging instruments.
Financial instruments could be used to create virtual reserves, ensuring cereals at a certain price
without many of the costs associated with physical stockpiles. Financial instruments could also
improve budget planning by allowing importing countries to lock in prices ahead of time. The
two primary financial instruments used to establish virtual stockpiles are futures contracts and
options. Examples of potential policy and investment activities include: improving national and
regional grain stock management; developing national and regional early warning and weather
risk management systems for food crop production; and improving price risk management.

D. Project location (if known)
Member states of the League of Arab States (LAS).

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Each project under the facility would be implemented by an implementing entity at the national
level designated by the government. A project implementation unit will be set up at the project
level that will be expected to include the required capacity to undertake successful
implementation of the Bank’s safeguard policies. A capacity assessment of the implementing
entity will be undertaken during project preparation and training will be provided, as necessary.
At the initiative level, along with eligibility criteria and details for accessing the funds, the
Framework Document will include guidance to be followed at the project level which will ensure
compliance with Bank safeguard policies.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Banu Setlur (MNSEN)
   Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSSO)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    A Framework Document will be prepared for the initiative as a whole which will include
details for accessing the funds. Additionally, this document will include a Safeguards Guidance
Annex that will outline steps required to be followed at the project level by each participating
country to be in compliance with the Environmental Assessment and other environmental
policies, as applicable.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
    A Framework Document will be prepared for the initiative as a whole which will include
details for accessing the funds. Additionally, this document will include a Safeguards Guidance
Annex that will outline steps required to be followed at the project level by each participating
country to be in compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement policy.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/01/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   N/A

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Julian A. Lampietti                                         05/25/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Hocine Chalal                                               05/31/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Hoonae Kim                                                  05/26/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
