                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/04/2012                                     Report No.: AC6613
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P090340                 Original Project Name: Quality Education
                                             in the Rural Areas of Moldova
Country: Moldova                             Project ID: P129552
Project Name: Quality Education in the Rural Areas of Moldova AF
Task Team Leader: Scherezad Joya Monami Latif
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 1,        Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: ECCU2                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Primary education (50%);Secondary education (50%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              1
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Quality Education in the Rural Areas of Moldova Project was designed to contribute
to the Government of Moldova’s goals of improving quality, access and efficiency of the
education system. The Project Development Objective is to increase the quality of
education in the rural areas of Moldova.

 The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would support activities that are consistent
with the Project’s Development Objectives (PDO and the Country Partnership Strategy.
The proposed Additional Financing would primarily finance supplementary technical
assistance critical to ensuring the smooth implementation of the Government of
Moldova’s Education Reform Program. In the medium term, the Bank also envisions an
IDA loan in the education sector in 2013. It is important to note that the Project has had a
very strong effect on the development of the Government’s Education Reform Program
which mirrors the Project’s development objectives of increasing the quality of education
and improving the efficiency of the education sector.
3. Project Description
The original Project objective has already partially been achieved through the following
components: (i) improving teaching and learning in rural schools; (ii) increasing access
and equity in rural schools; (iii) increasing efficiency in the use of resources; (iv)
strengthening education planning and monitoring.

  The proposed Additional Financing would finance technical assistance in components
(i), (iii) and (iv) through the following activities: (i) development of standards for
receiving (hub) schools; (ii) development of a new teacher remuneration scheme; (iii)
continued support to Moldova’s capacities to participate in international assessments; (iv)
capacity building and training of school directors in order to implement formula
financing in schools; (v) capacity building towards the strengthening of the school
mapping database; and (vi) continued support to communications/public relations
activities to support the implementation of the school reform program.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The original Project did not finance any civil works and did not have any environmental
issues. The proposed Additional Financing finances only technical assistance and The
proposed AF would neither trigger a new safeguard nor change the current environmental
category.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no safeguard issues or impacts associated with the original project or the
proposed Additional Financing.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There will be no potential indirect and/or long term environmental or safeguard impact of
the original project, or of the Additional Financing.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
  explain why:
  N/A


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Scherezad Joya Monami Latif               01/04/2012
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Alberto Rodriguez                         01/04/2012
  Comments:
