                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/20/2011                                    Report No.: AC6411
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P095250                 Original Project Name: Health Services &
                                             Social Assistance
Country: Moldova                             Project ID: P125719
Project Name: Health Services and Social Assistance Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Paolo Belli
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 19,      Estimated Board Date: December 8, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: ECSHD                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (49%);Central government administration (31%);Other social services
(15%);Compulsory health finance (5%)
Theme: Health system performance (50%);Social safety nets (25%);Social risk
mitigation (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             10.20
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objectives are to increase access to quality and efficient health
services, with the aim of reducing premature mortality and disability, and to improve
targeting of social transfers and services to the poor.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Health System Modernization. This component supports the changing
roles for key groups of actors under the new National Health Strategy. It consists of the
following four sub-components.

 Component 1.1: Capacity Development and Sector Regulation. This component
contributes to spearhead new policy developments in the areas of Public Private
Partnership, monitoring of health financing flows in the healthcare sector (with the
preparation of National Health Accounts (NHAs), and human resources# management
development and reform.

 Component 1.2: Health Care Financing and Provider Payment. This component
contributes to reforms in the way healthcare services are financed, with the principal
objective of progressively expanding health insurance coverage (at present approximately
80 percent of the population is covered) in a fiscally sustainable manner, as well as
reform the way healthcare services are #paid# by government, with a change in the
payment system for hospitals.

 Component 1.3: Primary Health Care Development. This component supports the:(i)
rehabilitation of 73 primary health care facilities in rural areas (Rural Health Facilities, or
RHAs); and (ii) updating the curriculum of Family Doctors, and providing training
opportunities for them.

 Component 1.4: Hospital Capacity Assessment and modernization. This component
contributes to the: (i) modernization of the Republican Clinical Hospital (RCH), the
largest referral facility in the country; (ii) finalization of a new Hospital Master Plan with
further hospital optimizations; and (iii) strategy to modernize the Oncologic Institute in
Chisinau, and reform the way cancer treatment services are organized [specifically,
regionalization of oncology services].

 Component 2: Social Assistance and Welfare Component. This component is
supporting the first implementation steps of a new targeted social assistance program,
called Ajutor Social, to strengthen government#s capacity to identify the poor, and to
collect and process information for appropriate decision-making. Furthermore, activities
under this Component establish a hardware and software infrastructure supportive to
further expansion and rolling out of Ajutor Social program.

 Component 3: Institutional Support. This component supports operating costs of the
project, both in Ministry of Health (MoH), as well as in Ministry of Labor, Social
Protection, and Family (MoLSPF).

 Component 4: Protecting Health and Nutritional Status. This component was introduced
as part of the Global Food Price Crisis Response Grant approved in August 2008 and
closed on August 28, 2011. The component has provided cash support to selected social
institutions (mainly kinder-gardens, orphanages, and long-term care institutions), and in-
kind nutrition supplement to at-risk pregnant women, lactating mothers, and
infants/young children.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented on the existing site of the Republican Clinical Hospital
and on existing sites of primary care facilities identified for rehabilitation. Any new
construction will be on existing government property and no resettlement will be
required. Any site which would require land acquisition is ineligible. During the
redevelopment of the hospital, hospital workers and patients will be affected by the
construction work but care will be taken to minimize the impact: for example, the work
will progress in phases to avoid any disruption in the normal working of the hospital.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Evelin Lehis (ECSSD)
   Mr Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed scale-up activities under the AF will not trigger any safeguard policy not
already triggered by the original Project under OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.
The AF remains under environmental category B. The AF will support civil works of the
same nature and magnitude as the original Project and the environmental procedures
outlined in the existing Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will remain applicable.

  Site specific EMPs or EMP checklists will be developed for individual construction
works as required. The AF will support one new relatively large scale construction in the
Republican Clinical Hospital. The Borrower confirmed that the land allocated for that
construction is government owned, free of any settlement, and not used legally and/or
illegally. Consequently, there will be no land taken under the Project as user rights to all
plots required for construction currently rest with the MoH, or local governments.

 The recent (May 2011) implementation support mission concluded that overall
implementation of the Project environmental requirements has been satisfactory,
including medical waste disposal at the site of RHCs supported by the original Credit and
that all construction and rehabilitation activities are being undertaken in a manner
consistent with the World Bank rules and procedures and with the existing national
environmental and construction requirements and permits. Furthermore, the existing
human and institutional capacities to ensure EMP implementation are adequate.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The long-term impacts are positive and relate to improved health care of the population.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The GoM has a number of policies, laws and regulations to address the safeguard policy
issues. These were reviewed and are included in the Environment Management Plan for
the Project. Risk mitigation measures proposed include:

 *      Adoption of safe demolition procedures in regard to the debris. Proper procedures
for working with and disposal of demolition debris will be implemented in order to
protect the workers and the environment; they will comprise at least the use of protective
equipment, dust containment procedures, transportation and dumping methods. Dump
sites will be in compliance with the environment protection regulation of the country.

 *      Use of environment friendly construction materials. Particular attention will be
paid on materials, isolation, paint and plaster. Prior to starting the works, the design of
the health care facilities will be reviewed to ensure that environmentally friendly
construction materials are used.

 *      The design will include a proper system of waste and sewerage system harmless
to the environment and living beings for all facilities rehabilitated under the Project.

 * The problem of healthcare waste management will be addressed by ensuring that the
MoH regulation on safe handling, disposal, transportation and destruction of hazardous
waste are implemented. Proper training will be delivered to the healthcare personnel and
adequate procedures will be enforced. Public awareness training will be provided and the
implementation of procedures will be monitored. Where necessary, appropriate
mechanisms for safe disposal of health care wastes (based on WHO guidelines) will be
provided under the Project.

 *      As all civil works planned under the project will be on existing sites on
government owned land, no new land will be acquired. As a consequence, no
resettlement is planned in the project or expected as a consequence of the Project.

 The MoH will work in close collaboration with the Epidemiological Surveillance and
Prevention Institute and its network for the coordination and supervision of the
environmental plans and risk mitigation measures undertaken in the project and would;

 *     coordinate training for health staff and contractors
 *     disseminate existing environmental management guidelines and when necessary
develop new ones in line with best practices accepted internationally;
 *     ensure contracting for construction and supply of equipment includes reference to
the appropriate guidelines
 *     conduct periodic visits to inspect and improve measures and monitor compliance.

 All the activities required by the adoption of mitigation measures will be properly
described and monitored in the M&E framework and pending arrangements for
monitoring. They will pertain to adopting the required environment safety legislation and
the PHC clinics structural standards. Implementing of the National Action Plan for
Health Care Waste Management will be closely watched. Personnel designated by the
GoM and MoH and its local structures together with project team and specialist
consultants will supervise the implementation of environment safeguard measures. They
will follow the environmental management plan part of the project and they will check
the compliance with current regulation, procedures employed, and mitigation measures
taken. Possible harmful impacts, if any, will be promptly addressed and adequate
measures will be taken.

 The environmental procedures outlined in the existing Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) will remain applicable also for the project AF. Site specific EMPs or
environmental checklists will be developed for individual construction works as required.

 The recent WB supervision mission concluded overall, implementation of the
environmental requirements of the project has so far been satisfactory, and the EMP has
been implemented successfully, - all construction and rehabilitation activities are being
undertaken in a manner consistent with the WB rules and procedures and with the
existing national environmental and construction requirements and permits. Furthermore,
the existing human and institutional capacities to ensure EMP implementation are
relevant - the MoH has hired two Supervising Construction Engineers which are
responsible for all safeguards issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During preparation, all agencies involved in health care environmental issues regulation
were consulted with including the Sanitary and Epidemiological Service, National
Institute for Preventive Medicine and the Ministry of Health. Discussions were also held
with local environmental specialists regarding regulations for construction activities and
existing monitoring systems.

 The GoM and MoH are the key stakeholders in implementing the risk mitigation
policies within the project. The program will be implemented in consultation with all
stakeholders. The main consultation mechanisms will involve national consultations with
all stakeholders, consultations with donor agencies, and consultations with health
stakeholders at the national and rayon levels. Public awareness campaigns will be
conducted under the Project. The EMP for the Project has been disclosed on the MOH
website.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/29/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/30/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/30/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           N/A
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's    No
Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Paolo Belli                               06/29/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Arcadii Capcelea                          06/27/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss                             09/07/2011
  Comments: Cleared by A. Kiss, via email of 09/07/11.
Sector Manager:                     Ms Rekha Menon                               06/29/2011
  Comments: Cleared by R. Menon, Acting SM, via email of 06/29/11.
