                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6454


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mongolia                             Project ID: P122535
Project Name: Third Ulaanbaatar Urban Service Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Toyoko Kodama
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15,        Estimated Board Date: January 17, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Solid waste management (30%);Roads and highways (30%);General water,
sanitation and flood protection sector (30%);Sewerage (10%)
Theme: Other urban development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             20.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              7.50
                                                                        7.50


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to enable Municipality of Ulaanbaatar
(MUB) provide integrated basic infrastructure services to targeted ger area residents and thereby
develop an approach for prioritizing investments.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project consists of five components:

 (I) Municipal access road upgrading ($5.8 million);
 (II) Solid waste collection improvement ($5.2 million);
 (III) Flood protection ($5.0 million);
 (IV) Water and sanitation improvement ($1.0 million); and
 (V) Operation and Management Support ($3.0 million).
 * The budget is preliminary estimates.
  Component I. Municipal Access Road Upgrading ($5.8 Million-Preliminary Estimates): The
proposed project will focus on constructing local roads within selected mid-tier ger areas in order
to improve the quality of life of ger residents. The primary criterion of selection will be
improving access to neighborhoods for transport, emergency services and solid waste
improvement. The synergistic benefits derived from the projects other components will also be a
criterion for selection. Potential roads have been identified by the Department of Transportation
which has been constrained from fulfilling its mandate of transport provision to all UB residents
due to the poor quality or lack of local roads. The roads are expected to be six meters wide and
two to five kilometers in length and will include sidewalks, public lighting and drainage systems.
In addition to improved transportation, these investments are expected to generate economic
activities, improve neighborhood safety through reduced road hazards and crime. They will also
improve drainage and provide preliminary infrastructure for expansion of utility services such as
water, sewerage or electrification for the future. Furthermore, it will contribute to reduction of
dusts generated from earthen roads, which is one of the significant factors of the severe air-
pollution of MUB. The approximate cost of a kilometer of an access road is approximately 700
million tugrigs (US$540,000 to be confirmed) and as such the project will finance approximately
seven to ten kilometers given the current allocation of US$5million unless the costs per
component are revised following the feasibility study. As these roads will become part of public
transport network of the municipality, MUB will ensure operations and maintenance.
Resettlement issues will be a key challenge (see Social Safeguards section) in implementing road
projects given that some rights of way are occupied. A detailed feasibility study will be carried
out for the project to support the selection of appropriate roads based on agreed criteria, such as
the number of people served by a new road, traffic volumes, potential for connectivity with
collector roads, minimal resettlement etc.

 <Potential Road Locations>
 Bayangol District - Khoroo 9th (Pop: 10,103)
 Bayangol District North - Khoroo 10th, 11th (24,769)
 Bayanzurkh District - Khoroo 5th, 22nd (18,595)
 Songinokhairkhan District - Khoroo 5th, 6th (13,994)
 Songinokhairkhan District - Khoroo 24th (5,475)

 Component II: Solid Waste Operation Improvement ($5.2 Million-Preliminary Estimate):
 This component is designed to improve solid waste collection in ger areas by introducing pilots
(demonstrations) in selected ger areas. It will include two subcomponents:

 (i)   Technical assistance to the Environmental Protection and Waste Management
Department (EPWMD) and the City Management of Public Utility Agency (CMPUA): a
prototype contract for the waste collection company will be developed. Additional activities
include, selection criteria for a waste collection company, and definition of indicators for
performance standards for pilot collection areas.
 (ii) Support solid waste collection activities in the pilot areas,through implementation of the
contracts defined under the TA above. Additionally, equipment and vehicles necessary to
achieve the performance standards will be supplied. Collected waste will be transferred to the
Narangiin Enger Disposal Site, constructed with assistance from JICA and under operation since
2009.
  Component III: Flood Protection ($5.0 million-Preliminary Estimate): The proposed project
will support flood prevention through two consecutively implemented subcomponents involving
technical assistance and investment.

 Subcomponent 1: Technical Assistance to Strengthen MUB Flood Prevention and Management
Systems
 This subcomponent is designed to assist MUB in prioritizing its essential investments and
identifying cost effective solutions for maximum benefit. The specific activities are likely to
evolve based on the analysis and guidance of the consultants for the Feasibility Study.

  - Improve Operations and Maintenance of Flood Protection Network: the overall ability of the
city to operate and maintain its existing drainage network by improving its O&M system.
  - Update Flood Vulnerability and Risk Analysis of UB based on hydraulic modeling. The
vulnerability and risk of flooding in UB needs to be updated. Since 2000, more than 60,000
families have moved to UB from the countryside, which has driven the uncontrolled expansion
of ger areas around the City. As a result, surface runoff patterns have been altered and the
percentage of the population that is exposed and vulnerable to natural and environmental hazards
has increased dramatically. Areas most vulnerable to future flash flooding will be identified and
mapped in greater detail to determine priority practical solutions.
  - Review and Revise Priority Flood Mitigation Investments. In 2006, the Municipality
completed a baseline study that identified potential locations of flood control infrastructure.
While this work forms a solid basis for current investments, it needs to be revised to include new
flash flood hazards. This study and associated infrastructure design would be updated to
incorporate the findings of the updated flood vulnerability and risk analysis (above).
  - Update Design Standards for Flood Prevention Structures. Technologies and standards
currently in use for flood prevention structures are outdated. The Engineering Department has
also highlighted that in some areas, ground water overflows into existing drainage channels
during the winter months, covering nearby roads with ice and causing potential safety hazards.
Standards for roads associated drainage structures also need to be revised. These and other
factors will be taken into consideration after a thorough review of the current standards in place
in order to update design standards based on international best practice.

 Subcomponent 2: Investments in Flood Protection measures: At an estimated cost of MNT 350
million per km (US$280,000/km), only a limited amount of repairs and/or construction of flood
protection structures would be carried out based on the results of the technical assistance. Given
the limited budget for this component, works would be intended for demonstration purposes and
to leverage co-financing or parallel financing from other donors.

 Component IV: Water and Sanitation Improvement ($1.0 million- Preliminary estimate): This
component will support extension of secondary sewer lines within the targeted ger areas and
connect them to the existing main trunk sewer. Five locations have already been proposed,
including two in Chingeltei, 1 in Denjiin, Khujirbulan, and Khailaast. The estimated total length
of sewer is 12.2 km. These areas were already connected to water supply system through USIP2.
This trunk sewer will connect the public facilities, such as schools, hospitals, administrative
buildings, public showers and saunas as well as multi-apartment buildings, if any. Currently, the
Water Supply and Sewerage Authority of Ulaanbaatar (USUG) collects wastewater from these
public institutions by trucks on daily basis. Under the proposed scheme, wastewater will be
conveyed to an existing trunk sewer and will be treated at the existing Central Waste Water
Treatment Plan, which has a capacity of 200,000 m3/day. The average daily flow is about
150,000 m3. Therefore, it has enough capacity to treat additional wastewater coming from the
proposed component.

  Component V: Operation and Management Support ($3.0 million-preliminary estimates): The
component would continue to support project implementation by the Project Management Unit
of MUB. While the PMU has one of the best capacity in the country in implementing Bank-
financed and donor-funded projects, it will require further enhancement of capacity as some of
the component are innovative and more complex to implement. It would be complimented by a
technical assistance on solid waste management in the core area of Ulaanbaatar, provided by
JICA, and Ulaanbaatar Water and Wastewater Operation Improvement Project by ADB. The
proposed component will cover the areas of: (i) preparation o f detailed engineering designs,
bidding documents; (ii) construction supervision and quality control, and construction
management: (iii) assistance with overall project management, including technical, financial,
environmental, and social aspects, as well as project reporting; (iv) overseas training; and (vi)
operation support.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be implemented in a couple of selected mid-tire ger areas of Ulaanbaatar City. A
long list of potential locations has been identified on the basis of the following criteria: khoroos
or neighborhoods which currently have a wide range of services (schools, health centers, khoroo
offices, private businesses etc) but lack critical infrastructure services (such as public transport,
roads and solid waste collection) that will enable them to revitalize the neighborhood; readiness
and commitment of the khoroos for project preparation; capitalizing on investments made under
USIP2 (accessibility of water supply) and the CLIP (strong community organizations through the
social mobilization efforts). The final selection of locations will be based on the potential for
maximum synergy among all components of the project as part of the Feasibility Study the MUB
will be conducting in preparation for the project.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The proposed Project will continue to be managed by the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar (MUB)
Project Management Unit (PMU), currently implementing the Ulaanbaatar Services
Improvement Project (USIP2). Composed of a highly competent team of 15, the PMU has one of
the best project preparation and implementation capacities in the country. It has technical
capacity, thanks to seconded staff from utility companies and related divisions of MUB as well
as financial management, procurement and safeguards specialists with knowledge of Bank
procedures. It has over 10 years of experience in implementing Bank projects (USIP1, USIP2,
Community Led Infrastructure Project 1 and 2, financed through the Japan Social Development
Fund (JSDF) and is currently responsible for the preparation of the Ulaanbatar Clean Air
Project). The investments planned under USIP3 are similar in scale and type of investment as
those it has already implemented in the past.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Songling Yao (EASCS)
   Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                   X
    The project includes four subcomponents in mid-tire ger areas of Ulaanbaatar City: access
roads, solid waste collection, water and sanitation, and flood protection. The main environmental
issues associated with these components are expected to include, among others, construction
issues, e.g. noise, dust, wastewater, spoil disposal etc. Based on the current proposed components
and initial environmental screening, the adverse impacts from the project are site-specific and
temporary, and mitigation measures could be readily designed and included in engineering
specifications.
      The first year of project implementation will focus on technical assistance and preparatory
studies such as mapping of drainage networks, developing procedures for maintenance of
drainage networks etc. Because the bulk of the investments for the project will be identified
during implementation and will not be known at appraisal, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared prior to appraisal. For the subcomponents
which will be decided during the implementation phase of the project, an Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) and/or Environmental Management Plan (EMP), will be conducted for the
proposed activities, and an EMP will be prepared based on the ESMF, to prevent, minimize and
mitigate adverse environmental impacts and enhance those that are positive. The ESMF will
include standardized Engineering Codes of Practice (ECOP) to be applied to most of the small
scale projects. If any projects are identified for the first year of implementation during project
preparation, an EIA and/or an EMP (or ECOPs), according with the ESMF, will also be
prepared proir to appraisal. The Project is rated as Category B based on its scale of civil works,
the type and location of the project and the nature and magnitude of the impacts.

     The EIA and the EMP for USIP2 and the ECOP for CLIP2 will be used in the preparation
of the ESMF of this project. . The PMU has accumulated experience on applying the EIA, EMP
and ECOP, and their performance was found satisfactory to the Bank.

      Besides, the Task Team will carry out following due-diligence activities for associated
facilities.
      - WWTP: Review of layout; flow chart; treatment capacity (design and actual); treatment
process technology; water quality and quantity of influent and effluent, compliance with the
domestic discharge standards; environmental monitoring activities for the WWTP (in terms of
odor, noise, WW, Sludge disposal, solid wastes, etc). If incompliance of discharge standard or
EHS risks are identified, corrective actions or recommendations on improvements will be
discussed with operational staff and the management of the WWTP and the utility company.
      - Landfill: Review of layout; landfill design; treatment capacity (design and actual - daily);
total service year (landfill closure requirement after full of service); environmental monitoring in
place (leachate treatment, emission of CH4, sludge disposal, noise, odor, ground water
monitoring, etc.); and operational manual. Any findings and recommendations will be shared
with the CMPUA (an organization which manages the landfill) and JICA experts for follow-up.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes          No          TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                        X
    According to the project proposal, and the initial screening conducted by the project team,
the proposed project is located in mid-tire ger areas of Ulaanbaatar City. The project will not
affect any protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical natural
habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                 X
    The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion or
degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                            X
    The Project will neither procure any pesticides nor cause an increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                             X
    The project will not adversely affect any sites with archeological, paleontological, historical,
religious, or unique natural values. In the event of chance find of culturally significant sites,
appropriate procedures to be followed will be included in the ESMF and the related clauses will
also be included in the related construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                      X
    Residents of the ger areas where the project is expected to take place are recent migrants
from rural areas. No indigenous peoples or communities are found in these areas based on our
experience in the previous projects (USIP2 and CLIP).
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
    The project components include: road upgrading, solid waste collection, flood protection,
water and sanitation. These will entail some land acquisition and possibly resettlement, resulting
in some temporary social disturbance but offering long term social benefits. The Involuntary
Resettlement OP 4.12 will be triggered.

      The first year of project implementation will focus on technical assistance and preparatory
studies such as mapping of drainage networks, developing procedures for maintenance of
drainage networks etc. The focus of the preparation will be on establishing the appropriate
procedures and methodologies for prioritizing investments and smaller scale investments for the
first year will also be identified. Therefore, prior to project appraisal, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), included in the overall Environmental and Social Management Framework
of the project will be prepared. The feasibility study will identify a long list of potential
investments for the first year. Consideration is currently being given as to whether or not to
include those investments that might trigger OP4.12 on a negative list (i.e., those will be
ineligible for the first year). A second option is that if those investments triggering OP 4.12 were
to be selected, a Resettlement Plan (RP) or abbreviated RP will be developed, according to the
ESMF.
      In addition, given that the project will have considerable social benefits and since
implementation would rely on participation of the ger area residents, a SIA, addressing issues
like participation, complaint handling mechanisms, gender, etc. will be carried out.

    The SIA and the RAP for USIP2 and the RPF for CLIP2 are good references for USIP3.
There has been no issue in the performance on application of the RAP and RPF.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                    X
   The project will not finance construction or rehabilitationof any dams as defined under this
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No         TBD
policy.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
    The project is not located in any international waterways as defined under the policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X
    The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 08/03/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Environment and Social Management Framework (including a Resettlement Policy
   Framework )             - October 2011

        RAP, EIA/EMP (TBD) If specific projects for the first year are identified.                                        -
       October 2011

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Toyoko Kodama                                               07/14/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             07/26/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                                    07/22/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
