                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                         RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/22/2013                                              Report No.: 80802
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Mongolia                              Project ID: P088816
Project Name: MN-Index-Based Livestock Insurance
Task Team Leader: Charles Annor-Frempong
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2005 Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2005
Managing Unit: EASCS                           Lending Instrument:
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (66%);Non-compulsory pensions
and insurance (20%);Central government administration (14%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (25%);Other social development (25%);Natural
disaster management (24%);Other Private Sector Development (13%);Regulation and
competition policy (13%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              7.75
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.26
         The Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative        0.56
         JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants                        1.32
                                                                         2.14
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To ascertain the viability of Index Based Livestock Insurance in Mongolia to reduce the
impact of livestock mortality for herders' livelihoods through (i) scaling up Index-Based
Livestock Insurance Program in Selected Aimags; and (ii) building the institutional
capacity and legal and institutional framework for the sustainability of the Index Based
Livestock Insurance Program

3. Project Description
The project includes the following components:

 Component 1: Index-based Livestock Insurance Program:
 The component will support data collection and data auditing to ensure the integrity of
the National Statistics Office (NSO) statistics; management of individual sales records
for herders; Risk assessment for the government and for insurance providers;
Management of the pre-paid indemnity pool; provision for the management of the
Contingency Debt Facility; monitoring, evaluation, and refinement for the program
implementation; and, preparation of all legal contracts to effectively implement the pilot.

  Component 2: Promotion and Public Awareness
  This component will support capacity building of key public institutions that play a key
role in implementation as well as awareness creation activities to educate key
stakeholders on the details of the insurance product and Index Based Livestock Insurance
(IBLI) pilot. These activities will target herders and herder groups, livestock providers
(eg veterinarians), parliamentarians, government officials, insurance companies,
commercial banks and other micro-finance institutions, NGOs and donor organizations.
Support would be provided for various media (written, radio, TV, workshops, face to
face) to increase awareness and understanding of the product.

  Component 3: Institutional Capacity Building
  The component supports capacity building of key public institutions that play a key role
in implementation focused on sustainability of institutional (including legal and
regulatory) arrangements and the capacity of stakeholders (NSO; insurance companies,
Financial Regulatory Commission, etc) Support will be provided for:
  •     Capacity building to strengthen livestock data systems;
  •     Capacity building to support development of an appropriate legal and regulatory
framework including the development of a livestock insurance law; and,
  •     Capacity building to FRC in developing appropriate regulatory framework for
IBLI, including providing assistance in developing prudential requirements and in
considering future regulations that may be needed to support IBLI
  •
  Component 4: Monitoring and Data Collection
  The objective of this component will be targeted at stakeholders during the project to
determine how the new products modify their behavior. The focus shall be research
oriented to, inter alia, if the modified behavior contributes to improved risk mitigation,
better access to bank and non-bank services, more collaboration among herders, and the
development of the insurance sector.
  Component 5: Project Management
  The component supports the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to enable the unit
function effectively and provide adequate management for implementation of the project.
Support will include operational costs for the PIU, technical assistance and training for
project staff, monitoring and evaluation of operational aspects of the pilot, information
dissemination, communication and auditing.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
National

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Songling Yao (EASCS)
   Mr Feng Ji (EASCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                       X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This project has never been involved in any other activity apart from studies, training,
study tours, awareness creation and indemnity payouts. Indemnity payouts are made
when insurers incur animal losses due to harsh weather conditions (dzud) once in a year.
The payout is a fraction of the total animal losses which is about 1/6th. The amount is not
enough to replace the entire losses incurred by an insurer; (ii) secondly, only a small
fraction of insurers receive payouts in any given year as all insurers do not incur losses in
a given year. The payouts therefore do not lead to any increase in animal numbers to
affect the environment. The insurance scheme as whole, therefore does not lead to
noticeable modifications of and increased herding - therefore no measurable physical
footprint.

 The proposed restructuring proposes to: (a) reallocate the Credit proceeds; (b) extend
the closing date from March 31, 2014 until March 31, 2016; and (c) amend the DCA to
enable: (i) the establishment of an equalization (multi-year) reserve; (ii) indemnity
payments to be made by the Participating Insurers rather than the PIU; and (iii) the
development of master policies- allow master policies to be entered into between
Participating Insurers and banks and financial institutions to reduce the administrative
load as the insurer would be covering many herders with one policy. The proposed new
restructuring activities will not likely pose a substantial change in the overall project risks
or warrant a change in the original environmental categorization or trigger new
safeguards policies. Therefore the categorization remain C.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:


3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project covers Khovskul and by implication the Tsaatans people (whose inclusion
triggered OP4.10 during the preparation of the additional financing). An IPPF was
prepared and is being implemented. As planned, prior consultations with Tsaatan
communities and between their representatives and insurance companies was held prior
to the introduction of the scheme in Khovskul. We have monitored project
implementation and have so far neither encountered any discriminatory practices nor
received complaints from the Tsaatan indigenous people.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Tsaatan are participating in the project by insuring livestock other than reindeer. The
issue of their participation as indicated in the IPPF was not related to reindeer, but to
  the understanding and accessibility of the Tsaatan to the project.

 To ensure that traditional Tsaatan communities have an equitable opportunity to
participate in IBLIP-AF, and to benefit from proposed project activities, the following
measures recommended in the IPPF, have been carried out:

 a. Free and informed consultation were held with Tsaatan communities as part of the
introduction of the project in their communities. The consultations were conducted with
the Tsaatan herders to explain the project objectives and design, and it was carried out in
a culturally appropriate manner to fully identify if they are interested in participating in
the project (i.e. to buy insurance, solicit their views and broad community support.

 b. The information provided to Tsaatan herders emphasized the following: (i) why
reindeer cannot be insured under the project; (ii) the principles of the project (the nature
of the index as a basis for making indemnity payments; (iii) the terms and conditions of
the insurance product; and (iv) the schedule for the insurance product (selling/buying
season, mortality
 period and indemnity payments).

 c. Discussion between Tsaatan representatives, insurance companies, and the project: to
develop specific operational modalities to benefit the Tsaatan's participation in the
 project. This modalities addressed: (i) how the Tsaatan can be contacted to provide
promotional and public awareness materials and training about the project; (ii) how
Tsaatan can make contact with insurance company agents to purchase the product;
 and (iii) how indemnity payments would be distributed to the Tsaatan in the event of a
payout.

 d. To take special actions to benefit Tsaatan community to maximize their opportunities
to participate in the project. A special promotional and public awareness campaign,
 based on the approaches established in the Project Implementation Manual, is being
implemented specifically targeting the Tsaatan to ensure they are fully aware of the
 product. Based on the above consultations, and monitoring by the PIU, appropriate
actions would be taken in the event that Tsaatan are not being contacted by insurance
companies to purchase the insurance. While it is understood that the decision to provide
insurance is a commercial decision made by insurance companies, and that their
participation and the participation of all beneficiaries is done on a voluntary basis, the
project has been proactive in maximizing the opportunity of Tsaatan to participate.

 Options used include: (i) the project organizing gatherings of Tsaatan to facilitate their
accessibility to insurance firms; and/or (ii) subsidizing travel and administrative costs of
insurance agents in order to reach Tsaatan communities (such subsidies, if used, would be
short term and phased out over several seasons once the market for insurance has been
established).

 Subsequent implementation support missions and reports have confirmed that the
Tsaatan people have been consulted, are aware and understand the priciples of their
participation with a number of them having subscribed to the scheme.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/02/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/21/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/13/2009
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The IPPF was prepared during the restructuring for the additional financing and is being
implemented. There is therefore no need to prepare another IPPF for the purposes of this
restructuring.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Charles Annor-Frempong   07/08/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Feng Ji                  08/14/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Songling Yao             08/21/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Mark R. Lundell          08/22/2013
  Comments:
