                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA1922

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        18-Jul-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Mongolia             Project ID:               P143406
 Project Name:                Integrated Budget Law Capacity Building (P143406)
 Task Team Leader:            Charles Annor-Frempong
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 29-Jul-2013             Estimated Board Date: 08-Aug-2013
 Managing Unit:               EASCS                Lending Instrument:       Specific Investment Loan
 Sector(s):                   Public administration- Other social services (100%)
 Theme(s):                    Decentralization (50%), Public expenditure, financial management and
                              procurement (30%), Municipal finance (20%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       0.96                     Total Bank Financing:     0.00
 Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     Borrower                                                                                     0.00
     Mongolia - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                                                  0.96
     Total                                                                                        0.96
 Environmental Category: C - Not Required
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?


 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The primary objective is to strengthen the understanding and capacity of local government
 administrative structures in implementing the Integrated Budget Law. Specifically, the project would
 enhance the skills of aimags’ and soums’ local government offices and community members to:
 (i) prepare annual budgets in a participatory manner with local communities in accordance with the
 IBL;
 (ii) ensure procurement competency of trainees is consistent with their procurement responsibilities
3. Project Description
To achieve the PDO, the project will be implemented through two inter- related components with
capacity building at the core. The first is the development of training manuals, followed by the
deployment of awareness creation and training of relevant agencies and individuals connected to the
implementation of the IBL.

Component 1. Preparation of Training Manuals (US$ 0.49 million)

The aim of this component is to develop manuals to be used in the training program. The project will
therefore support the services of consultants to prepare training modules for (i) participatory budget
preparation; (ii) community participation in budget preparation; (iii) procurement procedures and
contract management; (iv) community –based procurement methods; (v) municipal treasury audit; (vi)
financial management and public treasury audit; (vii) Good governance, accountability and performance
evaluation criteria; (viii) participatory community monitoring and evaluation; and any other relevant
material that will enhance the implementation of the IBL. In line with this, the training manual would
include a module on grievance redress mechanism which will outline a step-by-step system to receive
and address any issues, grievances or complaints form individuals, groups and even institutions and
organizations. The GRM module will follow the structure of the other modules but will include its
structure and operating mechanisms. The manuals will describe the entire processes and performance
evaluation criteria, including the objectives, the roles and responsibilities of individuals and agencies
and the certification processes required to undertake the tasks.

Component 2. Awareness Creation and Skills Development (US$ 0.47 million)
         The aim of this component is to create awareness among the generality of the people of
Mongolia and build the skills set of relevant agencies and individuals to implement the IBL. The
component will support the development and implementation of a comprehensive communication
strategy to address the needs of different agencies and groups/segments of the society to ensure that the
various communication channels (media, focus group, etc) are utilized for a better appreciation of the
IBL. The preparation of the communication strategy will be done as a matter of priority and will be
deployed prior to the training program. NGOs with considerable experience will be engaged to roll out
the communication strategy, especially among the herder community. The awareness creation will also
include sensitization on the existence of the GRM, its objectives and operationalization and its
applicability to all the other modules.
4.       The component will also support the hiring of local and where necessary international
consultants to undertake the training of UB Municipality, aimag and soum officials as well as the
community using the manuals prepared under component 1. It will also finance exchange of best
practices within the country, conduct workshops to share experiences and undertake study tours to
other countries. The training should develop the skills necessary for the participants to perform all the
activities in the training manuals and to allow them to understand their roles and responsibilities. The
consultants will also provide guidance to the soums and aimags to prepare their first cycle of budget and
where feasible at least one procurement. The satisfactory completion of the budget and the percentage of
people who pass the procurement test will be a condition for assessing the performance of the
consultants engaged for the training.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The primary location is the capital of Mongolia, Ulaanbaatar but implementation covers the entire
country’s 330 administrative districts

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Feng Ji ( EASCS )

6. Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01     No              The project focuses on capacity building of
                                                        local government administrative structures
                                                        in implementing the Integrated Budget Law
                                                        and will not finance any civil works and
                                                        construction activities. Therefore, there is
                                                        no negative environmental impact and no
                                                        any instrument is required.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No              There will be no impact on Natural Habitats
Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No              There will be no impact on forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                 No              No pesticides or any hazardous chemical
                                                        items will be purchased and be used in this
                                                        project
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No               There will be no impact on PCR.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           No              The project will not finance any physical
                                                        infrastructure, and focuses on capacity
                                                        building and regulatory reform. It is
                                                        classified as Category C and the project
                                                        does not involve any intervention
                                                        directed at any particular community. The
                                                        policy will therefore not be triggered
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     No              The project focuses on capacity building and
                                                        will not finance physical infrastructure or
                                                        any other activities that will require
                                                        resettlement or land acquisition
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No              N/A
Projects on International Waterways     No              N/A
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No              N/A

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A

B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
This is a category C project as it focuses on capacity building of local government administrative
structures in implementing the Integrated Budget Law. The project will not finance any civil works and
construction activities and therefore, there is no negative environmental or social impact and no
instrument is required

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Charles Annor-Frempong
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard   Date: July 3, 2013
Sector Manager:             Name: Mark Lundell     Date: July 3, 2013
