                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6246


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/07/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mongolia                            Project ID: P125863
Project Name: Community-led Infrastructure Development for the Urban Poor in
Ulaanbaatar Phase 2
Task Team Leader: Toyoko Kodama
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 6,        Estimated Board Date: May 3, 2011
2010
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (30%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
(30%);General transportation sector (20%);Roads and highways (20%)
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                          0.00
        Japan Social Development Fund                                     2.77
                                                                          2.77


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The development objective is to assist some 10,000 households of the most vulnerable among
the urban poor in ger areas of Ulaanbaatar where the majority of low-income households live
with very limited basic services, to generate additional income by scaling up community-led
infrastructure development activities piloted under a JSDF grant.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project will finance, but not be limited to, following five main components in ger areas of
Ulaanbaatar, where the majority of low-income households live with very limited basic services,
such as water supply, heating, and solid waste management.

 Component 1 - Community-led infrastructure development component
 This component would provide opportunities for generating employment and income for
vulnerable members of communities to meet immediate needs through construction of small
frastructure identified by the communities, such as foot bridges, walk paths, and short access
roads within the ger areas.

 Component 2 - Health improvement component
 This component would provide opportunities for generating employment and income for
vulnerable members of communities to meet immediate needs and improve hygiene through
employment in solid waste management and sanitation (both public and on-site sanitation)
works.

 Component 3 - Community safety component
 This component would provide opportunities for generating employment and income for
vulnerable members of communities to meet immediate needs and increase security in the
communities through construction of bus stop shelter and street light poles along the access roads
in the ger areas.

 Component 4 - Youth and adult component
 This component would provide opportunities for generating employment and income for
vulnerable members of communities to meet immediate needs and contribute to well-being of
young and elderly people through construction of information and recreation facilities for them.

 Component 5 - Training, monitoring, and management component.
 This component would finance training and workshops to learn about and build capacity for
community-based activities, such as project identification, project management, and operation
and maintenance. This component will also include monitoring, evaluation, and annual audit,
which will be done by experts.

D. Project location (if known)
Unplanned and unstructured settlement, so-called "ger areas," in Ulaanbaatar where most of low-
income households reside.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Project Management Unit (PMU),established under the Municipality of Ulaanbaatar, will be
in charge of implementation of safeguard policies. The PMU has been working on the Bank-
financed projects, and they are familiar with the safeguard policies of the Bank. The PMU has an
adequate capacity and experience to implement safeguard policies.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Songling Yao (EASCS)
   Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    Most of proposed activities are small scale, simple in design, and will significantly benefit
the community. The project will have some disturbance during contruction. The PMU has
prepared an Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) based on the guidance by the
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes            No      TBD
Environmental Specialist of the task team. The ECOP will be used as a guidance to mitigate
negative environmental impacts during construction for contractors and community workers. The
ECOP will be disclosed locally in local language and in infoshop of the World Bank prior to
appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
    The Bank’s Social Specialist conducted a screening using information from the Social
Assessment for an IDA-funded project (USIP2) which provided a thorough screening of
Indigenous Peoples (IP) around Ulaanbaatar, and concluded that there are no IP communities in
the project districts that meet the criteria of OP 4.10 so OP/BP4.10 is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
    The proposed activities under project do not involve any land acquisition or resettlement
except for the two km road rehabilitation. The improvement of the existing road which could
include road realignment may entail limited land acquisition and some limited house demolition
for road expansion. The PMU has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) based on
the guidance by the Social Development Specialist of the team. Because this is a community-
driven development project that finances relatively small infrastructure, the PMU will prepare a
abbreviated Resettlement Plan (RP) for possible land acquisition and resettlement relating to the
road and any other activities according to the RFP and submit to the Bank for review in
implementation stage. The project does not involve any voluntary land donation. The RPF will
be disclosed locally in local language and in infoshop of the World Bank prior to appraisal.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   06/01/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
   ECOP and RFP are already prepared, found acceptable for the Bank, and will be disclosed to
   the public. Since the proposed project is a small grant project, with an amount of 2.7 million,
   there is only one ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Ms Toyoko Kodama                                05/25/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan              06/01/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez                     05/31/2011
   Comments:
