                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6815


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/22/2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mongolia                              Project ID: P143406
Project Name: Integrated Budget Law Capacity Building
Task Team Leader: Charles Annor-Frempong
Estimated Appraisal Date:                      Estimated Board Date: November 21, 2012
Managing Unit: EASCS                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Public administration- Other social services (100%)
Theme: Decentralization (50%);Public expenditure, financial management and
procurement (30%);Municipal finance (20%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):             0
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                         0.00
        Mongolia - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                      1.00
        Financing Gap                                                    0.00
                                                                         1.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The primary objective is to strengthen the understanding and capacity of local government
administrative structures in implementing the Integrated Budget Law. Specifically, the project
would enhance the skills of aimags' and soums' local government offices and community
members to:
 (i) prepare annual budgets in a participatory manner with local communities in accordance
with the IBL;
 (ii) undertake public procurement in line with the public procurement law;
 (iii) monitor programs in accordance with the IBL Law; and,
 (iv) undertake financial management in accordance with the IBL.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Government of Mongolia passed the IBL in December 2011 and the Public Procurement
Law in October 2012 and intends to roll these out in January 2013. These Laws and their
practical implications for implementation are new to the local government entities. Although,
under the SLP2, some of them became acquainted with aspects of participatory budget planning,
procurement, contract management, auditing and financial management, some staff of the aimags
have been replaced while the upcoming local government elections will usher in new ones. In
addition, both Laws have introduced new measures and both old a new staff required to be
trained or retrained for the successful implementation of the IBL. In addition, community
members will also have to be aware of their responsibilities in order to participate in the planning
processes and demand accountability. Capacity building along these lines is envisaged under
SLP3, however, the project is expected to become effective sometime FYQ3 and even after that,
it will take some time for actual implementation to start as is usual with most projects.
Consequently, funding is required to bridge the gap between the time SLP3 takes off and the
implementation of IBL, particularly as capacity building should ideally start before the IBL is
rolled out. The proposed Swiss Trust Fund is therefore to support government, and in
particular to build capacity at the local authority level (aimag and soum) to the successful
introduction and operationalization of the IBL to be completed under SLP3. The intervention
proposed under the TF will empower an accountable sub-national governments’ to provide
services, responding to citizens needs in a new framework of the IBL.

 To achieve the PDO, the project will be implemented through two inter- related set of
components with capacity building at the core. The first is the development of training manuals,
followed by the deployment of awareness creation and training of relevant agencies and
individuals connected to the implementation of the IBL


 Component 1. Preparation of Training Manuals.

15.      The aim of this component is to develop manuals to be used in the training program. The
project will therefore support the services of consultants to prepare training modules for (i)
participatory budget preparation; (ii) community participation in budget preparation; (iii)
procurement procedures and contract management; (iv) community –based procurement
methods; (v) municipal treasury audit; (vi) financial management and public treasury audit; (vii)
Good governance, accountability and performance evaluation criteria; (viii) participatory
community monitoring and evaluation; and any other relevant material that will enhance the
implementation of the IBL. In line with this, the training manual would include a module on
grievance redress mechanism which will outline a step-by-step system to receive and address any
issues, grievances or complaints form individuals, groups and even institutions and
organizations. The GRM module will follow the structure of the other modules but will include
its structure and operating mechanisms. The manuals will describe the entire processes and
performance evaluation criteria, including the objectives, the roles and responsibilities of
individuals and agencies and the certification processes required to undertake the tasks.

Component 2. Awareness Creation and Skills Development

16.     The aim of this component is to create awareness among the generality of the people of
Mongolia and build the skills set of relevant agencies and individuals to implement the IBL. The
component will support the development and implementation of a comprehensive
communication strategy to address the needs of different agencies and groups/segments of the
society to ensure that the various communication channels (media, focus group, etc) are utilized
for a better appreciation of the IBL. The preparation of the communication strategy will be done
as a matter of priority and will be deployed prior to the training program. NGOs with
considerable experience will be engaged to roll out the communication strategy , especially
among the herder community. The awareness creation will also include sensitization on the
existence of the GRM, its objectives and operationalization and its applicability to all the other
modules.


17.      The component will also support the hiring of Local and where necessary international
consultants to undertake the training of UB Municipality, aimag and soum officials as well as the
community using the manuals prepared under component 1. It will also finance exchange of best
practices within the country, conduct workshops to share experiences and undertake study tours
to other countries. The training should develop the skills necessary for the participants to
perform all the activities in the training manuals and to allow them to understand their roles and
responsibilities. The consultants will also provide guidance to the soums and aimags to prepare
their first cycle of budget and where feasible at least one procurement. The satisfactory
completion of the budget and the percentage of people who pass the procurement test will be a
condition for the assessing the performance of the consultants engaged for the training.

D. Project location (if known)
Nationwide in the aimags, soums and community

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Although no safeguard policies are associated specifically with this project, the Bank safeguard specialists
could provide technical assistance to the implementing agency to strengthen its capacity for
environmental assessment and environmental management supervision.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Mr Feng Ji (EASCS)
   Zong-Chen Lin

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
This proposed project would involve technical assistance, training, and capacity building, and no negative
environmental impacts are expected

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   10/22/2012

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.


IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Charles Annor-Frempong                                     Oct 30, 2012
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                            Nov 1, 2012
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Mark R. Lundell                                            Nov 9, 2012
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
