                                                                                             66461


                             INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET 

                                     APPRAISAL STAGE 

                                                                       Report No.: (JDU will provide)


    Date prepared/updated : 1/11120124:19 PM

        I.       Basic Information

             A. Basic Data

Country: Morocco                                        Project ID: PI21917
                                                        Additional Project JD (if any):
Proiect Name: Municipal Solid Waste Carbon Finance Program
Task Team Leader: Jaafar Sadok Friaa
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 20 1~             Estimated Board Date: (ERPA Signature)
                                                        March 28, 2012
Managing Unit: MNSUR                                    Lending Instrument: nla
Sector: URBAN
Theme: Carbon Finance
IBRD Amount (US$m.):                               0
IDA Amount (US$m.):                       0
GEF Amount (US$m.):                       0
CPF Amount (US$m .):                      20 (estimated)*
Other financing amounts by source:        0
Borrower/recipient (US$m.):               0
Environmental Category :                  A
Is this a transferred project?                          Yes []                      No [XJ
Simplified Processing                                   Simple []                   Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and               Yes []       No [X]
Emergencies)                                                                                  I
      *The amount of financing shown In the table above IS only an estimate, based on historical CER
      prices in the last twelve months, and does not prejudge the outcome of the price negotiation
      between FEC and CPF. The effective contribution of the CPF will depend on the final price
      structure negotiated between the parties to the Emissions Reductions Purchase Agreement.

             B. Program Objectives

    The objective of this program is to support Moroccan municipalities develop carbon assets in the
    MSW sector, and access the carbon market.

    More specifically, the proposed program will: (i) support the development and registration of
    CDM program of activities (PoA); and (ii) allow the purchase of 2,000,000 Certified Emission
    Reductions (CERs), labeled in tons of C02-equivalent (tC02e), through an ERPA under the
    Bank-managed CPF.
                                                    -2­


These ERs will be generated through: (i) the avoidance of methane (CH4) emissions from MSW
landfills in Morocco, by promoting LFG capture and flaring, and/or electricity generation
projects; and (ii) the reduction of carbon dioxide (C02) emissions through the displacement of
fossil fuel-based electrical power generation.

         C. Project Description

The proposed demand-driven Carbon Finance Program provides a framework under which any
interested municipality, or group of municipalities, will be able to: (i) develop a COM project in
the municipal solid waste management sector according to COM rules and eligibility criteria; and
(ii) sell part of generated CERs to CPF as long as the COM project meets the Bank safeguard
policies.

Based on the progress made in implementing the PNOM (Programme National des Dechets
Menagers) - Landfill component, the proposed CF program will initially target municipalities
and sites included in the first phase of the PNOM (2008-2012)'. It is estimated that up to 16 LFG
projects, including those of the main Moroccan municipalities included in the first phase of the
PNOM, will join the program.

The program is expected to cover a total waste volume of approximately 3.38 million tons per
year, representing more than 50% of municipal solid waste collected in urban areas. The
emission reductions are on average estimated at 838,000 tC0 2e per year, amounting to 7.5 million
tC0 2e over nine years (2012-2020)2. The proposed ERPA will enable the Bank as trustee ofCPF
to purchase 2 mill ion tC0 2e. These figures only take into consideration the LFG capture and
flaring option 3.

The first landfill to be included in the PoA is located in Oum Azza, approximately IS km from
the capital city of Rabat. This landfill receives on average 1,400 tons of municipal solid waste per
day with an annual growth rate of 3%. The commissioning of the gas capture component of the
project is expected in early 2012 and should generate over I million tC0 2e over the period 2012­
2018 (first seven years, equivalent to the first COM crediting period). Over the 2012-2020
program, Oum Azza will generate about 1.5 million te0 2e.

  With reference to COM rules, the crediting period (CP) for the PoA is 28 years, starting in June 

  2012, the expected date for registration of the program. The crediting period for each CPA under 

  the PoA is seven years, renewable twice. The starting date for the crediting period of each CPA is 

  estimated on the basis of the commissioning date of the waste disposal activities in the new 

  landfills, allowing for at least three years for preparation. This period is required: (i) to allow 

. enough waste to pile up and start generating LFG; and (ii) to order, construct and install the LFG 

  capture and flaring systems.




 IThe COM portfolio was established on the basis of CPA projects identified by FEC during the preparation
   of the Program Idea Note (PIN) and updated taking into account the commissioning status of new
   landfills developed under the flfst phase of the PNDM (2008-2012).
2 According to the current CPF structure, no commitment on CER purchasing can be made after end-2020.
3 The feasibility of the electricity generation option would need validation during flaring stage of the LFG
  delivery.
                                                  -3­



        D. 	 Project Location and Salient Physical Characteristics Relevant to the Safeguard
             Analysis

The program will purchase emission reductions from landfill gas projects developed by Moroccan
municipalities located throughout the country. Only sanitary landfills supported under the PNDM
will be considered.

        E. 	 Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

Mr. Hocine Chalal, Lead Environmental Specialist, MENA Regional Safeguards Adviser
Mr. Andrea Liverani, Senior Social Development Specialist
Mr. Mohammed Bekhechi, Legal Environment Expert

        F. 	 Safeguard Policies Triggered

In recognition of the newly updated national EIA system in Morocco, the Bank and the
Government have agreed that EIAs for landfills selected under the Program will be carried out on
                                     4
the basis of the Moroccan system • To that effect, a Safeguards Diagnostic Review (SDR),
consistent with OP 4.00 related to Piloting the Use of Country Systems approach for Safeguards
has been prepared and disclosed to analyze the equivalence and acceptability of the Moroccan
system, and to identify the required gap filling measures. This SDR describes the applicable legal
and regulatory framework, as well as the mandates, responsibilities and roles of institutions and
stakeholders involved in EIA processes, outcomes and monitoring. In keeping with the
requirements of OP 4.00, the SDR reviewed the current institutional arrangements for ETAs and
more generally for environmental management. Finally, the SDR describes how, in practice, the
applicable procedures and guidelines are applied in the SW sector. Minor differences with
internationally accepted principles and practices have been identified and adequate gap filling
measures agreed upon between the Bank and the implementing agency.

The team has reviewed the social impacts of the proposed operation and concluded that no land
acquisition will be necessary for those landfills from which CERs will be generated. Also, it was
decided with the implementing agency and government authorities that:

    - The program will finance only those CERs generated from landfills for which the land is
      fully owned by the operating agency and will not accept projects for which the land tenure
      has not been settled or for which there are pending contentious claims.

    - The program will not accept projects for which a social plan would not have been prepared
      and agreed upon. These social plans will address the issue of potential job losses by
      municipal employees (in case the private sector is contracted to take over MSW
      management) as well as the issue of waste pickers who risk losing their lodging and/or
      sources of livelihood if they lose access to landfills.

The matrix below summarizes the safeguard policies triggered for the proposed CF Program.




4 This review was facilitated since the Bank already had good knowledge of the Moroccan system through
the preparation of a 2009-20 I0 SDR in the context of the Qum Errbia Sanitation Project.
                                                        -4­


Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                           Yes     No        OPIBP 4.00
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                                            X
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                       X
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                            X
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                     X
Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                               X
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                         X
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                    X            N/A:>
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                             X            N/A




         II.      Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Tbeir Management

               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

   1.   Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
   and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: The proposed
   Carbon Finance Program will not finance any infrastructure but wi II purchase part of the Carbon
   Emission Reductions generated through investment to be undertaken by COM project developers.
   All COM projects eligible under this program will consist of equipping sanitary landfills with
   LFG recovery systems (flaring and/or energy generation). Given the nature of such COM
   projects, neither major safeguard issues nor irreversible impacts are foreseen.

   2.     Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
   activities in the project 'area: The COM program will offer several environmental benefits. The
   destruction of LFG will improve the quality of the local and global environment, and contribute·
   to Morocco's climate change mitigation efforts. In particular, the program will result in: (i) the
   reduction of GHG emissions; (ii) the reduction of air pollution arising from landfills; (iii) the
   control of safety hazards and public health risks associated with municipal waste disposal in
   open, uncontrolled dumps; (iv) the minimization of LFG migration and associated risks of fires
   and explosions in landfill neighboring areas; and (v) the displacement of fossil fuel from
   electricity generation by the use of renewable source, namely biogas from municipal waste.

   The COM program will offer several social benefits. The main expected social benefits of the
   proposed CF Program are: (i) quality of life improvement for the concerned communities;
   (ii) capacity-building for the development of clean technology projects in Morocco;
   (iii) awareness raising in sustainable development practices; and (iv) creation of short- and long­
   tenn employment opportunities to install, operate and maintain LFG systems.

   Considering the activities envisioned, COM projects will be confined to the physical boundary of
   the targeted sanitary landfill and the LFG collection and usage system.




   5   OPIBP 7.50 and OPIBP 7.60 are not eligible for piloting under OP 4.00.
                                                -5­


3.    Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts: NI A

4.     For those safeguards to be addressed through OP/BP 4.00, characterize in general terms
the extent to which borrower systems are equivalent to the Objectives and Operational Principles
of OP 4.00, Table Ai. For those safeguards to be addressed through conventional OPlBPs,
identify the reason for the decision to not apply OP 4.00 (e.g. absence of equivalence and/or
acceptability report).

The Safeguard Diagnostic Report (SDR) prepared for this program analyzed the legislation for
environmental impacts in detail and confirmed the conclusions of the previous SDR prepared and
discussed with Moroccan stakeholders for the Oum Er Rbia Sanitation Project. The SDR
prepared for this program highlighted a substantial qualitative shift of the Moroccan system.
Furthermore, for the MSW landfill projects included in the program, the State Secretary for Water
and Environment (Secretariat d'Etat Charge de l'Eau et de l'Environnement, SEEE) has
developed comprehensive EIA guidelines and made significant progress toward enhancing the
public consultation process. In order to fulfill the requirements of OP 4.00 and ensure the
equivalence between the Bank safeguards and the Moroccan EIA system for this program, SEEE
has been asked to approve the EIA guidelines for MSW landfill projects and improve the
procedures for public consultationS. The Bank reviewed these guidelines in April 20 II and
evaluated them as satisfactory. In order to improve them further, and achieve the fuJi
equivalence, the Bank asked SEEE to elaborate on their operationalization. Moreover, the Bank
asked to ensure that the EIA of each MSW landfill should document the public consultation
undertaken both during EIA preparation and before its approval by the competent authorities.

5.      Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues to identify
any significant gap-jilling measures necessary to fulfill the conditions for application of OP 4.00.
Provide an assessment ofborrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The Safeguards Diagnostic Report included a detailed analysis of the regulatory and institutional
framework for EIA in the SW sector. Most of this framework has been successfully enhanced
following the approval of the PNDM. Results to date are significant and are certainly due to a
clear and strong Government commitment, supported by the Bank through a programmatic series
of two SW DPLs. The challenge for the near future is to ensure the sustainability of such
improved framework as well as a robust practice. The SDR identified minor gaps to ensure such
sustainability and described suitable gap filling measures. Such measures are related mainly to
the need for improving public consultations and adopting sound procedures to monitor
environmental impacts.

The measures to fill the gaps identified in the SDR are fully integrated in this program . FEC, as
the implementing agency of the program, wi II have the responsibil ity to ensure their
implementation and to report regularly to the Bank within the framework of the ERPA signed
with the CPF. More specifically, in order to fill the gaps of the current EIA system in Morocco,
FEC has committed to taking the following measures.

Gap filling measures for the equivalence ofthe Moroccan system with OP 4.00
(i) 	 SEEE will approve the guidelines to prepare the EIAs for the MSW landfill projects
       included in the program, following the results of the SDR; and
(ii) 	 the final EIA report for each MSW landfill project will document the public consultation
       process undertaken both during EIA preparation and before its approval by the competent
       authorities.
                                                 -6­



Gap filling measures for the acceptability o[the Moroccan system with OP 4.00

(i) 	   Prepare a study, complementary to the ElA developed by the operator of the Oum Azza
        landfill, detailing the impact of the projected collection and flaring of landfill gas [a full
        ElA will be prepared as soon as the project developer decides to proceed with electricity
        generation using the landfill gas collected]. Such a study should be evaluated by the ETA
        national committee;
(ii) 	 cover the social dimension of each project, both in general terms as well as with specific
        reference to the COM component (methane capture and flaring or use to energy
        generation), analyzing the impact on the quality of life of potentially affected groups (e.g.,
        local residents, workers, waste pickers);
(iii) 	 FEC should adopt a formal procedure to review COM project applications, regarding the
        compliance of these applications with the requirements of the Moroccan ElA system.
        Moreover, FEC should set up an in-house service to assist the applicants (municipality or
        operator) ensuring they have addressed regulatory requirements as well as above gap
        filling measures, as applicable, through the ElAs they will submit; and
(iv) 	 SEEE should adopt a formal procedure to track and monitor the impacts in each landfill
        project, based on the format described in the SOR.


6.      Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, including the Safeguard Diagnostic Review (SDR) with an
emphasis on potentially affected people:

A public consultation took place on June 29, 2011, in Rabat with the participation of 80
representatives from concerned governmental entities, local authorities and municipalities, NGOs,
consulting firms, and the private sector. The consequent feedback was incorporated into the final
SOR The final SOR was posted on the FEC website and by the Bank InfoShop for public
disclosure, respectively, August 19, 20 II, and August 26, 20 II.

Social Safeguards

The projects to be considered in this program will not entail negative social impacts as per OP
4.12 because they will take place on sites or facilities having satisfied the screening criteria as set
forth in the PNOM program. For instance, the landfill projects likely to benefit from this carbon
finance program are the projects that would have been supported by the PNOM program and, as
such, that would have satisfied the following pre-conditions:

        • 	 Submission of a full ElA, based on ToRs that have been reviewed by the Bank and that
            include, in particular, proper consultation with concerned stakeholders.
        • 	 Submission of a social inclusion plan taking into account potential job losses by
            individuals previously working in the solid waste management department of the
            municipalities, as well as livelihoods of waste pickers.
        • 	 No land acquisition will be required for the implementation of the target COM projects.

As an illustration of how these aspects are taken into consideration, the example of the Rabat
Oum Azza Landfill is useful. This landfill, managed by the company Pizzorno, has established a
partnership with a group of waste pickers who used to operate under very appalling conditions in
the old landfill of Akreuch . This partnership, establ ished through the intermediation of an NGO,
has allowed the waste pickers to organize themselves as a cooperative and operate a sorting
                                                  -7­


   facility provided to them by the company Pizzorno located on the premises of the new landfill.
   The waste pickers have, so far, been able to improve significantly their revenue, occupational
   health and safety conditions related to their occupation and their overall quality of life.


           B.   Disclosure Requirements Date

   Safeguard Diagnostic Review (Equivalence and Acceptability Report):
                                                                               Consultation on June 29,
     Dates of "in-country" consultation and disclosure                          20 II, and Disclosure on
                                                                                    August 19,20 II
     Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 August 26, 20 II
                                                                               The proposed program is
                                                                                not a lending operation.
     For category A projects, date of distribution of the PID to the Executive      According to CF
     Directors                                                                  operations guidelines, it
                                                                                will not be submitted to
                                                                                   Board for approval
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: NI A



           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when
              the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OPIBP/4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?      Yes [ ]       No [ ]      N/A [
                                                                       X]
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
credit/loan?
OPIBP 4.00 - Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard
Issues in Bank-Supported Projects
Did the Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit (QACU) and the               Yes [X]  No [ ]  N/A [
ESSD and International Law Practice Group (LEGEN) review and               ]
a2jJrove the Safeguard Diagnostic Review report?
OPIBP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of Yes [ ]   No [ ]  N/A [
critical natural habitats?                                                 X]
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation
measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                 Yes [ ] No [ ]  N/A [
                                                                       X]
Is a separate PMP required?                                            Yes [ ]       No [ ]      N/A [
                                                                       Xl
                                                    -8­


If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards
specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP requirements included in
project design? If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 ­ Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to physical cultural         Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [
resources?                                                                 X]
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples PlanIPlanning Framework (as              Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous        X]
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process          Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?                                  X]
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector
Manager review and approve the plan/policy framework/process
framework?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and        Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [
constraints been carried out?                                              X]
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it
include~rovisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                       Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [
                                                                           Xl
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?         ,
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [
                                                                           X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the
memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?

OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the   X]
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared
                                                    -9­


  Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the
  OP?
  Tbe World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World           Yes [X]        No [ ]       N/A [
  Bank's Infoshop?                                                            ]
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in      Public consultation held June 29,
  a form and fanguage that are understandable and accessible to project-      20 II, and French version SD R
  affected groups and local NGOs?                                             disclosed on August 19, 20 II
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional                  Yes [X]        No [ ]      N/A [
  responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures           ]
  related to safeguard policies?
I Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the        N/A
  project cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the        Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the          Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


             D. Approvals

 Submitted by:                    1\                      Name                                   Date
 Task Team Leader:             (t   Mr. Jaafar Sadok Friaa     W.                          January 11,2012
 Environmental Special ist:        .Mr. Gael Gn!goi~ /         ~                          January 11,2012
 Social Development Specialist: ~ Mr. Colin Scott              L, - r LJI? \
                                                           ~


                                                                                          January 11,2012
 Additional Environmental and/or ~
 Social Development
 Specialist(s):

 Approved by:                                             /J
 Regional Safeguards                   Mr. HocineChal~                                     January 11,2012
 Coord inator:
   Comments:                                      ~            /i\   ~
 Sector Manager:                       Mr. Franck Bousquet     lfh....1't .
                                                                ,., ,                      January I I, 2012
   Comments:
