                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/27/2011                                    Report No.: AC5935
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Morocco                             Project ID: P122028
Project Name: MA-Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar Power
Task Team Leader: Silvia Pariente-David
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 26, 2011      Estimated Board Date: October 18, 2011
Managing Unit: MNSSD                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme: Climate change (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           200.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Clean Technology Fund                                      197.00
                                                                    197.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objective of the proposed project is to support MASEN, the Moroccan
public solar agency, in initiating the development of the 500 MW Ouarzazate CSP power
plant, by financing the first phase (160 MW gross) through a public private partnership
(PPP), to increase power generation from concentrated solar power and mitigate GHG
emissions and local environmental impact.

 This project is intended to contribute to the higher-level objective of helping to develop
a globally-available competitive non-carbon energy source. It is quintessentially a
strategic demonstration project designed to spur replication, and is a flagship for the
Clean Technology Fund’s overarching goal of transformational impact on climate change
mitigation.

3. Project Description
The proposed project will support: (i) the formation of a PPP between MASEN and a
competitively selected private partner to develop a 160 MW gross (143 MW net)
concentrated solar parabolic trough plant, the first phase of the Ouarzazate 500 MW
complex; and (ii) the funding during the first 4-5 years of the gap between the costs of
CSP generation and conventional fossil fuel-fired generation, even if the GoM faces
momentary financial difficulties that would make budgetary support problematic.
 The project#s first component ("PPP Component") is a PPP for the construction of a
power plant 10 km east-northeast of Ouarzazate. This site is well suited for the
development of CSP because of its excellent solar resources, the availability of water,
easy access, and the proximity of a robust power grid to transport the electricity to
markets in Morocco and abroad for later phases. The construction is likely to start in
2012 for commissioning mid-2014. In light of the results of the prequalification and the
market response, the first-phase plant will use solar parabolic trough technology with 3
hours storage. Later phases will remain open to any proven solar technologies. The
Associated Facilities (or Common Infrastructures) required for the functioning of the
CSP plant are within the scope of the project, but are not financed by the Bank.
 In the project’s second component ("Incremental Cost Support (SICS) Component"), the
World Bank loan will be used to finance the difference in the prices at which MASEN
buys from the SPC and sells to ONE the kilowatt-hours produced by Ouarzazate I. GoM
has in principle committed, through the renewable law and the MASEN-GoM
convention, to cover this difference from the State budget. At the request of MASEN,
WB is offering a loan to cover the additional generation cost of CSP when the GoM
decides to resort to this financing, instead of state financing, when economic and fiscal
conditions warrant it. This solution might provide temporary comfort to private investors
that funds will be available to MASEN to pay the high CSP price agreed in the PPA even
when GoM faces budgetary pressures.
 The project triggers the World Bank Environmental Assessment Policy OP 4.01 and OP
4.12 due to the presence of land acquisition. MASEN has prepared a Framework
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (FESIA) in order to inform the process of
integration of environmental and social concerns in the design and preparation of the
project. This FESIA has been reviewed by the Bank and other co-financiers. The first
version of the FESIA has been disclosed on January 13th, 2011 and the final version of
the FESIA has been disclosed in-country on July 21st and on World Bank’s Info-shop on
July 25th 2011.
 The Framework ESIA scope covers the different technologies (CSP parabolic trough,
CSP Power Tower, photovoltaic, etc) that MASEN considers to develop in the
Ouarzazate solar complex. The FESIA includes a Framework Environmental and Social
Management Plan (FESMP). The FESMP includes institutional settings, general
mitigation measures and monitoring plan for the potential impacts expected from project
activities during construction and operation stages.

  The project will be implemented by a special purpose vehicle (Solar Project Company -
SPC) to be created as a partnership between MASEN and a competitively selected private
investor/developer with strong financial, technical and project management and
implementation capability. As soon as it is established, the SPC will carry out a project-
level Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) with appropriate mitigating
and monitoring measures. The capabilities of the counterpart entity that will enter into the
SPC will be fully assessed during the selection which will be carried out by MASEN with
the assistance of reputable technical and transaction advisors on the basis of the
requirements mentioned above. The process will be supervised and the evaluation report
submitted to the Bank and other donors/financiers on a no objection basis.

  Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) for the associated facilities
(transmission lines, water supply) and the corresponding Environmental Management
Plans will be carried out by the respective National Agencies (Office National de
l'Electricité, Office National de l'Eau Potable). All the above-mentioned ESIAs will be
prepared in accordance to the World Bank's Operational Policies and will be cleared by
the World Bank.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The site, a 2,500 ha green field area situated 10 km E-NE of Ouarzazate, is well suited for
solar projects, especially for development of CSP, because of:
 *      Excellent solar resources. There is a full 1-year in-site weather file that includes
solar insolation data. A second in site measurement station was added in September 2010.
Data collected since February 2010 indicate that the site DNI is significantly higher than
typical site qualification limits and used in the preliminary modelling. This conclusion is
based on: (a) comparisons of the Ouarzazate site data with insolation data from the
Andasol site in Granada, Spain and the Solar Energy Generating Systems (SEGS) site in
the Mojave Desert, California, USA; and (b) an analysis of 30 years of satellite data.
These analyses indicate that 2010 was an atypical year.
 *      Availability of water in case wet cooling is required. Although the area around
Ouarzazate is desertic, a reservoir with a capacity of 480 Mm3 is located approximately
10 km south of the city. Therefore, the option envisaged by MASEN for the first phase is
based on wet cooling but as specified in the RFP, entirely or primarily dry-cooled
systems would be accepted by MASEN if they are proposed by bidders.
 *      Accessibility. The site is accessible via unpaved tracks originating from the paved
N10 road that runs from the port city of Agadir, approximately 350 km from the Site,
through Ouarzazate. The Agadir port is located at a relatively short distance and could be
used to import and transport heavy equipment from abroad to avoid the Atlas Mountains.
Use of the Casablanca port would require crossing the Atlas Mountains.
 *      Proximity to the power grid. The existing grid and planned reinforcements by
ONE will allow evacuation of the full capacity of the power plant at peak output
conditions. Furthermore, concentrating solar power technologies can be fitted with
thermal energy storage capabilities allowing the optimization of peak output to meet the
network carrying capacity within reasonable limits.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Andrea Liverani (MNSSO)
   Mr Gael A. Gregoire (MNSEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
*       OP/BP 4.01
  During construction, the major impacts will be regular construction impacts such as
waste, noise, to be managed in the same way as similar impacts for large construction
projects (waste disposal, risk of wildlife disturbance, etc.);

 During operation, the key potential adverse environmental impacts of the proposed
project are expected to be:
 -      Water use in a desert environment, with the water to be provided from a nearby
reservoir. It has been estimated that total water consumption would amount to 6 million
cubic meters per year in the worst case scenario (500 MW with wet cooling), to be
compared to the 180 million cubic meters withdrawn from the dam for agricultural use.
The key mitigation measure, should water availability become a problem would be dry
rather than wet cooling techniques for the CSP plant.
 -      The use of transfer fluids in the CSP plant, and associated potential leakage or
anti-freeze or rust inhibitors. Safety measures against such release through relevant
components being leak-proof, regularly maintained, cleaned and periodically replaced by
appropriately trained staff.
 -      Thermal and/or chemical pollution of local water ways from cooling water and
other waste water. Appropriate mitigation measures would include wastewater
management practices (e.g. effluent treatment techniques to remove or reduce
concentrations of contaminants from disposal water), monitoring of discharge water (e.g.
such as eutrophication, effects on fish or other aquatic fauna, oxygen contents of local
waterways etc.), regular analysis of wastewater composition (temperature, chemical
content, etc.), and compliance with regulated pollutant emission levels of liquid effluents
(e.g. local and/or national regulations or international standards in default of those).

  -    Fire risk from solar converters at high temperatures, including risk of out-gassing
from panel components. Responses would include measures against overheating
(coolants) and relevant warning / monitoring systems.
  While it was envisaged at project launch that OP 4.04, 4.11, OP 4.37 and 7.50 could
have been triggered, the FESIA concluded that these policies are not triggered by the
project since:
  - There are no remarkable natural habitats in the close vicinity of the site. The project
site of the solar complex is recognized as being of low patrimonial value. None of the
flora species found at the project site is considered threatened or rare. Several protected
natural habitats have been identified in the region, the closest being the Mansour Ed
Dahbi dam lake, located 6 km south of the site chosen by MASEN. The FESIA
concluded that it is unlikely that the proposed operation would significantly convert or
degrade any of these natural habitats.
  - There are no physical cultural resources in the Municipality of Ghassate, with the
exception of a few sepulchral sites (marabouts, zaouias) that are unlikely to be affected
by the project;
  - While it had originally been envisaged that a new dam might be constructed in relation
with the proposed operation, the possibility has been abandoned;
  - The proposed project does not involve international waterways.

 *     OP 4.12 and social aspects

  -     The project does not involve any physical or economic displacement of local
populations. OP 4.12 was triggered precautionarily to verify the voluntary nature of the
land acquisition process necessary to the project and its full alignment with Moroccan
legislation. The project required the acquisition of 2500 hectares (Ha) of collective land
owned by the Aït Oukrour Toundout community (out of a total area of 64000 Ha). The
land is uncultivated and of little or no economic value. The transaction was carried out
following Moroccan standard procedures for similar types of voluntary land transactions
between a local community and a public agency. These procedures have included the
following steps: a) setting of purchase price by a Commission of Experts; b) granting of
required authorization; c) signing of notarized decision regarding land sale; and d)
transfer of property right. The FESIA describes the process through which, for the
purpose of the project, MASEN concluded the acquisition. A Land Acquisition Plan
(LAP) describes the detailed procedure used (also in Annex 3 of the PAD). The LAP
includes, in particular, the following documents: a) copy of the land price committee
determination of the price of the land; b) copy of the written agreement by the
community of the Ait Oukrour Toundout on the sale and conditions of the transfer of the
land; c) copy of the authorization of the Supervisory Board about the transaction; d)
ONE/MASEN/Community tripartite agreement on land acquisition. A Social
Development Plan is being developed through a participatory approach involving
MASEN, the Ministry of Interior, and the local community and will include measures in
the areas of education, sanitation, job creation and rural roads rehabilitation. The local
population (the Ait Oukrour Toundout community and more specifically the Tasselmant
village) took part in local consultations organized by MASEN as part of the LAP process
and the preparation of the Social Development Plan.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The development of the power plant is expected to have a positive impact on the local
population and the local economy by providing both direct (and indirect) sources of
employment during the construction and production phases and by contributing to the
development of tourism (including study tours). The proposed project will also contribute
to climate change mitigation by avoiding greenhouse gases emissions of 240,000 tons of
CO2 equivalent per year.

 Some specifics potential indirect and/or long term impacts depend on the technology:
 -     Increased amount of impervious surfaces ;
 -     Increased water consumption (as mentioned above).
 -     Risk associated with the presence of fossil fuel
 -     Increased fire risk due to the presence of oil at high temperature (400 ° C)
 Various generic mitigation measures have been identified in the FESIA and will be
confirmed in the technology specific ESIA that will be carried out by the SPC.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The site has been selected taking into account environmental considerations (availability
of water in case wet cooling is required, accessibility, proximity to the power grid).
Different technologies are envisaged and described in the framework environmental and
social impact assessment (FESIA). Advantages and disadvantages of each of these
technologies are presented in the document.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the purpose of this project MASEN has commissioned a Framework Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment in April 2010 that has been disclosed in draft form both in
country and at the Infoshop on January 13, 2011. The FESIA has been disclosed in-
country on July 21st and on World Bank's Info-shop on July 25th 2011. The FESIA was
undertaken in a consultative manner and includes a Framework Environmental and Social
Management Plan (FESMP). The framework ESIA will be followed by a project and
technology specific ESIA, to be carried out by the SPC once it is established. The bidding
documents will include clauses that will mandate the SPC to prepare such a project and
technology specific ESIA before finalizing the detailed design of the facility. The project
specific ESIA will include a detailed and project specific Environmental and Social
Management Plan to ensure proper follow-up of the FESIA/FESMP.

 Mitigation measures: The FESIA specified several appropriate mitigation measures,
environmental monitoring plans, institutional arrangements and training requirements,
together with cost estimates for implementation of the mitigation measures. Major
mitigation measures include limitation of water consumption, reduction of risks of
pollution, treatment of effluent, protection of biodiversity. Several positive impacts are
also foreseen, including avoided greenhouse gases emissions of 240,000 tons of CO2
equivalent per year
 The implementation and monitoring of the Framework Environmental and Social
Management Plan (FESMP) will be the responsibility of MASEN. Additional supervision
and monitoring of implementation will be ensured through Moroccan environmental
regulations on ESIAs, which requires formal approval by the authorities. MASEN will
designate a Safeguards coordinator and hire environmental and social management
specialists if needed (MASEN is a newly created entity that has no specific experience
with World Bank’s Safeguards policies.). MASEN will work closely with the SPC to
ensure that all environment and social impact mitigation measures including occupation,
health and safety guidelines are mainstreamed into the project design; monitored and
supervised.
 The SPC will also include a Safeguards Coordinator that will have direct responsibility
for implementation of the Environment, Health and Safety measures for the site during
construction and operation. The SPC will be responsible for preparing a specific
environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) that will include a detailed
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). The SPC Safeguards Coordinator
will, inter alia, prepare a monthly Health, Safety and Environment report during the
construction phase.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Consultation and Feedback: Before and during the preparation phase, several
meetings took place and have been attended by representatives of the local population,
local authorities, local representatives of the various Ministries, utility companies and
other affected organizations to discuss the proposed project, even before the World Bank
was involved in the project. At that time, a draft FESIA had already been prepared by the
client. A formal public consultation meeting on the draft FESIA has been organized on
November 3rd, 2010 in Ouarzazate and confirmed that the proposed operation is widely
supported by local officials and community representatives. The proceedings of this
meeting are included in the FESIA report. The main comments made during the meeting
are related to natural risks (wind, seism), water use, access road, economic and social
impacts. Additional consultations will be organized during the preparation of the specific
ESIAs. At that stage, more relevant and detailed information will be available, including
but not limited to a conclusion of the ESIAs and a discussion of recommended project
specific mitigating activities and plans, to ensure more meaningful consultations.
 Disclosure: A draft FESIA and LAP were reviewed during January 2011 and sent to the
Infoshop on January 13, 2011. The final version of the FESIA and LAP were disclosed
in-country on July 21 and on World Bank’s Info-shop on July 25 2011. Specific ESIAs
that will be conducted by the SPCs and national agencies in charge of water and
electricity will also be subject to disclosure (in country and at the Infoshop).



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/10/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/12/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/13/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              07/26/2011
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/10/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/12/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/13/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process           Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector     Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s    Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a    Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Silvia Pariente-David                     07/25/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gael A. Gregoire                          07/25/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Andrea Liverani                           07/25/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Hocine Chalal                              07/25/2011
  Comments: Lene Lind, Social Reviewer
  Maged Hamed, Env. Reviewer
Sector Manager:                    Mr Jonathan D. Walters                        07/26/2011
  Comments:
