                              INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                             CONCEPT STAGE


                                                                                     Report No.:   80884
Date ISDS.
                               03-April-20 13
 Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
         c Project Data
  A. Basi'
                                                                        '
Country:                       Kingdom of Morocco       Project ID:                   Pl44500
Project Name:                  Morocco Micro finance   Developm~nt    Project
Task Team Leader:              Teymour AbdelAziz
Estimated Appraisal Date: 25-Jan-2013                   Estimated Board Date:         28-Mar-20 13
Managing Unit:                 MNSFl                    Lending Instrument:           Specific Investmen~ Grant
Sector:                        Private Sector Development (100%)
Theme:                         Private Sector Development, Micro and small
                               finance
Financing (in USD Million)
                                                                                                                 -·

  FinanCing Source                                                                                          Amount
  Borrower                                                                                              I
                                                                                                               0.00
  MENA Transition Fund                                                                                          6.8
      J

  Total                                                                                                         6.8
Environmental Category           C- Not Required
Is this a Repeater project?      No -


B. Project Objectives
This project objective is to support the develop!llent of the microfinance sector, with a view to creating jobs
through facilitating access to finance to the poorest. This objective will be attained through providing a
combination of technical assistance at several levels: (i) at the level of the national microfinance association,
(b) at the level of governance and regulatory authorities overseeing the microfinance sector, and (c) at'the level
of the microfinance institutions themselves and their clients.


C. Project Description
The project is comprised of six components: (I) Strengthening the capacity of the microfinance sector
association (FNAM); (II) Modernizing the legal, regulatory and governance framework for mi~rofinance, (III)
Upgrading the capacity of the microcredit associations and microenterprises; (IV) Developing a new funding
approach for MFis; (V) National financial inclusion strategy diagnostic and (VI) Project Management,
Monitoring· and Evaluation.



                                                                                                        1
     Component 1. Strengthening the capacity of the microfinance sector association (FNAM) (USD 0.9
     million).

    ·This component aims to reinforce the capacity of the National Federation ofMicrocredit Associations of
      Morocco (FNAM), a key player in the restructuring and development of the Microfinance sector in Morocco.
      FNAM needs to be strengthened in order to rise to the challenge of developing the sector so that it can become

I     more mature. It has been identified by the Moroccan Government as the main vehicle for implementing the
      national strategy for microfinance development in Morocco. As a result, the project' will assist the FNAM in
      meeting its members' expectations, i.e. act as the steering body through centralizing information and

I
j
I
      disseminating studies, act as an intermediate body between state regulating bodies and microfinance
      institutions, develop.and deliver services that address member's needs/issues, and provide support across all
    · levels and in all regions and districts in the Country: FNAM plays the role of an intermediary between
      Micro finance Institutions and key stakeholders of Micro finance services of Morocco,. including the
      Government, Central Bank, Donors, Development partuers, financiers, investors and clients of micro finance
      services. ·

    Component 2: Modernizing the legal, regulatory and governance framework for microfinance (USD 1
    million).

    This component aims to support activities contributing to the modernization of the legal, regulatory and
    governance framework of the microfinance sector. This component will be developed and implemented in
    close collaboration and coordination with BAM. It is composed of the following two subcomponents:

                   Sub-component 2.1: Legal and regulatory framework for MFls. This sub-component aims to
                   support activities contributing to the modernization of the legal and regulatory framework for
                   microfinance, as well as the development of governance and risk management standards for the
                   microcredit sector: establish a tax policy adapted to the specific needs of the MFis, review the
                   cap on borrowings for clients of MFis, reviews and adapt the solvency and liquidity tatios of the
                   MFis, and strengthen the financial reporting and regulatory oversight of BAM over MFis.
                   Improving the use of judicial and non-judicial (arbitration, mediation) means for recovering
                   unpaid loans will also be a key activity of the project under this component.

                   Sub-component 2.2: Governance Framework ofMFls. This sub-component will support the
                   establishment of new governance standards specific to the MFis. BAM will benefit from this
                   sub-component in order to set new risk control reporting standards and set new rules on the
                   management and board of directors of the MFis.

    Component. 3: Upgrading the capacity of the micro credit associations and inicroenterprises (USD 3.2
    million).

    This component focuses on activities aimed at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of microcredit
    associations, and strengthening the capacity of microenterprises, with an emphasis on smaller MFis. These
    activities will be developed and implqnented in close collaboration and coordination with FNAM. The
    following sub-components are included:

                   Sub-component 3.1: Operational efficacy: Activities supported will include a diagnosis and
                   assistance to upgrade the distribution networks of MFis, their information systems, human
                   resources I internal organization, processes and procedures. In order to lower the operating costs

                                                                                                            2
                ofMFis in this respect, the project will encourage the mutualization of back offices and other
                support functions among MFis.                                ·

               Sub-component 3.2: Product development: Activities supported will aim at assisting the MFis in
               expending their product offering, including in the field of micro-insurance, microcredit, money
               transfer, and allow customization of the product offering among MFis. Products for developing
               non-financial services will also be developed under this sub-component.

               Sub-component 3. 3: Targeting of clients: Activities will include the development of scorecards
               and rating tools for MFis, the adaptation of commercial policies to regional and demographic
               particularities, and improving the measure of impact of micro finance on poverty and
               bancarization.


Component 4: Developing a new funding approach for MFis (USD 0.5 million)

This component aims to support activities which would inform policymakers, regulators, supervisors and MFis
on how the sector can diversify and strengthen its funding sources to ensure its financial sustainability over the
medium and longer term. This activity is composed of the following sub-components:

               Sub-component 4.1: Promoting the diversification offunding sources. Activities will include
               implementing a strategy aimed at providing refinancing possibilities to MFis and amend
               existing regulations to allow MFis tapping into new financial resources.

               Sub-component 4.2: Structuring guarantee mechanisms for MF!s. Activities will include
               structuring and designing a guarantee mechanism including all stakeholders both national and
               international in order to strengthen the financial situation of MFis.

Component 5: Component IV: preparatory work to design a national financial inclusion strategy (USD
0.3 million)

This component would deliver a first draft of a national financial inclusion strategy structuring and
coordinating existing and new efforts. The draft would be shared with stakeholders thereafter with a view to
implementation in 2014. The implementation part of the project could be submitted to the MENA Transition
Fund at a future date.

       The deliverable will cover five core components:
          • data and diagnostics (stock-taking) to inform objectives and targets (see Annex);
          • a strategy and action plan(s) to achieve those objectives/targets;
          • policy and regulatory reforms to encourage private sector responses;
          • financial sector responses through investment, innovation and intermediation;
          • monitoring and evaluation of progress towards the objectives and targets.


Component 6 : Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (USD 0.4 million)

The objective ofthis component is to support the MEF's capacity to manage, monitor and evaluate Project
activities. As such, this Component will provide support to the Ministry's PIU ("Unite de Gestion de Projet"-

                                                                                                        3
      UGP) responsible for coordinating day-to-day Project activities and administering loan funds. The UGP will be
      headed by a MEF staff appointed by a decision of the MEF and will report to the Secretary General of the
      MEF. The UGP will comprise external experts hired under the Project to fulfill the position of (a) project
      coordinator/monitoring and evaluation specialist, (b) procurement specialist and (c) project assistant. Under
      this component, the Project will also finance the provision of goods, consultants' services and training to the
      Project Management Unit (UGP) as needed for the implementation and monitoring and evaluation of the
      Project.


      D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
      This project will be implemented in the Kingdom of Morocco.

I     E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
     No major environmental issues are anticipated. Project activities are not expected to result in any potential
     large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. The project components have no safeguards implications.


     F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
     Safeguard Policies Triggered                         Yes          No         TBD            Explanation
     Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                               X
                                                                                                                        '

     Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       X
     Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                X
     Pest ManagementOP 4.09                                            X
     Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4. f1                           X
     Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     X
     Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                               X
     Sitfety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                        X
     Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                         X
     7.50
     Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                             X


    III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


     B. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
        25-Jan-2013

     C. Time frame for launching and completing the Safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
        specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

                                                                                                           4
     N/A


IV. APPROVALS
 Signed and submitted by:
                                                                                In
 Task Team Leader:                  Name: Teymour AbdelAziz / v-:::,.                       Date:                 '
 Approved By:                                      -

 Regional Safeguards
                                    Narg~1  ~ed  -R.
                                                          -------          ,'
                                                             1/..:,v~ '\IL"""               Date:
 Coordinator:                        . p 'l 1,~( ~---~                                          L{ )J j;JO!]
                                             v
 Comments:                                                      r\                   r-.A   n
 Sector Manager:                    Name: Simon C. Bell          },V\rN(\\)j;; "Q~e:
 Comments:

 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before
 appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that
 are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                                                                                                          5
