                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                        Report No.: 76722
Date ISDS
                          29-Jan-2013
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                   Morocco              Project ID:                P144438
 Project Name:              Local Government Support Program (PACT)
 Task Team Leader:          Francois Boulanger
 Estimated Appraisal Date: April 5, 2013         Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2013
 Managing Unit:             MNSUR                Lending Instrument:        Technical Assistance Loan
 Sectors:                   Subnational government administration, urban transport, solid waste
                            management, water supply, sanitation
 Themes:                    Decentralization, city-wide infrastructure and service delivery, municipal
                            government and institution building
 Financing (in USD Million) 5.8 Million
      Financing Source                                                                         Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            USD 1.25 Million
      MENA TRANSITION FUND                                                          USD 4.55 Million
      Total                                                                          USD 5.8 Million
 Environmental Category     C - Not Required
 Is this a Repeater project? No


 B. Project Objectives
 A.      Proposed Development Objective(s)

 1.       The Development Objective of the proposed Grant is to set up a lasting program to
 provide Local Governments (LGs) access to decentralized support services and assistance to
 institutionalize inter-municipal cooperation.

 2.     The proposed Grant would achieve this Development Objective through funding the
 design and set up of a Morocco Local Government Support Program (Programme d’Appui aux
 Collectivités Territoriales – PACT), as well as through funding some of the initial support and
 incentives it will provide.

 3.      Progress towards the objective will be monitored by a series of indicators that will

                                                 1
measure:

   (a) For component one. Deconcentrated LG Support Centers:

             (i)   The number of deconcentrated single-window LG support centers established;

             (ii) The number of Government Departments offering services through the
                  established support centers;

             (iii) The number of LGs who benefitted from support; and

             (iv) Formal commitment to fund the program after grant closure.

   (b) For component two. Inter-municipal Cooperation and Institutional Reform for Local
       Service Delivery:

            (i) The number of conurbation associations created or expanded (geographically or
                in sector terms) with clear/sustainable legal, financial, governance, and staffing
                arrangements;

            (ii) The number of conurbations with operational asset companies or similar
                 institutional arrangement; and

            (iii)Lessons learned from the pilot projects assessed and existence of a plan to
                 continue supporting inter-municipal cooperation.


C. Project Description

4.    The proposed grant will finance the following two main activities in addition to program
management:

5.      Component 1 – Deconcentrated LG Support Centers (US$ 1,950,000). This
component will design and set up the support mechanism that will provide LGs with technical
assistance to prepare and manage projects. These may include infrastructure projects, the
improvement or introduction of a new public service or the contracting of a public service to the
private sector. This activity will draw on existing LG support experiences and mechanisms to
establish local single-window Support Centers for LGs, possibly linked to a support unit at
central level. In these Support Centers a small team of well-trained staff will be able to either
directly provide assistance to elected local officials and municipal staff or direct them to available
resources and programs at national level or in other LGs.

6.     These Centers will mostly function on a demand-driven basis by providing expertise and
information to help officials and technical staff transform ideas or broad objectives into actual
projects through assisting with carrying out the steps required by a project, from identification
through feasibility studies, bidding, contract management, etc. The Centers could also take a
pro-active role in raising local decision-makers’ awareness of existing support programs and
tools offered by central Government departments or partner SOEs, including investment

                                                2
    incentive programs for service modernization (such as the National Solid Waste Program, the
    National Sanitation Program, the National Urban Upgrading Program, etc.), training programs
    for staff, ICT tools, sector-specific technical assistance, etc. Finally, the Centers could foster
    networking and knowledge exchanges among LGs. Incentive and M&E systems will be set up to
    ensure the Support Centers’ responsiveness to LG demand and a high quality of services, evaluate
    their performance and draw lessons for their expansion.

    7.       Sub-component 1.1 - Initial studies and implementation planning. The proposed grant is
    expected to fund expertise to assist the Moroccan Government with reviewing implementation
    options and organizing a consultative process to define, in partnership with LGs, central
    government departments and other stakeholders, the optimal legal and administrative form,
    territorial mapping, and deployment plan of such Support Centers. This will include staffing
    requirements, IT and other resources, budget, etc. The centers will be placed geographically close
    to the LGs to avoid the perception that “everything is decided in Rabat?. A distinction will also be
    made between large and small municipalities, which have different needs and capacities.

    8.      Sub-component 1.2 - Setting up and operation of a small number of Support Centers on a
    pilot basis. The proposed grant would also fund the establishment of the first two to three Support
    Centers and possibly the strengthening of a centralized support unit, covering possible consulting
    services and their incremental operating costs for a defined duration. It is likely that these Support
    Centers will be set up by gradually incorporating different support services and sectors.

    9.      Sub-component 1.3 – Tools development. In the area of municipal service delivery, many
    tools, how-to guides, procedure books, model organizational diagrams, etc. already exist for the
    benefit of LGs. The proposed grant is expected to fund an inventory of existing resources and the
    system to make them publicly available, so that each Support Center can offer them to LGs. If the
    inventory shows significant gaps, it would also fund the design of new tools, including possible
    software and hardware, and/or selected studies.

    10.    Component 2 – Inter-Municipal Cooperation and Institutional Reform for Local
    Service Delivery (US$ 2,950,000 + % of set-up costs). This component will include specific
    consulting services and incentives towards accelerating the formation of inter-municipal
    cooperation structures and the creation of new service delivery models on a pilot basis.
    Inter-municipal cooperation structures are necessary to manage local network services, such as
    urban transport which often needs to go beyond municipal boarders, in an efficient and effective
    way. There are two types of inter-municipal structures in Moroccan law, which are not expected
    to change under the upcoming LOCT: conurbation associations (groupements d’agglomération),
    and associations of municipalities (groupements de communes).1To date, few associations of
    municipalities have been created. There is only one conurbation association, which is responsible
    for urban transport services in the Rabat-Salé-Temara area. It is likely to be expanded to other
    municipalities and the other services listed in the law. It has no executing structure yet.

    11.    Within the framework of these associations, the grant will also finance the creation of
    inter-municipal or regional public asset companies (sociétés de patrimoine or SP) or other types

1
 Conurbation associations concern urban areas of more than 200,000 inhabitants. Once created they are by law in charge of providing urban
planning, urban transport, waste management, sanitation, water supply and electricity distribution services. The associations of municipalities can
include any municipalities that wish to regroup to deliver certain services.

                                                                        3
of institutional arrangements in charge of the day-to-day service delivery on a pilot basis. These
companies would have the responsibility of planning and financing infrastructure investments
and contracting the operation of service to public or private operators. Whether they would be
multi-sector or sector-specific would be decided in a feasibility study. They would likely include
in their shareholding national-level operators who would provide technical and management
expertise. The objective of such new arrangements include: (i) clarifying the governance of
service delivery and separating the strategic guidance provided at political level from the daily
running of operations, (ii) professionalizing project management and management of contracts
with the operators through hiring more qualified staff dedicated to the project, (iii) clarifying
financial relationships towards greater sustainability, (iv) giving a greater financial “surface? for
long-term capital planning and raising financing, (v) involving national-level entities (State,
state-owned entities, the state-owned development Bank CDG) within a clearly defined
financial/governance platform.

12.      Sub-component 2.1 – Technical Assistance to LGs to set up associations. The grant would
finance consulting services to provide hands-on expertise to a limited number of municipalities
wishing to form an association on a pilot basis. This assistance would help them design adequate
arrangements for governance, budgeting and financial transfers, staffing, incentive mechanisms,
etc. This will ensure that such associations are (i) effectively operated, (ii) financially sustainable,
(iii) not subject to decisional uncertainty for their daily operations, and (iv) not adding costs to the
existing overhead but rather seeing matching transfers of responsibilities, costs and resources.

13.     Sub-component 2.2 – Stocktaking of private sector participation (PSP) issues, design and
set up of asset companies (SP). This would include studies, such as a brief study to re-assess what
conditions would be optimal in Morocco for preserving effective private sector involvement.
Such study would be based on the results of existing sector-specific studies and complement them
to draw generic lessons, with a view to designing the new pilots. The grant would also finance the
review of possible designs for SPs or other types of institutional arrangements based on
international benchmarks, possibly including issues of general nature such as the legal structure,
the relationship with municipalities and private operators, financing, etc.

14.    Sub-component 2.2 would also finance the support necessary to set up a number of SPs or
other executing structures for these associations on a pilot basis. This could include high-caliber
expertise to municipalities to provide them with legal, financial, and operational transaction
advisory services to guide them through the roadmap, economic and business planning, staffing
requirements.

15.      Possible pilot urban areas for both sub-components could include Rabat-Salé-Temara,
Agadir, and the greater Casablanca. Finally, the pilot arrangements set up under this operation
will be evaluated and recommendations will be prepared to extend and generalize their use.

16.    Sub-component 2.3 - Incentive mechanisms. The proposed program will also fund an
incentive mechanism for the formation of new associations, which could be in the form of a
contribution to set-up costs or to all or part of the associations’ incremental operating costs for a
defined period. The incentive formula will be determined in the initial design studies and will
only be covered by the program for a limited time period.


                                                 4
 17.     Component 3 – Program Management (US$800,000 + US$100,000 contingencies). In
 addition to normal implementation functions, such as project management, procurement and
 financial management, this component would include planning the deployment of the project
 activities with participating government departments, regularly following up with each of them
 on progress towards meeting their commitments, and organizing continued consultations with
 stakeholders and in particular LGs all along project implementation. The grant would also
 finance incremental operating costs for the Program Management Unit (PMU) and monitoring
 and evaluation (M&E). The PMU will be in charge of ensuring the overall quality of services
 provided to LGs through the deconcentrated Support Centers and bringing in international
 experience and benchmarks as needed. Such international knowledge exchanges could also be in
 the form of study tours.


 D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
 known)

 18.      The proposed operation focuses on technical assistance, capacity strengthening and
 institution building. There are no physical interventions which might trigger the need for
 safeguard analysis. The studies, institution-building, capacity-strengthening, and technical
 assistance to be provided under this grant are simply geared to strengthen the public service
 delivery capacity of local governments. Although the technical assistance and advice will not
 include the preparation of any specific investments (for instance the program will not fund
 feasibility studies), it will incorporate the need for SPs to have an Environmental and Social
 Management System, with the necessary expertise (staffing, budgeting, etc.) to be able to meet
 the Moroccan environmental impact assessment requirements for downstream investments.

 19.      The proposed operation has no foreseen negative environmental and social impacts,
 which commensurate with the C rating. As the activities focus only on capacity strengthening and
 institution building and do not involve involuntary resettlement and/or involuntary land
 acquisition, OP 4.12 does not apply.


 E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

 20.    The proposed operation focuses on capacity building and technical assistance. The
 Recipient of the Grant will not be required to apply safeguard policies for this operation.


 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Fatou Fall ( MNSSO )
 Andrew Losos ( MNSEN )

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP      No             -

                                              5
 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No                  -
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 No                  -
 Pest Management OP 4.09                            No                  -
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP                  No                  -
 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      No                  -
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                No                  - As the activities focus only on capacity
                                                                        strengthening and institution building and do not
                                                                        involve involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                        involuntary land acquisition, OP 4.12 does not
                                                                        apply.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                          No                  -
 Projects on International Waterways                No                  -
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No                               -

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

   Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
A. April 5, 2013


    Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
 B. needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
     Not applicable.


IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:                       Name: Francois Boulanger
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards                     Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed                                 Date: February 28, 2013
 Coordinator:                            (MNAOS)
 Sector Manager:                         Name: Franck Bousquet (MNSSD)                             Date: March 12, 2013



 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
 persons.




                                                               6
