                                INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                           APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                             Report No.:    80883
1   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        25-January 2013
    I. BASIC INFORMATION

1    1. Basic Project Data
I
!
     Country:                      Kingdom of Morocco Project ID: '               P144500
     Project N arne:               Morocco Microfinance Development Project
     Task Team Lead~r:             Teymour Abdel Aziz
     Estimated Appraisal Date: 25-Jan-20 13              Estimated Board
                                                         Date: N/A (to be
                                                         submitted to MENA
                                                         Transition Fund
        '·
                                                         Steering Committee
                                       \                 January 2013,
                                                         planned submission for
                                                         RVP approval March
                                                         2013)
     Managing Unit:                MNSFl                 Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                             Grant
     Sector:                       Private Sector Development(IOO%)
     Theme:                        Private Sector Development, Micro and small
                                   finance
     Financing (in USD Million)
             Financing Source                                                                Amount
         Borrower                                                                                  0.00
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     0.00
         Other                                                                                     4.90
        Total                                                                                      4.90
     Environmental Category:       c         '
     Is this a Repeater project? No


    2. Project Objectives
    The project objective is to promote access to finance to low income households and micro and
    small enterprises through the promotion of a sustainable and inclusive microfinance sector.
    This objective will be achieved through a comprehensive package of analytical work and
    technical assistance aimed at supporting the enabling environment for microfinance and
I
l
"
    financial inclusion, leading to enhanced financial services to wider segments of the population.


    3. Project Description
    The project aims to support access to finance to low income households and micro and small
    enterprises through the promotion of a sustainable and inclusive microfinance sector. This
    objective will be achieved through a comprehensive package of analytical work and technical
    assistance aimed at supporting the enabling environment for microfinance and financial
    inclusion. The program is structured around three core components: (1) Strengthening the
    institutional, legal, regulatory, tax and governance framework for microfinance, (2)
    Strengthening the market infrastructure, product innovation and funding sources for
    microfinance, and (3) Integrating Microfinance into a national financial inclusion strategy. A
    brief description of the respective components is included below (See Annex 2 for detailed
    project description).

    Project Components
                      I
    Component 1: Strengthening the institutional, legal, regulatory, tax and governance
    framework for microfinance (USD 1.9 million)

    This component aims to support activities contributing to the strengthening of the institutional,
    legal, regulatory and governance frameworkofthe microfinance sector. This component aims
    to a) assess and reinforce the capacity of the National Federation ofMicrocreditAssociations of
    Morocco (FNAM) and b) support activities contributing to the strengthening of the legal,
    regulatory, tax and governance{ramework of the microfinance sector. This component will also
    finance goods, services, travel, and incremental operating costs incurred by the PMU in the
    implementation and management of the project.

       a) Assess and reinforce the capacity of the National Federation of Microcredit
           Associations of Morocco (FNAM): FNAM is the primary industry association
           responsible for development of the microfinance sector in Morocco through policy
           guidance, MFI coordination, and engagement with key actors including funders and
           regulators. The institutional capacity of FNAM needs to be strengthened to ensure the
         · sector can effectively restructure, expand, and respond to changing regulatory and
           market conditions. The project will assist the FNAM in fulfilling its core mandate of
           acting as the industry's steering body by centralizing information and disseminating
           studies, acting as an intermediate body between state regulating bodies and
           micro finance institutions, developing and delivering services that address member's
           needs/issues, and providing support across all levels and in all regions and districts in
          the Country. FNAM also plays the role of an intermediary between Microfinance
           Institutions and key stakeholders of Micro finance services of Morocco, including the
           Government, Central Batik, Donors, Development partners, financiers, investors and
           clients of micro finance services.

           This component will be implemented in two stages: First, a comprehensive diagnostic
           will be conducted to assess the current role, funding structure, statutes, governance and
       capacity of the FNAM, measming the gap between its current status and desired futme
       role, benchmarking it with other· global best practice examples. In a second step, a
       technical assistance program will be developed building on the recommendations of this
       diagnostic, with the objective of transforming the FNAM into a proactive industry
       organization and knowledge hub of the Moroccan microfinance sector.

    b) Strengthening of the legal, regulatory and governance framework of the microjinance
       sector: This sub-component aims to support activities contributing to the modernization
       of the legal, regulatory and fiscal framework for microfinance, as well as the
       development of governance and risk management standards for the microcredit sector.
       Activities will include, inter alia, studies that inform the development of a tax policy
       adapted to the specific needs of the MFis, review the cap on borrowings for clients of
       MFis, the regulation of remuneration of credit, reviews and adapt the solvency and
       liquidity ratios of the MFis, and strengthen the financial reporting and regulatory
       oversight of BAM over MFis. Improving the use of judicial and non-judicial
       (arbitration, mediation) means for recovering unpaid loans will also be a key activity of
       the project under this component.

Component 2: Strengthening the market infrastructure, product innovation and funding
sources for microfiuance (USD 1.5 million)

This component focuses on activities aimed at a) building common platforms improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of micro credit associations, b) build market infrastructme in
support of micro enterprises, and c) promote the strengthening and diversification of funding.

     a) Promoting innovative common platforms and new products for MF!s. This
        sub-component will support the development of common platforms, systems and
        products aimed at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of MFis. Activities will
        include studies on the development of new products for the microfinance sector, the
        development of a mobile banking platform for MFis, which is expected to have a
        transformational impact on the sector through the significant reduction of transaction
        costs for cash transfers for low income households and microenterprises. Other
        proposed activities include the development of a training and certification program for
        MCA officers.

     b) Building market infrastructure for micro entrepreneurs: This sub-component will
        support the development of market infrastructme aimed at facilitating
        microenterprises' access to markets. Activities supported will include studies on how
        microenterprises can improve the commercialization of their products, and the
        development of an electronic platform allowing microenterprises to market their
        goods, or the development of a e-project platform through which microentreprenems
        can get information on innovative business models, and supporting the development
        of a micro-credit mediation function within the framework of BAM's mediation
        center.

    c) Strengthen and diversifY fUnding sources: This sub-component aims to support
         . activities which would inform policymakers, regulators, supervisors and MFis on how
           the microfinance sector can diversify and strengthen its funding sources to ensure its
           financial sustainability over the medium and longer term. Proposed activities include,
           inter alia, studies aimed at assessing refinancing possibilities to MFis and amend
           existing regulations to allow MFis tapping into new financial resources, and
           structuring and designing a guarantee mechanism including all stakeholders. In a
           second phase, this sub-component would, building on the findings of the
           aforementioned studies, finance the design and structuring of mechanisms (eg.
           stabilization fund, guarantees, etc.) aimed at strengthen the financial sustainability
           and stability of the sector.

Component 3: Integrating Microfinance into a national financial inclusion strategy (USD
1.5 million)

This component aims to integrate the national microfinance roadmap into a wider,
comprehensive national financial inclusion strategy. In a first step, this component aims to
conduct a cross-cutting stocktaking exercise of all previous and ongoing activities aimed at
promoting financial inclusion, putting the microfinance sector in a larger financial sector
development context. This component will also finance the design and roll out of financial
literacy programs for low income households and microenterprises, the key beneficiaries of
microfinance, within the framework of the proposed 'foundation for financial education',
which is in the process of being rolled out under the leadership of BAM. This component will
also finance studies and impact evaluations assessing the effectiveness of public policies and
private initiatives aimed at promoting financial inclusion, as well as the impact of financial
inclusion, including microfinance, on employment creation, poverty reduction and growth.

In a second phase, this component aims to build on the findings of the aforementioned activities
to develop a comprehensive national financial inclusion strategy, to be developed in a
structured consultative process with all key public and private sector stakeholders, and develop
an action plan with specific objectives and targets to achieve the aims of the strategy, as well as
a clearly defined M&E framework to measure progress.


4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project will be implemented mainly in Rabat and Casablanca, working with regulators,
policymakers, government, and financial institutions mainly on diagnostic analysis, policy
development, capacity building, and coordination and dissemination of policy changes.
Financial literacy modules will be implemented at Centre Mohanuned VI in Casablanca, as
well as low-income community around Morocco.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
  6. Safeguard Policies                       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.0 I        No
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No
  Pest Management OP 4.09                     No
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               No
                                                                         .
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         No
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No
  Projects on International Waterways         No
  OPIBP 7.50                         -
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
  A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe
  any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


 Safeguards policies are not expected to be triggered. Activities relate to policy development, research
 and stock-taking and institutional capacity building with regards to key actors (microfinance
 institutions, government, regulators, and service providers) in the microfinance sector. The nature of
 most of the activities will be procurement of services and other intangibles, with possible small scale
 goods or equipment which are not anticipated to have any major or irreversible environmental impacts .
                                                                              .




 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
 the project area:
. Indirect impacts are expected to include cumulative impacts of multiple small activities that individually
  would be negligible.
 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
 impacts.
 No alternatives to the proposed project were considered as the environmental and social negative
 impacts are negligible.
 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 Social safeguard policies are not triggered, and the social impacts of this project are expected to be
 positive. The activities will apply research and policy development to improve the regulatory, legal, and
 governance framework for the microfiriance sector. Activities will also include implementing financial
 education modules to low income Moroccans country wide, providing them the skills necessary to make
 sound consumption, savings, and investment decisions. Connected, the development of a financial
 inclusion strategy will help create a road map for Moroccan authorities to bring low income Moroccans,
 particularly women, into the formal financial sector. The OM will also describe design features to
 facilitate inclusion of women as beneficiaries of the project, with respect to research activities, policy
 development, and technical assistance.

Environmental safeguards policies are not expected to be triggered given .the significant majority of
activities are related to capacity building of institutions within the microfinance sector. The nature of
most of the activities will be procurement of services and other intangibles, with possible small scale
goods or equipment which are not anticipated to have any major or irreversible environmental impacts.
The OM will include a negative list of activities, the process of screening ciut any activities with
anticipated social or environmental negative impacts, and the principles of giving due consideration to
social and environmental implications of technical.advice provided.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consnltation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
NIA

B. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the JSDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 -Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ 1             No [X]      NA I 1
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager         Yes [ 1      No [ l      NA [X]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ l         No [ 1 NA [X]
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes[. 1             No [ l     NA [X]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [ l           No[    1 NA[X]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local _NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies                                                                   .



Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional              Yes [ l       No [   l   NA [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ 1         No[· l      NA [X]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include        Yes 0        No [    l   NA [X]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and-measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with          Yes [ l      No[     l   NA [X ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?
                   .
III APPROVALS
                                                                         .I
 Task Team Leader:   !Name: Teymour Abdel A..:...- ·
                                                                        '1     ~


 Approved By:
                                              f\
 Sector Manager:     IName: Simon C. Bell rJ1 '·       J: '61.""'   January 25, 2013
                                                         ~
                                                                    v
