                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                         Report No.: 76723

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        12-Apr-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed:      14-Apr-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    Morocco              Project ID:                P144438
 Project Name:               Local Government Support Program (PACT)
 Task Team Leader:           Francois Boulanger
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Apr-2013            Estimated Board Date: 16-Sep-2013
 Managing Unit:              MNSUR                Lending Instrument:        Technical Assistance
                                                                             Operation
 Sector:                     Subnational government administration, urban transport, solid waste
                             management, water supply, sanitation
 Theme:                      Decentralization, city-wide infrastructure and service delivery, municipal
                             government and institution building
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00            No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       8.45                    Total Bank Financing:
 Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     Borrower                                                                                      3.90
     MNA VPU Free-standing Trust Funds                                                             4.55
     Total                                                                                         8.45
 Environmental Category: C - Not Required
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred       Yes
 project?


 2. Current Project Development Objectives (PDO)

 1.     The Development Objective of the proposed Grant is to set up a lasting program to
 provide Local Governments (LGs) access to decentralized support services and assistance to
institutionalize inter-municipal cooperation.

2.     The proposed Grant would achieve this Development Objective through funding the
design and set up of a Morocco Local Government Support Program (Programme d’Appui
aux Collectivités Territoriales – PACT), as well as through funding some of the initial support
and incentives it will provide.

3.    Progress towards the objective will be monitored by a series of indicators that will
measure:
   (a)      For the PDO:

            (i)   The Local Government Support Program (PACT) is set-up and operational;

            (ii) The financial incentive of the PACT is financed adequately and there is
                 formal commitment to fund the program after grant closure; and

            (iii) Number of beneficiaries (male/female) (core sector indicator).

   (b)      For component one. Deconcentrated LG Support Centers:

             (i) The number of deconcentrated single-window LG support centers
            established;

             (ii) The number of Government Departments offering services through the
            established support centers; and

             (iii) The number of LGs who benefitted from support.

   (c)      For component two. Inter-municipal Cooperation and Institutional Reform for
         Local Service Delivery:

             (i) The number of conurbation associations created or expanded
                 (geographically or in sector terms) with clear/sustainable legal, financial,
                 governance, and staffing arrangements;

            (ii) The number of conurbations with operational asset companies or similar
                 institutional arrangement; and

            (iii)Lessons learned from the pilot projects assessed and existence of a plan to
                 continue supporting inter-municipal cooperation.

   (d)      For component three. Project management, monitoring and evaluation

            (i) A monitoring and evaluation system for the program is operational.
3. Project Description

4.    The proposed grant will finance the following two main activities in addition to
program management:

5.      Component 1 – Deconcentrated LG Support Centers (US$ 1,950,000 of which
US$900,000 in kind contribution from the Ministry of Interior). This component will
design and set up the support mechanism that will provide LGs with technical assistance to
prepare and manage projects. These may include infrastructure projects, the improvement or
introduction of a new public service or the contracting of a public service to the private sector.
This activity will draw on existing LG support experiences and mechanisms to establish local
single-window Support Centers for LGs, possibly linked to a support unit at central level. In
these Support Centers a small team of well-trained staff will be able to either directly provide
assistance to elected local officials and municipal staff or direct them to available resources
and programs at national level or in other LGs.

6.      These Centers will mostly function on a demand-driven basis by providing expertise
and information to help officials and technical staff transform ideas or broad objectives into
actual projects through assisting with carrying out the steps required by a project, from
identification through feasibility studies, bidding, contract management, etc. The Centers
could also take a pro-active role in raising local decision-makers’ awareness of existing
support programs and tools offered by central Government departments or partner SOEs,
including investment incentive programs for service modernization (such as the National
Solid Waste Program, the National Sanitation Program, the National Urban Upgrading
Program, etc.), training programs for staff, ICT tools, sector-specific technical assistance, etc.
Finally, the Centers could foster networking and knowledge exchanges among LGs. Incentive
and M&E systems will be set up to ensure the Support Centers’ responsiveness to LG demand
and a high quality of services, evaluate their performance and draw lessons for their
expansion.

7.      Sub-component 1.1 - Initial studies and implementation planning. The proposed grant
is expected to fund expertise to assist the Moroccan Government with reviewing
implementation options and organizing a consultative process to define, in partnership with
LGs, central government departments and other stakeholders, the optimal legal and
administrative form, territorial mapping, and deployment plan of such Support Centers. This
will include staffing requirements, IT and other resources, budget, etc. The centers will be
placed geographically close to the LGs to avoid the perception that “everything is decided in
Rabat?.

8.      Sub-component 1.2 - Setting up and operation of a small number of Support Centers
on a pilot basis. The proposed grant would also fund the establishment of the first two to three
Support Centers and possibly the strengthening of a centralized support unit, covering
possible consulting services and their incremental operating costs for a defined duration. It is
likely that these Support Centers will be set up by gradually incorporating different support
services and sectors.
    9.      Sub-component 1.3 – Tools development. In the area of municipal service delivery,
    many tools, how-to guides, procedure books, model organizational diagrams, etc. already
    exist for the benefit of LGs. The proposed grant is expected to fund an inventory of existing
    resources and the system to make them publicly available, so that each Support Center can
    offer them to LGs. If the inventory shows significant gaps, it would also fund the design of
    new tools, including possible software and hardware, and/or selected studies.

    10.     Component 2 – Inter-Municipal Cooperation and Institutional Reform for Local
    Service Delivery (US$ 2,950,000 and a contribution of US$ 3,000,000 from the Ministry
    of Interior for the incentive mechanism). This component will include specific consulting
    services and incentives towards accelerating the formation of inter-municipal cooperation
    structures and the creation of new service delivery models on a pilot basis. Inter-municipal
    cooperation structures are necessary to manage local network services, such as urban transport
    which often needs to go beyond municipal boarders, in an efficient and effective way. There
    are two types of inter-municipal structures in Moroccan law, which are not expected to
    change under the upcoming LOCT: conurbation associations (groupements d’agglomération),
    and associations of municipalities (groupements de communes).1To date, few associations of
    municipalities have been created. There is only one conurbation association, which is
    responsible for urban transport services in the Rabat-Salé-Temara area. It is likely to be
    expanded to other municipalities and the other services listed in the law. It has no executing
    structure yet.

    11.     Within the framework of these associations, the grant will also finance the creation of
    inter-municipal or regional public asset companies (sociétés de patrimoine or SP) or other
    types of institutional arrangements in charge of the day-to-day service delivery on a pilot
    basis. These companies would have the responsibility of planning and financing infrastructure
    investments and contracting the operation of service to public or private operators. Whether
    they would be multi-sector or sector-specific would be decided in a feasibility study. They
    would likely include in their shareholding national-level operators who would provide
    technical and management expertise. The objective of such new arrangements include: (i)
    clarifying the governance of service delivery and separating the strategic guidance provided at
    political level from the daily running of operations, (ii) professionalizing project management
    and management of contracts with the operators through hiring more qualified staff dedicated
    to the project, (iii) clarifying financial relationships towards greater sustainability, (iv) giving
    a greater financial “surface? for long-term capital planning and raising financing, (v)
    involving national-level entities (State, state-owned entities, the state-owned development
    Bank CDG) within a clearly defined financial/governance platform.

    12.     Sub-component 2.1 – Technical Assistance to LGs to set up associations. The grant
    would finance consulting services to provide hands-on expertise to a limited number of
    municipalities wishing to form an association on a pilot basis. This assistance would help
    them design adequate arrangements for governance, budgeting and financial transfers,
    staffing, incentive mechanisms, etc. This will ensure that such associations are (i) effectively

1
 Conurbation associations concern urban areas of more than 200,000 inhabitants. Once created they are by law in charge of providing urban
planning, urban transport, waste management, sanitation, water supply and electricity distribution services. The associations of municipalities can
include any municipalities that wish to regroup to deliver certain services.
operated, (ii) financially sustainable, (iii) not subject to decisional uncertainty for their daily
operations, and (iv) not adding costs to the existing overhead but rather seeing matching
transfers of responsibilities, costs and resources.

13.    Sub-component 2.2 – Stocktaking of private sector participation (PSP) issues, design
and set up of asset companies (SP). This would include studies, such as a brief study to
re-assess what conditions would be optimal in Morocco for preserving effective private sector
involvement. Such study would be based on the results of existing sector-specific studies and
complement them to draw generic lessons, with a view to designing the new pilots. The grant
would also finance the review of possible designs for SPs or other types of institutional
arrangements based on international benchmarks, possibly including issues of general nature
such as the legal structure, the relationship with municipalities and private operators,
financing, etc.

14.    Sub-component 2.2 would also finance the support necessary to set up a number of
SPs or other executing structures for these associations on a pilot basis. This could include
high-caliber expertise to municipalities to provide them with legal, financial, and operational
transaction advisory services to guide them through the roadmap, economic and business
planning, staffing requirements.

15.      Possible pilot urban areas for both sub-components could include Rabat-Salé-Temara,
Agadir, Tangier and the greater Casablanca. Finally, the pilot arrangements set up under this
operation will be evaluated and recommendations will be prepared to extend and generalize
their use.

16.    Sub-component 2.3 - Incentive mechanisms. The proposed program will also fund an
incentive mechanism for the formation of new associations, which could be in the form of a
contribution to set-up costs or to all or part of the associations’ incremental operating costs for
a defined period. The incentive formula will be determined in the initial design studies and
will only be covered by the program for a limited time period.

17.     Component 3 – Program Management (US$800,000 + US$100,000 contingencies).
In addition to normal implementation functions, such as project management, procurement
and financial management, this component would include planning the deployment of the
project activities with participating government departments, regularly following up with each
of them on progress towards meeting their commitments, and organizing continued
consultations with stakeholders and in particular LGs all along project implementation. The
grant would also finance incremental operating costs for the Program Management Unit
(PMU) and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The PMU will be in charge of ensuring the
overall quality of services provided to LGs through the deconcentrated Support Centers and
bringing in international experience and benchmarks as needed. Such international knowledge
exchanges could also be in the form of study tours.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)

18.    The proposed operation focuses on technical assistance, capacity strengthening and
institution building. There are no physical interventions which might trigger the need for
safeguard analysis. The studies, institution-building, capacity-strengthening, and technical
assistance to be provided under this grant are simply geared to strengthen the public service
delivery capacity of local governments. Although the technical assistance and advice will not
include the preparation of any specific investments (for instance the program will not fund
feasibility studies), it will incorporate the need for SPs to have an Environmental and Social
Management System, with the necessary expertise (staffing, budgeting, etc.) to be able to
meet the Moroccan environmental impact assessment requirements for downstream
investments.


19.    The proposed operation has no foreseen negative environmental and social impacts,
which commensurate with the C rating. As the activities focus only on capacity strengthening
and institution building and do not involve involuntary resettlement and/or involuntary land
acquisition, OP 4.12 does not apply.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Fatou Fall ( MNSSO )
Andrew Michael Losos ( MNSEN )

6. Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01     No
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No
Pest Management OP 4.09                 No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     No
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No
Projects on International Waterways     No
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
NA
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The proposed operation focuses on technical assistance, capacity strengthening and institutions
building and its impacts are expected to be positive, both in environmental and social terms. By
providing LGs with access to decentralized support services and assistance to institutionalize
inter-municipal cooperation, the project will strengthen their service delivery capacity. In the longer
run, this is expected to improve transport, waste management, and other public services provided by
LGs to citizens and consequently improve their quality of life. Similarly, strengthening LGs’ service
delivery capacity and institutional structure is eventually also expected to positively impact the
environmental performance of these entities.

There are no physical interventions which might trigger the need for a safeguard analysis. The studies,
institution-building, capacity-strengthening, and technical assistance to be provided under this grant
are simply geared to strengthen the public service delivery capacity of local governments.
Nevertheless, although the technical assistance and advice will not include the preparation of any
specific investments (for instance, the program will not fund feasibility studies), it will incorporate the
need for SPs to have an Environmental and Social Management System, with the necessary expertise
(staffing, budgeting, etc.) to be able to meet the Moroccan environmental impact assessment
requirements for downstream investments.

The absence of foreseen negative environmental and social impacts commensurate with the C rating.
As the activities focus only on capacity strengthening and institution building and do not involve
involuntary resettlement and/or involuntary land acquisition, OP 4.12 does not apply.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
NA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The proposed operation will focus on capacity building and technical assistance. The Borrower will
not be required to apply safeguard policies for this operation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
NA

B. Disclosure Requirements
Technical Assistance Project
For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
NA
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
NA

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Francois Boulanger
Approved By:
Sector Manager:                Name: Franck Bousquet (MNSSD)             Date: April 14, 2013
