INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
Appraisal
Report No.:                                                              ISDSC2090
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:                                          22-Jan-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:                Morocco          Project ID:           P143979
Project Name:           MA- New Governance Framework Implementation support project
(P143979)
Task Team Leader:       Fabian Seiderer
Estimated Appraisal Date: 22 January 2013  Estimated Board Date: 19 February 2013
Managing Unit:          MNSPS            Lending Instrument:   Transition  Fund grant
(following  Investment
Loan track I procedures)
Sector:                 General public administration sector (50%), Central government
administration (30%), Sub-national government administration (20%)
Theme:                  Administrative and civil service reform (40%), Public expenditure,
financial management and procurement (40%), Decentralization (20%
Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source                                             Amount
Borrower                                                     0.00
Transition Fund                                              4
Total                                                        4
Environmental Category  C - Not Required
Is this a Repeater project? No
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen government transparency, accountability and
public participation by (i) supporting the development and implementation of a public consultation
policy and right a law to on petitions; (ii) improving access to fiscal information and enhancing
performance orientation in budget management; and (iii) strengthening fiscal decentralization.
C. Project Description
I1.   The project supports the implementation of the governance framework foreseen in Morocco's
new Constitution through technical assistance and capacity building for three strategic intertwined
governance reforms aiming to increase civic engagement in government affairs, enhance the
government's accountability towards parliament and tax payers, as well as to strengthen fiscal


﻿decentralization and local governance. The project follows an integrated and holistic approach by
supporting three horizontal and mutually reinforcing governance reforms in order to improve the
inclusiveness and effectiveness of Morocco's public policies across the whole of government.
2.    The project's first component supports the development and implementation of government
wide policies for public consultation and petitions. This reform not only concretizes new
constitutional rights but will also create an enabling environment for greater citizen engagement in
government affairs and will help build trust between the public administration and citizens. These
policies will be developed in a participatory manner through a national dialogue to be headed by an
independent personality.
3.    The second project component supports the implementation of performance budgeting,
another key horizontal governance reform that will enhance Government transparency and
accountability. This reform represents a strategic lever to strengthen the government's internal and
external accountability in the implementation of public policies and the use of corresponding
resources. The new organic budget law will require the Government and its different ministries to
commit to performance objectives along with the budget proposal. At the end of each budget year the
government will have to report to Parliament and to the public on the achievement of its performance
targets. Likewise, this new budget management approach will also increase accountability and
managerial flexibility within the public administration. Finally, the new programmatic budget
presentation will increase fiscal transparency and the link between policy priorities and budget
allocations.
4.    The third project component will support the holistic implementation of these new governance
principles across the public sector by strengthening fiscal decentralization, local governance and
intergovernmental fiscal relations. The empowerment of directly elected local govcrnments and
strengthening transparency and public engagement in the management of local affairs, represent a key
pillar of the Country's new governance framework and Constitution. Reforms supported under the
two first project components represent an opportunity to bring about more inclusive local governance
and strengthen their financial management. Furthermore, the advanced regionalization strategy and
the planned empowerment of regions will necessitate in the transfer of new competences and financial
resources. 'his will in turn require the revision of the current system of fiscal transfers and
equalization, taking into account the new distribution of competences in a constrained fiscal
environment.
5.    The duration of this project is envisaged for a period of 4 years, in line with the time frame of
the government's development program (2012-2016) as well as with the transition period foreseen for
the full implementation of the new constitution. Supporting the implementation of reforms covered
under the Morocco Accountability and Transparency DPL, this project will also support an
information and communication strategy that will help provide the necessary visibility to improve
awareness within the administration and the public on the benefits of the government's reform
strategy and ongoing initiatives. This strategy will be particularly important for cross-cutting reforms
such as public consultations, performance budgeting and fiscal decentralization. The strategy should
also contribute to building momentum for their effective and successful implementation. For the
public consultation reform work under Component I, a specific information and communication
strategy will be developed around the launch and implementation of the National Dialogue in order to
support the reform process and duration of activities under this new and innovative reform area.
6.    The project is recipient executed and will be managed by the Ministry of General Affairs and
Governance (MAGG), which will act as an implementing agency. A project management unit (PMU)
will be established and supervised by MAGG, which will be responsible for the implementation of


﻿project activities, procurement of services and financial management. The Unit will also be tasked
with monitoring the activities and coordination between the different actors associated in the
respective reforms covered under this project. The PMU will be overseen by a Steering Committee
which consists of representatives of the central departments and decentralized units involved in these
reforms. The task of the Steering Committee is to provide overall facilitation and supervision of
project activities throughout the project cycle. The chair of the Steering Committee will be the
Secretary General, or the Project Director. The Project Director presides over the PMU and will be
assisted by a Project Coordinator, as well as an expert in procurement and financial management,
unless the administrative and financial management units wish to assume this role. The Project
Director is appointed by the Minister and the three other positions are financed by the project.
Budget
The project's budget is estimated at USD 4 million over a four (4) year duration. The indicative
allocations by components and sub-components are specified below in table 1.
Indicative project budget for 4 years (in USD)
Cost by Component                                Transition  Country  Bank       Total
Fund       Financing  Financing  (USD)
I Strengthening public participation
1-1. Support to the National Dialogue on the new
constitutional principles of citizen participation and to the
participatory development of related consultation and
petitions policies.
1-2 Piloting of the new consultation policy in a ministry  266,000
and a local government and capacity building of officials
and CSOs
1-3 Development of a monitoring and evaluation system,  142,000
including on-line consultations and user surveys
Total component I                                730,000              50,000
11. Enhancing Efficiency and Accountability in the Use
of Public Funds
11-1 Support to the implementation of the performance  1,500,000      70,000
budgeting reform through public sector expertise from
OECD countries having implemented the same reform It
comprises support to (i) the design and steering of the
budget reform and for the development of the new
procedures and tools, (ii) the implementation of the
performance-based approach in line ministries, and (ini)
the development of a government wide performance
monitoring and evaluating system and the revision of the
financial management information systems
11-2 training and capacity building for the implementation
of the new public procurement rules.
124 000
11-3 Public investment management diagnostic and
technical assistance                              100,000
11-4 public financial management assessment through an  100,000
update of the 2009 PEFA


﻿Total component II                               1,824,000            70,000
Ill Advancing Regionalization
Ill-1 Adapting the fiscal transfer and equalization system  277,800   50,000
for local governments (LG), in accordance with the new
constitution and the advanced regionalization strategy
111-2 Capacity building for Local Government (LG) financial  296,000
management, including on the new public procurement
rules.
111-3 Strengthening the planning and performance  195,000
contracting process in line with the enhanced role of
regions
Total component III                               768,800             50,000
Information and communication                     50,000
Reserve (Misc expenditures)                       137,200
Project Implementation Unit                       490,000    200,000
Total project cost                               4,000,000
I). Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
7.    The project mainly focuses on technical assistance and institutional capacity building. The
institution-building and technical assistance to be provided under this grant are geared towards
improving the internal functioning and performance of public institutions. There are no physical
interventions which might necessitate an Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) or other similar
diagnostic instrument. The incremental environmental impact of this project is nil, commensurate
with an environmental category rating of "C".
8.    No involuntary resettlement and/ or involuntary land acquisition can be envisaged in relation
to project activities and therefore OP 4.12 does not apply." A social safeguards specialist will advise
the team to ensure that implementation of project activities would not warrant triggering of the policy.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
9.    The proposed operation will focus on capacity building and technical assistance. 'ihe
borrower will not be required to apply safeguard policies for this project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies              Triggered ?  Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP No
4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     No
Forests OP/BP 4.36              No
Pest Management OP 4.09         No


﻿Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP No
4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  No
Safety of Darns OP/13P 4.37         No
Projects on International Waterways No
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
1-22-2013
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
NA
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:               Name: Fabian Seiderer, Senior Public Sector Specialist
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Project is transferred to sector manager  Date: 1-15-13
Sector Manager:                 Name: Guenter Heidenhof, MNSPS Date: 1-23-13
sector manager
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a forn and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


