68782
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.; ISDSC
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-April-2012
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:                      Mozambique           Project ID:                P131195
Project Name:                 Climate Change Technical Assistance Project
Task Team Leader:             Giovanni Ruta
Estimated Appraisal Date;     07 May 2012          Estimated Board Date:      26 June-2012
Managing Unit:               AFTEN                Lending Instrument:        Technical Assistance Grant
Sector:                       Transport (17%); General water, sanitation and flood protection (17/); Renewable
Energy (17%); Health (17%); Agriculture, fishing and fbrestry sector (32%)
Theme:                        Climate Change (100%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                            Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              0.00
Pilot Program fbr Climate Resilieice                                                           2.00
Co financing (DFID)                                                                             0.53
Financing Gap
Total                                                                                           2.53
Environmental Category        B - Parial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project?   No
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective Is to strengthen the institutional and technical capacity of the Government of
Mozambique to mainstream climate change resilience into key economic sectors.
C. Project Description
The Technical Assistance project would provide targeted support to build capacity and address key knowledge gaps for
each of the three pillars of the Strategic Program on Climate Resilience (SPCR)1. Technical assistance activities are
arranged into three components:
Component 1: Policy and Institutional Reform
National Climate Change Strategy Preparation: The project would support GoM to develop this strategy and action
'The three pillrs of the SPCR arm. - (i) Policy and institutional reTfonns (Pillar 1), (i) Transformational investmet pilots' (Pillar 2) and.(iii) Program and
knowledge management (Pillar 3).


﻿plan which will require deployment of technical assistance to build national. capacity and to support the strategy
development process. The project will also contribute to the costs ofinational and regional consultation processes to ensure
that strategy development is evidence-based and responsive to ideas and views from a wide range of stakeholders. The
strategy will be reviewed by CONDES and then submitted for Cabinet approval.
Preparation of the Development Policy Operation: Specialist technical assistance support will help GoM prepare a
series of studies and assessments as baselines for the DPO, including reviews of climate-related expenditure in selected
sectors; a Poverty and Social Impact Assissment (PSIA) and a potential complement to the Strategic Environmental and
Social Assessment (SESA) proposed for PPCR investments.
Delivery of Policy and Institutional Reforms:At sector level, the project will support the delivery of specialist technical
assistance - both national and international, to support delivery of specific policy actions identified in the DPO results
framework. Itis anticipated that this would include consultancy support to (i) Assist the Ministry of Public Works to assess
the vulnerability of its rural roads infrastructure to climate change and to identify and pilot the development of climate
resilient standards, (ii) Assist the Ministry of Agriculture to review and develop research and extension approaches that
could build resilience into farming systems and that could promote the uptake of effective 'conservation agriculture'
approaches, (iii) Assist the Ministry of Health to review sector climate vulnerability, identify adaptation and disaster
response options and then integrate these into sector frameworks.
Component 2; Knowledge Management and Evidence Building
Knowledge management and learning: The project would support GoM to design and implement measures to
disseminate, discuss and mainstream relevant studies and pilot experience on climate adaptation and will support the
development and incremerital operating costs of a knowledge management centre - initially to be hosted by the GoM's
forthcoming Climate Change Coordination Unit.
Evidence gaps: Scoping studies would be undertaken to design the detailed studies that would be needed to address the
key evidence gaps identified in the SPCR - on coastal vulnerability, fisheries, health, and forestry.
Component 3: SPCR Management and Coordination Support
Technical expertise on financial management, procurement and M&E: A national climate change manager will head
a team including a monitoring and, evaluation officer, a financial management officer and a procurement officer. The team
will be based in the CCCU once it is formed and in the interim will be hosted by MPD.
General operations of the climate change office: The climate change office will provide the works.space for the staff in
charge of managing and coordinating SPCR activities. Activities to be supported include the purchase of office equipment
and supplies, and a vehicle, and will allow the staff to travel in order to supervise PPCR projects and attend relevant
international events.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
The proposed project would support consultations, analytical work, and capacity building to strengthen Mozambique's
institutional capacity on climate change in support of the parallel implementation of a series of Development Policy
Operations under the Ministry of Planning and Development (MPD). As such, there will be no specific on-the ground
project locations associated with this project.
E. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Stephen Ling, Natural Resources Management & Environment Specialist, AFTEN
Cheikh Sagna, Sr. Social Development Specialisi, AFTCS
H. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered        Yes     No    TBD                   Explanation


﻿Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  X                 The project is a TA operation designed to improve
environmental outcomes through strengthening
MICOA and broader capacity to identify and manage
climate adaption and mitigation investments, and will
not finance physical investment activities on the
ground. It will therefore not have any direct
environmental impacts, and its indirect impacts,
through informing policy development, are expected
to be largely positive.
Given that the project will finance additional
analytical work to complement existing analysis
(including the SESA of PPCR activities) of poverty,
social and environmental effects of the climate
change policy reforms considered by the government,
the Policy on Environmental Assessment BP/OP 4.01
has been triggered, and the project classified as
Category B. The ToRs for the analytical work on
poverty, social and environmental effects of climate
change would be prepared, consulted upon, and
disclosed before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 X
Forests OP/BP 4.36                          X
Pest Management OP 4.09                     X
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      X
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4. 10              X
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         X
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4,37                   X
Projects on International Waterways         X
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguardlesus
1 Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any
potential large scale, significant and/or IrreverLsible impacts:
The project is a TA operation designed to Improve environmental outcomes through strengthening MICOA and
broader capacity to identify and manage climate adaption and mitigation investments, and will not finance physical
investment activities on the ground. It will therefore not have any direct environmental impacts, and its indirect .
impacts, through informing policy development, are expected to be largely positive. The project will provide suppor
across all three pillars of the SPCR, including the 'Mozambique: First Climate Change Development Policy
Operation.
A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) of the SPCR is already being undertaken by GoM with
support from the African Development Bank, which aims to generate sector-specific guidance for climate-smart,
environmentally and socially responsible development (with a focus on the pilot investments). The work under
CCTAP will allow to fill eventual knowledge gaps in the event that some specific social or environmental issues are
considered not adequately covered by the SESA.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area:
3


﻿N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
N/A
4. DescrIbe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The SPCR is in the process of preparing a SESA for the pilot investments to be financed under the program. This will bring
together the key stakeholders that are also relevant for this project The TOR for the proposed studies to analy2e the project's
and DPO's impact on environmental and social issues as well as poverty have been agreed and discussed with the main
stakeholders.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
with an emphasis on potentialy affected people.
Stakeholders for the project include those from Government, civil society, private sector, local communities, academia, and other
development partners. Analytical underpinnings for the proposed DPO, like a SESA and a PSIA will be discussed and agreed with
all stakeholders. Workshops will be organized upon their completion to disseminate the findings.
III. APPROVALS
Sigard and sabmivted b          Name                                        D   at
Task Team Leader                Giovanni Ruta
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Alexandra Ben         7                                          A,
Comments:
Sector Manager:                 Idah Pswarayi-Riddihough                              §
4


