                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/20/2011                                    Report No.: AC6401
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Mozambique                           Project ID: P107350
Project Name: Water Resources Development
Task Team Leader: Marcus J. Wishart
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 16, 2011        Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTWR                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%);Flood protection
(20%)
Theme: Water resource management (75%);Other urban development (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             70.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              3.00
         Climate Investment Funds                                       10.00
         Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund               0.75
         Financing Gap                                                   0.00
                                                                        13.75
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the development and management of
national water resources and increase the yield from Corumana Dam to augment water
supply for the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area (GMMA).

 The direct project beneficiaries are persons benefitting from improved water
management systems, water supply and distribution in target towns and communities as
well as livelihood improvement programs and employment opportunities.

 The expected results of the project primarily include: (i) % of the river basins covered
by water resources management plans; (ii) % of hydro-climatic stations operational and
reporting; and (iii) incremental reservoir yield available from Corumana Dam for the
GMMA.
3. Project Description
Component A: Water Resources Management. The objective of this component is to
enhance capacity at the national and regional level to address the challenges of water
resources management in Mozambique and strengthen the framework for water resources
development.

 Component B: Completion of the Corumana Dam: Civil and Hydro-Mechanical Works.
The objective of this component is to ensure the completion of the Corumana Dam,
including installation of spillway gates with repair works of concrete pillars/abutments, a
saddle dam with a fuse plug emergency spillway, a monitoring system and equipment,
along with other safety measures.

 Component C: Completion of the Corumana Dam: Environmental and Social. The
objective of this component is to ensure that completion of the Corumana Dam is
compliant with the project safeguard instruments prepared by the Borrower and cleared
by the Bank. The component includes implementation of the Environmental Management
Plan (EMP) and the Resettlement Action Plan, including a Community Livelihood Plan.

 Component D: Water Resources Development. The objective of this component is to
address the infrastructure deficit and assist in the development of river basin plans and a
pipeline of future water resource investments. Activities to be supported include the
development of feasibility studies, tender designs, strategic assessments and river basin
plans, along with preparation of environmental and social assessments for potential
investments.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will support the Government’s National Water Resources Development
Program. Components B and C will be directed toward completion of the Corumana
Dam. Built between 1983 and 1989, the Corumana Dam is located in Mozambique,
approximately 90 km north-west of the capital Maputo, on the Sabíe River which flows
from South Africa into Mozambique and is a tributary to the Incomati River. The
Incomati River is an international waterway shared by South Africa, Swaziland and
Mozambique, which is the downstream riparian.

  The Corumana Dam is situated within the Lebombo Mountains in southern
Mozambique. It lies in the Moamba District of Maputo Province (25°13'10.10''S;
32°8'2.31''E) and immediately downstream of the border with South Africa's Kruger
National Park. Completion of the Corumana Dam will restore the full supply level (FSL)
from the current operating level of 111 mASL to the original design of a level of 117
mASL. This will increase the surface area of the reservoir by 23 percent (adding an
estimated 1,607 ha).

 The Project Affected Zone corresponds to areas notified by the National Directorate of
Water to that effect and will include areas affected by the (i) expanded reservoir
inundation area and adjacent buffer zone; (ii) areas directly affected by project civil
works (saddle dam, borrow pits, construction camp, lands for resettlement, etc.) and (iii)
the areas affected by a 1 in 1,000 year return period flood event, if the reservoir reached
120 mASL which would activate the saddle dam’s fuse plug emergency spillway and
excess water flow through the diversion channel to the Sabíe River downstream from the
main dam.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr George Campos Ledec (AFTEN)
   Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Issues: The Sabíe River, on which the Corumana Dam is situated, flows
through South Africa's world-famous Kruger National Park (KNP) and enters
Mozambique immediately upstream of the existing Corumana Reservoir. Within the
extensive KNP (encompassing some 2 million ha), the only area to be affected by raising
of the Corumana Reservoir would be a section of the Sabíe River that cuts through the
Lembobo Mountains, just upstream of the South Africa-Mozambique border.

  Hydrological analyses and detailed topographic LiDAR surveys carried out during
preparation indicate that at a full supply level of 117 mASL (10 percent expected
frequency), the backwater effect would be confined to the river channel in the Sabíe
River gorge, and reach 730 m into KNP in South Africa. At an operating level of 115
mASL, the backwater effect is estimated at 430 m. In the case of a 1 in 200 year return
period flood event at the 117 mASL operating level, and if the dam's gates were closed,
the backwater effect would be confined to the river channel and reach an estimated 1,195
m into South Africa. For a 115 mASL operating level, the same scenario is estimated to
reach 1,050 m into South Africa. All of this incremental inundated area would be within
the existing channel in the Sabíe River gorge, which comprises braided rapids.
  Accounting for increased sediment deposition due to slower river flow near the reservoir
tail, as well as inundation, this riverine ecosystem could be ecologically altered for up to
about 1,080 m into South Africa at the 117 mASL operating level (935 m at the 115
mASL operating level). However, since this ecosystem type extends for nearly 8 km
along the Sabíe River into the KNP, the EIA indicates that only up to 15 percent of the
riverine ecosystem could be somewhat affected by the completion of Corumana Dam.
The magnitude and frequency of the impacts associated with potential back-flooding
would be further reduced if, as planned, the dam's main gates are left open above 117
masl. Cooperative disaster management measures being developed under the tri-partite
arrangements for the Incomati River basin under the Progressive Realisation of the
IncoMaputo Agreement (PRIMA) program will facilitate joint operations, so as to keep
the reservoir at or below 117 masl during all except sudden, extraordinarily large flood
events.

  Aside from relatively small portions of the Sabíe River channel within KNP, the
terrestrial natural habitats to be affected by raising the Corumana Reservoir level are
primarily within Mozambican territory and outside of designated protected areas.

  The boundaries of the Sabíe Game Park (SGP), an existing private conservation area, do
not extend below 117 mASL, the FSL of the expanded future Corumana Reservoir. The
Corumana Dam EIA indicates that at the FSL of 117 mASL, the following area of
terrestrial natural habitats would be affected: (i) 888 ha of Sclerocarya birrea-Acacia
nigrescens Savanna; (ii) 445 ha of Lebombo South Landscape, a small portion of which
includes the riverine vegetation within the Sabíe River channel of KNP; and (iii) 274 ha
of existing Floodplain Grassland. The natural habitats comprising the Sclerocarya birrea-
Acacia nigrescens Savanna and Lebombo South Landscape are still relatively extensive,
occurring within the KNP as well as the existing Sabíe and proposed Ingwe game parks,
both privately owned and fully on Mozambican territory. The expected loss of these
habitats within the expanded reservoir inundation zone is therefore not considered to be
significant.

 The Floodplain Grassland ecosystem type is not an original natural habitat, but has
developed in response to the fluctuating shoreline of the Corumana Reservoir. These
grasslands currently provide a valuable grazing area for livestock along the portions of
the Corumana Reservoir shoreline with a resident human population, as well as for
wildlife from the KNP and Sabie Game Park (SGP). Hippopotamus, African Buffalo, and
various antelope species regularly graze within this ecosystem type, which provides
suitable forage throughout the year. As the Corumana Reservoir level rises, the existing
Floodplain Grassland area will disappear under the rising waters. However, a roughly
comparable area of this habitat type is expected to re-establish itself along the fluctuating
shoreline of the future reservoir. To ensure that an adequate Floodplain Grassland area is
maintained while the reservoir level is initially raised and thereafter, the future Operating
Rules for water releases from the Corumana Dam will be adjusted accordingly.

 Downstream of Corumana Dam, the Sabíe River ecosystem is much more modified by
human activities than is the case upstream within KNP. Since the existing Corumana
Dam first began operating in 1989, downstream flows in the Sabíe River differ
significantly from the natural (pre-dam) pattern, until its confluence with the Incomati
River. In particular, current water releases are made to generate peaking power from the
dam's two turbines (with 16 MW installed capacity); over much of the year, the dam
releases twice-daily peak flows that are very different from the seasonal peak flows that
predominated before the Corumana Dam was first built. The fish and other aquatic
species that still remain within the Sabíe River between Corumana Dam and its
confluence with the Incomati River have adapted to this un-natural flow pattern.
Completing the Corumana Dam and raising the reservoir FSL from 111 to 117 masl is
expected to reduce annual downstream flows in the Sabíe River by about 5.1%, due to (i)
reduced spillage (of water that the enlarged reservoir will be able to store) and (ii)
increased evaporation from the enlarged reservoir, due to its greater surface area.

  The water quality of the existing Corumana Reservoir is generally good, with high
levels of dissolved oxygen and relatively low turbidity. The EIA confirms that this
situation is not expected to change appreciably with the planned increase of the FSL from
111 to 117 mASL. Thermal stratification does not occur in the present reservoir, nor is it
considered likely at the increased FSL. Reservoir as well as downstream water quality
will be systematically monitored as part of the EMP. A diversity of native fish species
have adapted to the Corumana Reservoir, including the economically valuable Tigerfish
Hydriocynus vittatus. According to the EIA, raising the FSL from 111 to 117 mASL is
expected to increase the reservoir's surface area by 23%, and net fishery output by 2%.

 Social Issues: An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been
completed, including a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and Community Livelihood Plan
for the completion of the Corumana Dam. These have been reviewed by the Bank, the
executive summary translated into Portuguese and disclosed in country and through the
Bank's InfoShop.

 The SIA concluded that completion of the Corumana Dam is likely to affect 186
households with 338 assets as follows:

 * 77 households will be relocated as follows:
 - 31 houses have residential units that are located within the 250 m bufferzone along the
maximum water level (i.e., 120 masl);
 - 46 households have residential units that are located within the 500 m bufferzone
along the saddle dam;

 * 230 recession farm plots will be relocated as follows:
 - 185 recession farm plots are located within 250 m bufferzone along the maximum
water level (i.e., 120 masl), belonging to 25 also affected households;
 - 45 recession farm plots are located within the 500 m buffer zone along the saddle dam,
belonging to 4 also affected households (armed attacks were more intense in the villages
of Jone and Matunganhana, which were closest to the border with South Africa. After the
conflict a considerable number of those who escaped to Chavane did not return. The
populated area of Jone is much smaller than it was before the war and most of
Matunganhana has been transformed into the Sabíe Game Park);

 * 25 family graves are located within the bufferzones of the maximum water level (i.e.,
120 masl) will need to be relocated, belonging to 4 also affected households;

 * 1 Church is located within the bufferzone along the saddle dam (i.e., 500 m) and will
need to be relocated, belonging to one also affected household;

 * 4 high Voltage Electricity Towers are located within the bufferzone of the the
maximum water level, (e.g. 120 masl) and will need to be relocated (or additional studies
will be required to identify technical solutions for the foundation and the isolation of the
towers);

 * 1 ARA-Sul former military headquarter, no longer at use; and

 * There are no infrastructures or human settlements identified in the impacted area in
the Republic of South Africa's Kruger National Park.

  Given that the dam has been operational since 1989, existing water level fluctuations
have prevented large permanent settlements within the reservoir area. However, people
do establish temporary structures during the planting season and there will be impacts in
terms of changes to the availability and extent of recession agriculture. The SIA and RAP
detail the number of Project Affected People, both temporary and permanent assets and
livelihoods that will be affected. The RAP (and the EMP) will be implemented by an
Environmental and Social Management Team with assistance from a well-qualified
consulting firm that will be contracted to assist with the implementation of Project
Component C.

 A Resettlement Action Plan identifies Project Affected People and outlines the
processes and procedures to facilitate the resettlement process. While the reservoir level
will continue to fluctuate and access to agricultural areas will be permitted, all
infrastructure and 25 identified graves will be relocated above the full supply level. An
area downstream of the emergency spillway will be cleared from any permanent
infrastructure. Based on the findings of the SIA, most of the affected population will be
relocated within the same areas of residence. Appropriate grievance mechanisms have
been established building on the local administrative and traditional structures as well as
the Basin Committees used by ARA-Sul to engage local stakeholders. A Community
Livelihood Plan will be implemented as part of the RAP to ensure benefits accrue at the
local level to the relocated and host communities and also to the household displaced
when the Dam was originally constructed in 1983 and 1989. Provisions have been
included under Component C for socioeconomic monitoring during and after
implementation of the works associated with completion of the Corumana Dam, to
evaluate and respond to any emerging impacts associated with the project.
  The original construction of the dam took place between 1983 and 1989 during the post-
independence conflict (1976-1992). The Sabíe Administrative Post, and particularly the
Corumana Dam, suffered from numerous armed attacks from late 1982 up to the Peace
Agreement in October 1992. During this period most of the communities around the dam
migrated to Chavane seeking security and gradually returned to their homelands after the
Peace Agreement. The Matunganhane locality was initially settled along the Sabíe River
in the reservoir area upstream of the dam and was relocated to the northern area of the
reservoir. This population continues to inhabit the surrounding areas and is mainly
dedicated to subsistence or cash crop agriculture and livestock, with no experience of
fishing. The Magonela community was affected by the establishment of the Sabíe Game
Park in 2005 and the Chavane community, especially Jone, is expected to be affected by
the proposed Ingwe Game Park to the south of the reservoir. While the World Bank was
not involved in the original construction or establishment of the parks, and there is no
record of the resettlement process of the original construction, the Community Livelihood
Plan makes deliberate effort to ensure benefits accrue to the wider hosting communities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Potential Indirect Impacts: During consultations with Impacted and Affected Parties
(I&APs), concerns were raised that the higher water levels of Corumana reservoir might
enable improved access by boat to wildlife poachers coming to the Kruger National Park
and Sabie Game Park, since the reservoir shoreline would be physically closer to both
protected areas.

 To mitigate this impact, the Environmental Management Plan provides for development
and implementation of a Reservoir Management Plan during project implementation.
This will include zoning of the reservoir, including those adjacent to the KNP and SGP.
The roles and responsibilities, along with estimated recurrent costs of routine patrols for
these sections of the reservoir, are outlined in the EMP.

 Long-term Impacts: Although the completion of Corumana Dam is intended to provide
a more secure water supply for the GMMA, it is possible that additional water stored by
the dam and not needed by Maputo would be used to expand irrigated agriculture on
suitable lands below the reservoir. Any such new or expanded irrigation project would be
separate from this one, and subject to the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
requirements of MICOA, Mozambique's Ministry for Coordination of Environmental
Affairs.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The Corumana Dam is an existing dam built between 1983 and 1989. The completion is
intended to augment bulk water supply for the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area
(GMMA). Projections are that the GMMA will experience severe shortages of water
from 2015 if no new infrastructure is built. In response to this challenge, the Government
of Mozambique has undertaken a number of studies to identify the next source of supply
for the GMMA.
 A study by Mozambique, South Africa and Swaziland under the auspices of the
"Tripartite Interim Agreement for Co-operation on the Protection and Sustainable
Utilization of the Incomati and Maputo Watercourses (IIMA)" on the Augmentation of
Water Supply to the City of Maputo and its Metropolitan Area (October 2009) identified
completion of the Corumana Dam as one of the priority interventions. The Master Plan
for the Greater Maputo Water Supply System (February 2011) has also confirmed that
completion of the Corumana Dam must be regarded as the first choice for the next step in
water resources development, given the lower risk in time and cost and the more
immediate possibility of implementation.

  The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and a Technical Services and Dam Safety
assignment undertaken during preparation have both undertaken hydrological analyses to
determine the potential impacts of the increased reservoir and the extent of possible back
flooding. Alternative operating full supply levels at 117 mASL and 115 mASL for the
reservoir were assessed.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Corumana Dam is owned by the Government of the Republic of Mozambique
through the National Directorate of Water in the Ministry of Public Works and Housing
and operated by ARA-Sul. The dam operator, ARA-Sul, has experience in the
implementation of large infrastructure projects and the associated environmental and
social issues associated with their operation. The Project will provide additional support
to ARA-Sul during the construction phase to consolidate capacity and support the
increased scope of required environmental and social management measures.

 The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been completed to assess
the potential impacts associated with completion of the Corumana Dam. The ESIA
includes the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and the Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP). As part of the RAP, a Community Livelihood Plan (CLP) has also been
developed to improve local development conditions and paying particular attention to
previous displacement in the project affected area.

 A qualified firm, independent of the civil works contractor, will be contracted to support
the Environmental and Social Management Team of DNA and ARA-Sul in development
and implementation of the measures required under the EMP and RAP (Component C).

 The EMP and RAP include implementation schedules for the EMP and RAP activities,
the timing of which will be carefully coordinated in relation to the schedule for civil
works construction and reservoir filling, and a full budget for which sufficient Project
funding has been allocated.

 To mitigate the potential adverse environmental impacts of completing the Corumana
Dam and to enhance the positive impacts, the EMP includes support to the following
programs during implementation:
 - A Construction and Workers Camp Management Plan, to minimize the potential
negative impacts of construction activities and outline the contractors’ responsibilities in
relation to environmental management, along with environmental supervision by the
Supervising Engineer, as part of their independent contract. The EMP is to be included in
the tender documentation to ensure that all contractors and sub-contractors comply with
the requirements of the EMP. Based on the EMP, the contractor(s) will prepare and
implement as part of their contractual arrangement their own EMP, called the
Construction EMP (CEMP). More complex environmental management issues will be
handled through the preparation and implementation of Method Statements, which will
need to be approved by the Supervising Engineer and the ARA-Sul and DNA’s
Environmental and Social Management Team.

 - An Inundation Preparation Plan, prepared during the first year of project
implementation and implemented prior to impoundment. This would include the
following: a) identification and removal of potential sources of water contamination, such
as garbage dumps and latrines in order to protect water quality; ii) limited biomass
clearing within carefully selected portions of the area to be inundated to facilitate fishing
and navigation on portions of the reservoir. The areas which would be cleared will be
discussed with key stakeholders; iii) survey and transplant of threatened plant species if
found within the area to be inundated; iv) survey and salvage of any physical cultural
resources, including potential archaeological sites and fossils; v) baseline survey on
waterborne diseases in the wider project area with a focus on intestinal and urinary
bilharzias and malaria; and vi) finalisation of the framework Emergency Preparedness
Plan (EPP) in order to warn the population around the reservoir and downstream of the
dam in case of severe flooding around the reservoir and downstream of the dam, large
operational flood releases, or other emergency situations. A draft EPP has been prepared
under a separate contract during preparation. The final EPP will be approved 12 months
before reservoir inundation.

 - A Reservoir Management Program that would be prepared during the first two years of
implementation and include the following: i) Environmental Zoning of the reservoir (e.g.
for fishing and controlled hunting) and the area around the reservoir through a
consultative process with all major stakeholders in order to protect wildlife resources,
biodiversity, and water quality; ii) Patrolling designated sections of the Corumana
Reservoir to reduce wildlife poaching risks, in collaboration with the conservation area
managers and local fishing communities; iii) Management of the catchment area around
the reservoir in Mozambique in order to protect the reservoir from excessive
sedimentation, and euthropication in order to protect water quality, particularly since the
Corumana reservoir is a drinking water reservoir; iv) Reservoir fisheries development
and management for the development and management of the reservoir fisheries, based
on sustainable harvests of native fish species; and v) Invasive Aquatic Plant Management
to monitor the spread of non-native aquatic plant species (such as water hyacinth, salvinia
and azolla) and outline control options in the event that infestation becomes problematic.
  - An Environmental Water Releases Program that would take into account
considerations such as: i) limiting backwater flooding within the Kruger National Park;
ii) ensuring an adequate area of floodplain grasslands along the reservoir shoreline, to
provide grazing for wildlife and livestock; iii) reducing impacts to downstream channel
morphology, including river bank erosion; and iv) enhancing downstream water quality,
along with the conditions for fish and other aquatic life. This program will recommend
technical criteria and decision-making procedures for environmental water releases and
these recommendations will serve as a key input to the revised Operating Rules for the
Corumana Dam. The new Operating Rules will be approved by ARA-Sul prior to any
raising of the reservoir’s full supply level above the current 111 mASL. This program will
include long-term monitoring of water quality, fish species, macroinvertebrates, and other
environmental quality parameters, to provide a feedback mechanism for future
adjustments to environmental water releases from the Corumana Dam.

 - An Environmental Monitoring Plan for the monitoring of primarily water quality in the
reservoir and downstream of the dam, sedimentation deposition upstream of the dam,
downstream river morphology and impacts on wildlife, and the effectiveness of control
poaching measures.

 To mitigate the potential adverse social impacts of completing the Corumana Dam and
to enhance the positive impacts, the RAP includes provision for compensating those
directly affected by the project. The RAP also includes a Community Livelihood Plan to
extend the potential development benefits of the project at the local level and to address
any potential legacy issues. Regular socio-economic monitoring is intended to help
evaluate project impacts and the efficacy of the planned interventions, providing a
mechanism to respond to any emerging issues during implementation.

 The GoM has presented its intention to proceed with the completion of the Corumana
Dam within the regular meetings of the Tripartite Permanent Technical Committee
(TPTC), established under the IIMA. The GoM provided its formal written riparian
notification of these proposed activities on January 12, 2009 and received letters of no
objection from both the Republic of South Africa (January 29, 2010) and the Kingdom of
Swaziland (July 15, 2009). The request from South Africa for constant feedback and
regular consultation with the respective bodies, namely the Department of Water Affairs,
the South African National Parks and the affected municipalities’ has been addressed by
the GoM during project preparation and will continue to be addressed during project
implementation through the TPTC. With reference to the proposed preparation for the
Ressano Garcia weir also to be located in the Incomati River basin (Component D), the
no objection has also been given as reflected in the minutes of the TPTC’s 38th meeting
on March 04, 2008.

 Under Project Component A (Water Resources Management), environmental
considerations will be mainstreamed within the water resources management and
planning functions of the National Water Directorate (DNA) and the Regional Water
Administrations (ARAs). This will include (i) ensuring that key environmental data -
including protected areas, major wetlands and other natural habitats, and environmental
flow requirements are included in the information systems developed for the Rapid Water
Resource Assessments of major Mozambican river basins; (ii) ensuring that adequate
environmental expertise is available to the Project Administration and Monitoring Team
that will support DNA in overall project implementation, coordination, and management;
and (iii) providing environmental training and other capacity building to the staff of DNA
and the ARAs.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key groups of stakeholders of the project include, but are not exclusive to:

 - Communities in project area: affected households, smallholder farms, fishery
association, previously resettled communities, the existing Sabie Game Park and the
proposed Ingwe Game Park (private conservation areas), and downstream irrigators.

 - Water supply, including water users in Maputo and the surrounding metropolitan
areas, and FIPAG.

 - Stakeholders in South Africa: Department for Water, the Kruger National Park, the
Inkomati Catchment Management Authority.

 A Public Consultation Process was undertaken in order to identify key issues of concern
and possible solutions, as well as accessing relevant local or traditional knowledge. The
process embarked with public consultations on the Terms of Reference in 2009 and has
since included meetings, public hearings and workshops with government officials in
Mozambique and South Africa, interested and affected parties, project affected
communities and representatives from the Kruger National Park.

  Overall, most of the responses from the various consultations were on socio-economic
issues and are described in detail in the ESIA. The issues raised included inquiry on the
impacts of increased inundation and sedimentation, any changes to biodiversity and water
quality as well as socio-economic benefits from the project. The key issue raised by the
PAPs is on improvement in their standard of living. In general all seven communities
around the reservoir are living under the poverty line with limited access to social
infrastructure.

 Access to social infrastructure in affected communities is very low compared with the
district levels, and much lower than national standards. The project is responding to the
needs of the affected communities through provision of these basic services, such as
access to schools, health services and water supply and sanitation. In addition the
communities will be provided permanent agriculture land, upgraded housing, improved
agriculture, fishing, livestock raising and other income generating activities. A
comprehensive description of the Community Livelihood Plan is detailed in the RAP.
 All final safeguards-related documents were disclosed publicly by the Borrower and the
Bank in Mozambique on May 16, 2011 as well as through the Bank’s InfoShop. In line
with national law, continuous public consultations have been undertaken as part of the
preparatory process.

 During project implementation, Component C will focus substantially on the structures,
processes, and principles for continued engagement and collaboration with stakeholder
groups.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/01/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/11/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/11/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/01/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/16/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/16/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                            Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts       Yes
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements         Yes
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                          Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification            N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                         N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s        No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Marcus J. Wishart        06/08/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr George Campos Ledec      06/17/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Yasmin Tayyab            06/17/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi    06/17/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala   06/08/2011
  Comments:
