                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC5700


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/02/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mozambique                         Project ID: P123201
Project Name: Coastal Cities and Climate Change
Task Team Leader: Paula Dias Pini
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 9,       Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTUW                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (50%);General water, sanitation and
flood protection sector (50%)
Theme: Climate change (40%);Other urban development (10%);Municipal finance
(25%);Municipal governance and institution building (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           100.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                       0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed development objective of the project is to improve municipal management and
sustainable financing to enhance climate resilience of targeted coastal cities.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project will be a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) that integrates municipal development
reforms and capacity building, climate related adaptation measures, and disaster preparedness,
bringing together the complementary approaches and resources from the Pilot Project Climate
Resilience (PPCR) (US$25 million) and IDA (US$60 million). The PPCR SEA, once finalized,
will serve to inform the strategic investment planning issues in this and other projects involving
climate resilience interventions.

 Based on experience to date, a SIL is the instrument that would most effectively enable the
project to work with central government on sector-wide issues as well as directly with municipal
governments based on measures of commitment from mayors as demonstrated by the actual
implementation of municipal reforms.

 The proposed approach is aligned with the PPCR and with previous Bank interventions in
Mozambique's municipal sector. Building upon the policy impact and lessons learned of the
Program for Reform of Local Public Administration (PROL 1994-1999) and the Municipal
Development Program (MDP 2003-2007), the project will focus infrastructure investments in
selected municipalities while providing broader policy and capacity building support to the
national municipal system. The proposed project also follows the successful strategy employed
by the Maputo Municipal Program (2007-2010, 2010-2015): empowering and directly funding
large municipalities to undertake fundamental institutional and financial reforms which enable
the sustainability of major investments for infrastructure and service delivery improvement.

 The proposed project will respond to two distinct but related requests from the GOM: to finance
investments which reduce the immediate (and continuing) vulnerability of strategic coastal cities
to climate related environmental threats and to resume Bank support for the development of the
national municipal system which has been interrupted since the closing of MDP in 2007. By
developing the new operation in collaboration with MAE, but at the same time maintaining the
advantages of municipal responsibility demonstrated by ProMaputo for working in larger cities,
this project will respond coherently to both of GOM's concerns. Thus one component, to be
managed by MAE, will provide general policy and institutional development assistance to the
municipal sector, while the second component, to directly finance selective municipalities under
the coordination of MAE, will support municipally managed investments to sustainably improve
urban infrastructure, environmental management, and operation and maintenance.

 Components description

 Component 1. Strengthening the municipal sector (US$10 million)

 The objective of this component is to strengthen systems and capacities at national and local
levels to improve the sustainability of municipal service provision, especially in context of
building resilience to tackle debilitating effects of climate-related impacts.

 At the national level, the component will provide technical assistance and capacity building
support to continue development of the national policy and institutional framework for local
government and urban management including: improved functional allocation among levels of
government, the legal and regulatory framework for municipal management and governance, and
strengthened accountability systems for municipal decision-making, service provision, and
resource management. This component will assist the Ministry of State Administration (MAE) to
develop its technical and management capacities as the lead agency for local governance in
Mozambique. Through MAE, support will be provided to the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and
other government institutions with key roles in urban and municipal development. Support to the
MOF will aim to improve policies and systems for intergovernmental finance (IGF) including
existing general purpose transfers and own-source revenues as well as possible additional
targeted grant mechanisms supporting municipal investments related to improved urban climate-
related resiliency. It will also support MOF and MAE to manage risks associated with the
transfer of additional functions to municipalities.

  At the local level, the component will fund training and technical assistance which strengthen
municipal capacities for planning, management, service delivery, and good governance in a
broader subset of Mozambique's municipalities than those funded under Component 2. This
assistance will enhance the capacity of municipalities to implement the systems and
methodologies defined by national policies, especially those related to environmental and fiscal
sustainability, supported by the Project's policy-reform efforts. At present the Government
(through MAE, the responsible central agency) has neither the resources nor the institutional
capacity to provide such support beyond the scope of the P13 project. Based on assessments of
need and of lessons learned from MDP and P13, the substantive and geographical scope and
associated mechanisms for providing this capacity building for targeted municipalities including
the roles of MAE's DNDA and the National Association of Municipalities (ANAMM), will be
defined during project formulation.

 In addition, this component will provide for the overall project coordination unit in MAE, the
central ministry leading the project, which will be primarily responsible for fiduciary
management and safeguards as well as monitoring and reporting to IDA, as discussed in the
Implementation Agency section below.

 Component 2 - Enhancing resilience of strategic coastal cities (US$50 million)

  This component objective is to enhance municipal capacities in selected cities for sustainable
resilience to weather-related environmental threats. Beneficiary cities are selected on the basis of
their strategic economic importance and their vulnerability to climate-related environmental
risks: the first and most important set of cities satisfying these criteria are the regional port cities
of Beira and Nacala. The implementation of the component activities will be the responsibility of
participating municipalities and will be provided through a grant. Credit funds to be transferred
by the national to local government will be at the disposal of the cities following certain climate
change criteria to be defined during preparation. The investments will absorb a large percentage
of the component resources, given their nature and level of institutional capacity already
achieved by these municipalities. These large infrastructure investments would be implemented
as much as possible through labour-intensive construction technologies.

 The component will finance infrastructure improvements to meet existing adaptation deficits
and provide the basis for future investments to reduce the threats resulting from climate change.
To ensure the effectiveness of these investments, the component will support the formulation by
each municipality of a comprehensive adaptation strategy, integrated into long-term municipal
land use and environmental management plans. In Beira and Nacala these instruments will build
on the data, studies, and plans already available or under preparation. Also building on several
ongoing initiatives, the component will improve municipal capacities to manage and respond to
natural disasters.

 Complementary capacity-building activities will support the sustainable operation and
maintenance by municipalities of urban infrastructure and services, especially those contributing
to enhanced adaptation to climate related environmental risks. Appropriate institutional
arrangements for O&M and systems for both service-related cost recovery and general municipal
revenue mobilization will be strengthened. Municipal plans and investment strategies will also
enhance the cities# economic and revenue bases by promoting the strategic roles of targeted
cities in regional development. Municipal counterpart funds contribution will be directed toward
recurrent costs for sustainability including environmental planning and management systems and
O&M of project financed infrastructure. This will be further discussed during preparation.

 Support to Beira municipality will address the adaptation deficit in infrastructure investments to
reduce flooding by: a) improving the drainage system (detailed engineering designs for
upgrading the existing open-air drainage network as well as subsequent works such as
rehabilitating, lining, and widening); b) improving coastal protection (update studies and then
develop engineering designs to address beach erosion as well as subsequent coastal works such
as rehabilitation of the existing groynes (beach erosion protection structure) system, and/or
studies and actions plans for improving vegetation on the beach to further protect against
erosion); and c) further strengthening the municipal sanitation agency, including its financial
base, to ensure sustainable operation and maintenance for sanitation, drainage, and coastal
management.

 Support to Nacala municipality will address the adaptation deficit in infrastructure investments
to tackle erosion by: a) developing a drainage master plan; b) executing priority drainage works;
and c) strengthening municipal capacity to maintain the drainage system and other critical
infrastructure and environmental management services.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be located in the urban areas of the cities Beira and Nacala.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Borrower has implemented several Bank financed projects and the Bank's safeguard
policies. The institution responsible for urban interventions has demonstrated an adequate
capacity to apply the safeguard policies through their projects. The cities that would be financed
through this project will need additional capacity on safeguards. An assessment of this capacity
will be carried out during the project preparation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP)
   Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    The overall environmental impact of the project is expected to be positive. However,
negative effects may arise during the implementation of the civil works. In Beira the proposed
drainage works will be along existing drainage canals. The coastal works will address control of
beach erosion through the rehabilitation and improvements of the existing beach protection
system. In Nacala the physical works will include the rehabilitation of existing canals. Most of
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes           No        TBD
these works can be managed through good engineering practices for design and construction.
Perhaps the most sensitive issue will be the disposal of dredged materials from existing polluted
drainage canals. Prefeasibility and feasibility studies have been financed by the European Union
for Beira, and by the Millenium Challenge Corporation for Nacala, and final engineering design
studies are underway. An Environmental and Social Management Framework will be prepared
for the project prior to appraisal, and will be the basis for preparation of site-specific EMPs or
EAs once the final engineering designs are prepared and precise locations and widths of
rehabilitated drainage canals and rights-of-way for maintenance access are determined.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
    The works will entail rehabilitating existing drainage canals in urban areas and improvements
in drainage channels made up of the natural drainage system in already heavily modified
periurban areas. No significant impacts on natural habitats or critical natural habitat issues have
been identified during the course of prefeasibility and feasibility studies. The project might
finance revegetation of some areas of beach dunes and planting of some mangrove in remnant
beachfront mangrove areas in Beira, in order to prevent further losses from erosion.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
    The project will focus on urban areas. There are no forests or large green areas preserved in
the urban areas targeted.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
    No adverese impacts on significant physical cultural resources are expected based on
prefeasibility and feasibility studies. The ESMF will include chance finds procedures.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
    The project will be located in urban or periurban areas. No communities meeting the criteria
specified in OP 4.10 are located in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    Due to the potential for temporary disturbance or relocation of a small number of structures
such as fences and latrines or assets such as fruit trees along the natural drainage channels in
periurban areas, OP 4.12 is triggered. However, until final engineering designs are completed
that identify the width of the rehabilitated drainage channel and the width of the necessary right-
of-way for maintenance access, the exact location of impacts cannot be known during project
preparation. A Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared for the project prior to
appraisal, and will be the basis for preparing either an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan or a
Resettlement Action Plan once final engineering designs are completed. An approved
Abbreviated RAP or full RAP will be prepared and implemented prior to commencement of any
civil works in which assets will be affected that require compensation or relocation.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 11/03/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   11/01/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Prefeasibility and feasibility studies have already been prepared through financing either by
   the European Union or the Millenium Challenge Corporation. These have included
   preliminary assessments of potential environmental and social risks and impacts. While final
   engineering designs are being prepared through these existing funding resources, an ESMF
   and an RPF are being prepared for the project, and these will be reviewed by the Bank and
   disclosed prior to appraisal. The ESMF and the RPF will be the basis for subsequent
   preparation of site-specific EMPs and EAs, and either Abbreviated or full RAPs prior to
   initiation of any civil works.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Paula Dias Pini                                             11/01/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       11/01/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad                                          11/01/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
