                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC5886


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/16/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mozambique                        Project ID: P124216
Project Name: MZ-Preparation and Supervision of the Pilot Public Works Program
Task Team Leader: Manuel Salazar
Estimated Appraisal Date:                  Estimated Board Date: November 1, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTSP                       Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                           Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                      0.00
        Rapid Social Response Program                                 1.80
                                                                      1.80


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective of the grant is to design and implement the first phase of a
labor-intensive public works program as an effective tool to provide temporary income support
to chronically insecure and food-insecure poor households. This first phase of the labor-intensive
public works will constitute, if successful, the initial phase of a larger intervention to be funded
by the government of Mozambique and other donors, including the World Bank.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The program will provide seasonal (ie. temporary) but predictable source of income to
households affected by regular and unexpected shocks through participation of beneficiaries in
public works. This is expected to provide chronically food insecure households with a level of
cash that will guarantee access to food in particularly harsh periods of the year, and prevent these
families from using negative coping mechanisms, such as asset depletion. It will be
complemented by including public/private sector partnership, microcredit schemes and other
income generation initiatives that still need to be defined as part of the overall design of the
Productive Social Action Strategy, and which will develop the capacity of beneficiaries to build
assets and eventually leave (or graduate from) the public works program. The proposed grant
will finance the initial phase for one year, while other donors (eg. The Swedish cooperation)
have already committed funds to finance these activities beyond this initial phase.

 Component 1 # Designing, implementing and assessing a labor-intensive public works program
(US$1.8 million # government executed).

 Sub-component 1.A. Capacity-building for INAS (US$116,000).
 The objective of this sub-component is to support INAS in setting up the operational and
implementation arrangements to carry out, monitor and assess the program. Activities under this
subcomponent aim at enhancing the capacity of INAS to: (a) implement, monitor and measure
program results; and (b) carry out institutional and implementation adjustments to scale up the
intervention after the initial phase. Additionally, this sub-component will provide financial
support for the following specific activities under responsibility of INAS: (a) Designing and
implementing an information and communication campaign to engage with community ladres
and potential beneficiaries; and (b) produce ID cards for beneficiaries registered in the program.

 Specifically the sub-component would finance technical assistance, consulting services, a small
proportion of equipment and operating costs directly linked with project operations (such as fuel
for the local offices of INAS involved in the implementation of the project).

 Sub-Component 1.B.Implementing Labor-intensive public works (US$1,584 million).
 This subcomponent will finance grants to municipalities and districts to carry out
implementation of eligible public works with beneficiaries selected through pre-determined
targeting methods and eligibility criteria. Grants will be used to cover administrative
expenditures and capital inputs (not more than 25%) and labor costs (wages - at least 75% of the
grants) to carry out approved sub-projects following predefined criteria.

 Districts/municipalities will be responsible for selecting public works projects and to implement
these projects, while INAS will be responsible for the selection of beneficiaries, with the support
of the districts/municipalities.

 The proposed grant will finance the initial phase of the program in CY 2011 and 2012 duration
in a number of districts and municipalities.

 Number of working days created. During the initial phase, approximately 180 public works
subprojects will be implemented in few districts pertaining to one province (the criteria for
selecting the province and the district/municipalities are described below) and in selected urban
areas of Maputo municipality. Each subproject will employ an average of 110 workers for 60
days each (or 3 months) although the exact duration and number of days will be revised in the
Operations Manual (current discussions with the Government indicate 4 months rather than 3 in
rural areas, and a longer period for urban areas). The initial phase will therefore create
approximately 1.100.000 working days and is expected to provide additional income to around
20.000 households.

 Eligible activities. There will not be a list of eligible activities, but there will be a negative list.
Activities under the public works program will meet a few simple eligibility criteria:
 i)     They should provide a public good or service: this is a particular important point and
details will be discussed in the Operations Manual to ensure that benefits are unambiguously
public (and not private) or for the sole benefit of a small group within the community. Some type
of public infrastructure, because they yield benefits to a few individuals or a very small group
within the community, will be excluded from financing, eg. housing for public servants (this will
also be described in the Operations Manual);
 ii)    They should be implemented using a budget ratio of 75% wages and 25 % for material,
tools and administrative costs;
 iii) They should be implemented in a period of not more than three months in urban areas
and up to fourth months in rural areas;
 iv) Even though there are no major environmental issues anticipated under sub-projects
given the small size, all sub-projects should follow the environmental framework as explained
below and in the Operational Manual.
 v.) As stated below, the financed activities should not involve involuntary resettlement, or have
any impact on natural habitats, forests and physiscal cultural resources.

 Targeting of communities within districts/municipalities. The communities to be targeted
should be the ones that experiment the highest chronic food insecurity within the targeted
districts. The list of selected postos administrativos and communities will be drawn by each
district/municipality, in relation to the budget available and the number of public works activities
that are eligible for the district/municipality. As these communities will participate in the
program for at least three years (but possible for a longer period of time), this exercise will take
place mostly at the beginning of each three-year cycle, or whenever emergency situations dictate
the inclusion of new communities within the districts/municipalities.

 Selection and design of public works. Districts and municipalities will select potential public
works to be implemented in the targeted communities: these activities should be part of the
district/municipal plans or should be discussed with the selected communities as part of a
participatory selection process. They should be endorsed by the conselhos consultivos at the
level of the posto administrative, but any decision on the selection of a particular project will
need to be discussed with the broader community and not left to the sole decision of the
Conselhos Consultivos. They also should meet a number of criteria already described above. The
responsible district/municipal sector will prepare a technical design proposal, with assistance of
the relevant provincial sectoral administration if needed, and will attach a budget that will
describe the use of funds (in particular the use of the 25% reserved for material/equipment,
information and communication activities and administrative overheads and operating costs). A
format for the proposals will be included in the Operations Manual.

 Sub-Component 1.C. Assessing Program Operations and Results (US$100,000).
 Tracking program progress and measuring results are key elements to adjust the intervention as
necessary and improve its sustainability. This subcomponent will provide funds and technical
assistance to carry out regular assessments to evaluate program operations and measure
outcomes. Particularly important will be the implementation of a process evaluation to inform
government about program operations and functioning, before the program is scaled up to a
second larger phase.
D. Project location (if known)
Mozambique -Urban and Rural areas of selected districts

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Mozambique ProMaputo Project has prepared and implemented an ESMF that covers the
same activities to be implemented by this project in the Maputo area. In rural areas the project
will use the Programmatic Support to Disaster Risk Management Phase I (EMF-EPM). Capacity
may need to be strengthened for ensuring compliance with provisions of the ESMF; such support
will be financed by the project.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    There are no major environmental issues anticipated under sup-projects due to small size and
rehabilitation nature of public works financed under subproject. The policy is triggered due to
potential negative impacts that may occur as a result of activities to be implemented under
component which may include construction or rehabilitation of small community roads,
construction of or rehabilitation of other community assets such as water reservoirs, cleaning of
drainage canals, etc. To mitigate against any potential negative environmental impact the pilot
will adopt the ProMaputo Project for those sub-projects financed in the Maputo. For smaller
projects rural public works, the project will adopt the EMF-EPM. No other safeguard policies
will be trigger because the project will adopt a negative list to select sub-projects and o projects
that involving involuntary resettlement, or affecting natural habitats, forests or physical cultural
resources will be financed.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                              X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   02/28/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The MZ-RSR Pilot Public Works Program will adopt the the ESMF prepared for the
   ProMaputo II Project to implement sub-projects in the Maputo area. The proposed project
   will also adopt the EMF-EMS for those smaller projects in rural areas.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Manuel Salazar                                              12/01/2010
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       09/09/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz                                     12/06/2010
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
