                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6100


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/02/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Mozambique                         Project ID: P125120
Project Name: Greater Maputo Water Supply Expansion Project
Task Team Leader: Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28,       Estimated Board Date: July 2, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: AFTUW                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan
Sector: Water supply (100%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):          130.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                      0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the production and treatment capacity of
water in order to meet the demand for water of the residents in the Greater Maputo Area.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Greater Maputo Water Supply Expansion Project (GMWSEP) consists of four components.
Component A includes construction of abstraction works from the Corumana Dam, a water
treatment plant, and transmission mains carrying initially raw water to the treatment plant and
then treated water to one of several existing distribution centers in the Greater Maputo area.
Component B includes goods and civil works to enable the Water Supply Investment and Asset
Fund (FIPAG) to carry out works for installation of 60,000 new connections, rehabilitation of
about 15,000 existing but poorly constructed connections, and the rehabilitation of about 300 km
of tertiary network. Component C of the project is TA for FIPAG's supervision of works
included in the current project and TA for preparation of a second, future phase of water
development to meet the City's growing need. Component D provides capacity building and
institutional support to the Water Supply Regulatory Council (CRA) with respect to expanding
their regulatory responsibility for smaller cities and towns.
  The significant environmental and social issues of the Greater Maputo Water Supply Expansion
Project are associated with the civil works to be built under Component A. This component
includes construction of abstraction works from the Corumana Dam, a water treatment plant, and
transmission mains carrying initially raw water to the treatment plant, and then treated water to
one of several existing distribution centers in the Greater Maputo area. With respect to
Component B, previous experience with identical Bank-financed work carried out elsewhere by
FIPAG has demonstrated very minor environmental impacts may arise that can be addressed by a
Construction Environmental Management Plan, which FIPAG has developed and implemented
for such works, and which also will be appropriate for construction management of Component
A. The TA provided by Component C is expected to have no significant environmental and
social impacts associated with it.

  The Environmental Assessment prepared for the project will include a summary description of
Phase 2 of Maputo's water supply expansion investments (of which this project is Phase 1) and
its likely impacts. The key components of Phase 2 (additional pumping capacity, water
treatment, and transmission mains) are likely to be built in the servitudes and land parcels
obtained for Phase 1.

D. Project location (if known)
Extensive feasibility studies have already been done to examine alternative water supply options
for Maputo. The preferred source of water supply is from the completed Corumana Dam on the
Sabie River, a short distance upstream of its confluence with the Incomati River, approximately
75 km northwest of Maputo. Completion of the Corumana Dam, which began operations in
1989, requires installing spillway gates, for which the dam was originally designed and
constructed, as well as some other minor works. Completing the dam will raise the full design
water level by an additional 7 m over the current operational mode.

 Key alternatives to be considered include: the location of the water treatment plant near the
Corumana Dam, rather than at a site near Moamba; and the final delivery point to an existing
distribution center at Machava, or a smaller distribution center under construction through
European funding sources at Tsalala, both located northwest of the urban core of Maputo. The
latter alternatives (delivery of treated water to either Machava or Tsalala) will require different
pipeline routes from Moamba to their respective destination.

 The project does not overlap sensitive environmental areas or resources, nor does it cross
densely populated areas except in the immediate vicinity of the Machava Distribution Center. In
the urban area around the Machava Distribution Center, the street rights-of-way are sufficiently
wide and unencumbered so that pipelines can be laid with minimal disruption of traffic or other
activities. Most of the landscape between Corumana Dam and the urbanized area north of
Maputo is sparsely occupied brush or open savannah with scattered farm plots (machamba).

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Adequate staffing capacity and procedures exist within FIPAG to manage environmental and
social risks of the GMWSEP, including specialists dedicated to oversight on similar Category A
projects. A strong record of experience exists with Safeguard aspects of projects with the World
Bank and other international and bilateral donors, as well as host country environmental
regulations. The project team will need to work with FIPAG during project preparation to ensure
that adequate measures are taken to ensure that an environmental specialist and a social specialist
experienced with Category A projects is assigned responsibility for overseeing preparation of the
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and possibly one or two Resettlement
Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated RAPs for the GMWSEP, and the subsequent
implementation of respective Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for construction of the
pipelines and distribution lines, and construction and operation of the water treatment plant.
FIPAG has experience with implementation of RAPs, and should have no difficulty in
overseeing their preparation and implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP)
   Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                   X
    An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment will be prepared and disclosed in draft
prior to project appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                        X
    There are no sensitive or critical natural habitat areas along the proposed alternative corridors
for the pipelines and the water treatment plant.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                 X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                            X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                             X
    Almost all of the civil works for the project will occur within existing road rights-of-way or
on land that has already undergone substantial human modification (e.g., at the dam site, and
adjacent the urban area of Moamba). Moreover, the presence of physical cultural resources is
not expected in the project area. As per standard practice, surveys for physical cultural resources
in the project footprint will be carried out as part of the baseline studies for the draft ESIA, and
civil works contracts will include chance finds procedures.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                      X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
    Based on preliminary feasibility work, it appears that involuntary resettlement and adverse
effects on people's livelihoods due to the taking of land can be avoided by minor shifts in
location of project facilities. This will be examined further during project preparation. FIPAG
has experience with preparation of RAPs and Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs) in other
Bank financed projects, and will prepare either a RPF, RAP, or Abbreviated RAP during project
preparation, depending on further decisions on the location of project facilities during project
preparation.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
    Because Safeguards-related work for the completion of the Corumana Dam, including
requirements of the Dam Safety policy (OP 4.37), is already being done as part of the Water
Resources Development Project (WRDP, P107350), that aspect of Safeguards work will not be
duplicated as part of the preparation of the GMWSEP; rather, Safeguards documents prepared
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No        TBD
for the Corumana Dam will be cross-referenced and disclosed by the Bank as part of the project
file for the GMWSEP.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                    X
     The Corumana Dam is located in Mozambique on the Sabíe River which flows from South
Africa into Mozambique and is a tributary to the Incomati River, an international waterway
shared by South Africa, Swaziland and Mozambique. Mozambique is the downstream riparian.
Cooperation among the riparians is governed by the Tripartite Interim Agreement for Co-
operation on the Protection and Sustainable Utilization of the Incomati and Maputo
Watercourses. Mozambique has carried out riparian notifications under the National Water
Resources Development Project (P107350). Compliance with OP 7.50 and the riparians' no-
objections were effectuated through the Tripartite Agreement mechanism.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                        X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   04/12/2012

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The completion of the Corumana Dam will be carried out as part of the WRDP, which was
   approved by the Board on September 15, 2011. The WRDP is classified as Category A.
   Contracts were signed for the Technical Services and Dam Safety review (June 2010) as part
   of project preparation for WRDP. The ESIA and EMP were disclosed locally and at the
   InfoShop on April 11 and April 28, 2011, respectively. The Social Impact Assessment was
   disclosed in-country and through the InfoShop on May 16, 2011. Also, Panels of Experts to
   advise the government regarding Dam Safety and environmental and social issues were
   appointed during project preparation and provisions have been included for their continued
   services during WRDP implementation. Because Safeguards-related work for the
   completion of the Corumana Dam, including requirements of the Dam Safety policy (OP
   4.37), has already been initiated as part of the WRDP, that work will not be duplicated as part
   of the proposed Greater Maputo Water Supply Expansion Project; rather, safeguards
   documents prepared for the Corumana Dam component will be cross-referenced and
   disclosed by the Bank as part of the project file for the GMWSEP.



1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
 An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be required for the GMWSEP
for the following components and the feasible alternatives under consideration:

   - intake pumping station and raw water transmission main of about 30 km to the water
treatment plant to be located at the town of Moamba;
   - water treatment plant at Moamba;
   - pumping facilities; and
   - transport main to Maputo, approximately 45 km, to one of several existing distribution
centers.

 The Construction Environmental Management Plan for Component A will also be
applicable to Component B, whose impacts are expected to be very minor based on
experience with identical works implemented by FIPAG elsewhere in Mozambique.

  The project does not overlap sensitive environmental areas or resources, nor does it cross
densely populated areas except in the immediate vicinity of the Machava Distribution Center.
Most of the landscape is sparsely occupied brush or open savannah with scattered farm plots
machamba). In addition to construction-related impacts, key issues of concern at the water
treatment plant will be: transport, handling, and storage of chemicals used in the treatment
process; and appropriate management of back-flush water or sludges, depending on the final
treatment process selected. The WRDP will separately address all relevant Safeguards issues
associated with changes in operations at the reservoir.

 It is expected that almost all of the civil works for transmission mains and pipelines will
occur along or within existing road rights-of-way. Without exception, the rights-of-way
along the roads where the pipeline will be laid are sufficiently wide for pipeline installation
and are not encroached upon by fences, structures, road-side stands, or machamba.
Installation of the pipeline, whether raw or treated water mains, is unlikely to require any
involuntary resettlement of households, with the possible exception of a few households near
Moamba, depending on decisions regarding preferred siting. Whether any resettlement is
required for the project will depend on whether the water treatment plant is built at the
Corumana Dam site, or if and where it is to be built near Moamba. If it is built near
Moamba, the final site selection will determine whether a small number of households near
Moamba are adversely impacted. If it is determined that the number of persons impacted
does not exceed 200 and no household loses more than 10% of their land, an Abbreviated
RAP may be prepared if the water treatment plant is located near Moamba and if resettlement
or compensation is required. The water treatment plant location is expected to minimize the
need for resettlement or loss of livelihoods. As the pipeline approaches either of the two
existing distribution centers in the Greater Maputo area, there may be small businesses along
the roadway whose business may be temporarily inconvenienced while the pipeline is
installed in the road right-of-way.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares   11/01/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi          11/01/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad             11/01/2011
   Comments:
