                       PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID)
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE


                                                      Report No.:74757
Project Name                     National Human and Animal Health Systems Assessment Tools and
                                 Bridges
Region                           World
Country
Sector(s)                        Health (50%) - Animal production (50%)
Lending Instrument               Recipient Executed Trust Fund - Technical Assistance Loan
Project ID                       P133572
Borrower(s)                      World Organisation for Animal Health
Implementing Agency              World Organisation for Animal Health
Environmental Category           C
Date PID Prepared                30-November-2012
Estimated Date of Appraisal      15-January-2013
Completion
Estimated Date of Board          N/A
Approval
Decision                         15-January-2013
Other Decision                   N/A

I. Project Context
  Country Context
  Many countries, in particular developing countries, continue to face challenges in fulfilling
  minimum core public health and veterinary services requirements developed by WHO (World Health
  Organization) and OIE (World Organisation for Animal Health) and fail to implement efficient
  strategies and programs due to inadequate structures and resources. Having appropriate surveillance,
  reporting and response capacity are common requirements for both human and animal health services to
  effectively prevent and control infectious diseases, including zoonotic diseases. Human and animal
  health systems need to be strong, but they also have to work in close partnership to address common
  issues as effectively and efficiently as possible.

  It is essential to strengthen the governance of such systems for countries to be able to address their
  weaknesses in a sustainable manner and to reduce risks to human and animal health, economies,
  trade, nutrition, food safety, and food security. These risks cross borders, and if not addressed can
  impact entire regions, continents, and the world. Assessments of human and animal health systems are
  also key for donors and partners because the efficiency and sustainability of the projects and programs
  they support critically depend on the quality of governance of national systems. Appropriate tools and
  guidance are needed for individual countries to evaluate objectively their situation and address
 deficiencies and to comply with international requirements.

II. Sectoral and institutional Context
 Two main global institutions (WHO and OIE) are responsible for international standards affecting
 human and animal health. The WHO establishes public health regulations which are laid down in the
 International Health Regulations (IHR) (2005). The OIE is responsible for developing standards,
 guidelines and recommendations for animal health and zoonoses in accordance with the World Trade
 Organization Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary measures (WTO/SPS
 Agreement).

 These international organizations are committed to develop and expand appropriate tools and
 collaborate across the sectors, where appropriate, to support countries to improve public health and
 animal health globally. The WHO plans to further develop operational tools for countries to help them
 address identified gaps and for planning and budgeting purposes to meet their obligations in the
 development and maintenance of IHR core capacities in the area of infectious disease surveillance and
 response. The OIE has developed the Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) Pathway, which
 includes different tools for countries to objectively assess and address the main weaknesses of their
 Veterinary Services but those tools need continuous refinement and updates to take recent developments
 into account, including strengthening cooperation with other national authorities, in particular public
 health services.

 During the last decade, dialogue amongst international organizations and joint events to address
 these common topics have grown continuously. In a context of a globalized world, it is essential that
 such cooperation and synergies be built at national level as well to best address existing and
 (re)emerging threats of both national and international importance. The World Bank has been actively
 involved and instrumental in pushing this agenda forward. It had a catalytic role at the institutional level
 through its continuous dialogue with international and regional organizations involved and through its
 pro-active participation in international fora on human health, animal health and “One Health?. At the
 corporate level, the Bank has been a strong advocate of systemic and cross-sectoral approaches. Its aim
 is to ensure operationalization of this Grant going forward. In particular, a specific operational
 framework on human and animal health governance would be developed to provide further guidance to
 task teams in building human and animal health projects, taking full advantage of the products
 developed through this Grant.

III. Project Development Objectives
 The objective of this Grant is to support the development and refinement of harmonized operational
 assessment tools and guide by leading international organizations on human and animal health. This
 would contribute to increase capacity of countries to address priority diseases, including zoonoses and
 pandemic threat, and build synergies among human and animal health systems.

IV. Project Description
 Component Name
    - Component 1: Development of tools for further deployment and implementation of WHO IHR.
 Such tools would include a WHO/IHR assessment tool, a costing tool, and a laboratory assessment tool

    - Component 2: Refinement of OIE PVS Pathway tools
 Such tools would include the PVS Tool, the PVS Gap Analysis Tool, and a Veterinary Laboratory Gap
 Analysis Tool and respective manuals for the assessors.

     -   Component 3: Development of an operational guide for countries on good governance of human
         and animal health services
 This joint WHO/OIE Guide would be composed of OIE and WHO manuals on processes to strengthen
 public health and veterinary services governance as well as approaches to build joint strategies and
 programs to address issues at the human/animal interface.

     -   Component 4: Management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation

V. Financing    (in USD Million)
 For Loans/Credits/Others                                                    Amount
 Borrower
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development from
                                                                             3.12
 the Avian and Human Influenza Facility Trust Fund
 Total                                                                       3.12

VI. Implementation
 This 1 year project would be implemented by the OIE (World Organisation for Animal Health) and
 WHO (World Health Organization). The OIE, through its World Animal Health and Welfare Fund
 Coordination Unit, will be the recipient of the Grant and will have overall responsibility for project
 implementation. Between the two organizations a subsidiary agreement will be signed to establish
 respective responsibilities as well as financial and procurement provisions and reporting requirements.
 The closing date of the Grant will be December 31, 2013.
 This project will follow the Bank small recipient-executed trust fund grants procedures. It will be
 managed by the Agriculture and Environmental Services Department.

VII. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
   Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                                   Yes            No
   Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                                          X
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                                                  X
   Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                                           X
   Pest Management OP 4.09                                                                      X
   Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                                       X
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                                X
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                                          X
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                                    X
   Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                               X
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                                        X
VIII. Contact point
   World Bank
   Contact:   Francois Le Gall
   Title:     Livestock Advisor
   Tel:       (202) 473-0355
   Email:     Flegall1@worldbank.org

   Borrower/Client/Recipient
   Contact:   Alain Dehove
   Title:     Coordinator of the World Animal Health and Welfare Fund
   Tel:       +33 1 44 15 19 63
   Email:     a.dehove@oie.int

   Implementing Agencies
   Name:      OIE (World Organisation for Animal Health)
   Contact:   Alain Dehove
   Title:     Coordinator of the World Animal Health and Welfare Fund
   Tel:       +33 1 44 15 19 63
   Email:     a.dehove@oie.int


IX. For more information contact:
   The InfoShop
   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: +1 202 458-4500
   Fax: (202) 522-1500
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop
