                                                                                         71516



                        INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.:
Date preparedlupdated: 8 May 2012

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Pr<!ltd Data
Country: Nepal                                 1 Pro·co. ID: P129177
                                               1Additional Proietr ID (lf orry):
PrO'tel Name: Pilot Program for Seismic Scheel Safety in the Kathmandu Valley'
Task Team Leader. S3urabh Dani
Estimated Appraisal Date: October Il,2011      1 Estimated Board Date: May 16 2012
ManaRinR. Unit: SASOU                          1Lendio2 Instrument: Grant TF
SectOt: Urban
Theme Disaster Management
IBRD Amoun. (USSm.):
IDA Arnoun. (USSm.):
GEF Amoun. (US$m.):
PCF Amoun. (USSm.):
Othee financing amounts by source: Japan PHRD Trust Fund
Environmental Category: B
15 this a transferred project                   1 Yes []                   NoIX]
Simplified Processinl!                          1 Simole rx                Reoeate>" r l
[s this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises         Yes []         No [X]
and Emergcncies)

2. Projttt Objectives:
The averall objective of the proposed program is to reduce Nepal's tisk from eruthquakes and
especially the vulnerabilities of public schools by strengthening the capacity of the Govemment
ofNepal to implernent school rttrofitting progo.uns. This objective will be achleved through (i)
the dcvelopment of capacity to assess the structural iotegrity of schools; (H) training of local
engineers, foremcn and masons in sei smic saie construction techniques; (iii) support 10
contingency planning, and (iv) sensitization of local officiaIs and communities.


 3. Project Description:
  The projett activitics ta he financed are organizcd around fivc main components (i) Structural
 essessment of schools; (ii) Rctrofining of public school buildings, (iii) Preparedness and
 contingency planning; (iv) Socialization and awareness buHding; (v) Monitoring and evaJuation.
 and (vi) Project management.

 4. Project Location and salient pbys?(:al tharacteristics relevant ta the safego.rd analysls:
  The project will be canied out in idcntified public schoob in the Kathmandu valley which
 indudes Kathmandu, Bhaktapur and Lalitput districts. A study conducted by the NepaJ'·s
local communities by involving them in the process and sensitizing them to the risks of adveJSe
narural events and in particular earthquakes.

2. Deseribc any potential indirect and/or long tenu impacts due to anticipated future activjties in
the project area:

No significant, long·term and irreversible adverse impact is anticipated.

3. Dcscribe any project alternatives (if relevant) considcrcd 10 help avoid or mi.nimize adverse
impacts:

Not applicable, as highly significant. irreversiblc and long·tenn adverse impact is not expected

4. Deseribe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment ofborrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The Department of Education. the implementing agcncy, has prepared Environmental
Management Framcwork for SSRP. and is being implememed in the SSRP. Provisions orthe
SSRP EMF will be applied to the CUITent operation (for example in mitigating small·sca!e
impacts related to noise & dust, construction wastes, safety gears to workers & safety of students
& tcachers, and sanitation). OoE will prepare an environmental checklist for use in this projett
on the hasis of the SSRP EMF and ERS Guidelines ofIFC/World Bank. The checklist Will be
sbared with IDA. Retrofitting activity at site will not take place v.ithout a cleared cbecklist DoE
will ensure that the ehccklist is effectively used. The bids and construction contract documents
will incorporate the che<:klist. The envirorunental mitigation eosts \1';11 he iotemalized in the
contraet documents (bids, specifications, and bill of quantity), which win he cleared by the IDA.
The M&E will aIso check the use of the ehecklist.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and dcscribe the mecbanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The Department of Education, District Education Office (Kathmandu, Bhaktapur and Lalitpur
District), the school management team and snldents and parents are the key stakeholders. The
tnsk tcam has consulted them during the preparation of the pilot proposai. During
implernentation, under Socializa!?on and Awareness Building Component, projcct will reach out
to the students, tcachers and community along with the local officiais and also cover
environmcntal issues besides the seismic risks. The project win also provide additional mason
training to increase awareness and cxpand local capacity. Care will be taken te cnsure that
vulnerable community adjacent ta the school prcmiscs are pre~infonncd about the consultations.

 B. DiscJosurt! Requirements Date
 Environmental AssessmcntfAuditIMana2:ement PlanlOther:                  Not-aoolkable
  Was the document disclosed nrior 10 appraisal?                                     Yos
  Date of receiot bv the Bank                                                     8/1212009
  Date of "in-countrv" disclosure                                           8/1112009 & 412612012
 OP 4.09 - Pest Manafcmcnt
 Does the EA adequatcly addrcss the pest management          Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NIA [x]
  issues?
  Is ~~arate PMP required?                                   Yes [ 1    No [xl   NIA [ ]
  If yes, bas the PMP bccn revicwcd and approved by a
  safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? ..tue PMP
  requirements iocluded in projett design? If yes, docs the
1 project team include a Pest Management Specialist'?

   OPIBP 4.11- Phvskal Cultural ResoURe5
   Does the EA include adequate measures related to          Yos [ ]    No [ )   NIA [x )
   cultural orooel"tv'?
   Dacs the creditlloan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
   the potential adverse impacts on physica1.cultural
   resources'?
   OPIBP 4.10 - Jadillcnous Pcoplcs
   Has 8. separate Indigenous Peoples PlanfPlanning           Yes [ )   No [x)   NIA [   1
   Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
   consultation v.itb affected lndi~enous Peoples?
   If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
   safeguards or Sector Mana2.er rcview the plan?
    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
    design been reviewed and approvcd by the Regional
    Social Development Unit?
    OPIBP 4.12 - IDvoluDtarv Resettlemenf
    Has a rescttlement plan/abbreviated plan/poliey           Yes [ 1   No [x]   NIA [ J
    frnmeworkJprocess framework (as appropriate) becn
    p,.pared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
    safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
 i planlpolicy framework/process framework:?

    OPIBP 4.36 - For.sts
    Has the sector·widc analysis ofpolicy and institutiooul   Ves [ ]   NoD      NIA [x)
    issues and eonstraiots been curried out?
    Does the project design includc satisfactary measures ta
    ovcrcamc these constraines?
     Does the project tinance commercial harvesting, and if
     50, docs ie indude provisions for cenification systcm?
     OPIBP 4.37 • Sa(ety of Dams
     l lave dam safeey plans becn prepared?                  1 Yes       No       NIA xl
     Have the TORs as weil as composition for tbe
     independent Panel of Expcrts (POE) been reviewed and
     aPDroved bv the Bank?
     Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
     prtpared and arrangements becn made for public
     awareness and trainin~?
     OPIBP 7.50 - Projects on International Watennys
D. Approvals

 Si~ned   and submitted bY.:                              Name                                 Date
 Task Team Leader:
 Environmental Specialise
                                      Saurabh Dani                      /f f                May 8. 2012
                                                                                           J'{ "'1 t z."
                                      Dm.. Ra Ghimi" ~
 Social Development Specialist        ParthaprÎya Ghosh ,        I?                    i   MII'f ,*- u>
 Additional Enviroomemal and/or
 Social Dcvelopment Specialist(s):

 ApPTOved by:                                                  .   ,.
 Rel!.ional Safe uards Coordinator:   San'a' Srivastava        .#                      II-1A'/~.lC'l-
   Comments:        ( "L CAR"L P                               "/11     (,
 Sector Manager:
   Comments: (
                                      Bernice van Bronkhorst                          " Ll-1ftr) Il
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                      'LP~




                                                                         rrtmplaJc: Vcnion Novcmbcr 2007)
