                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                           Report No.: 75387
Date ISDS
                           24-Jan-2013
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                      Nepal                Project ID:                P130015
 Project Name:                 Enhancing Resilience of Endangered Species to Climate Change
                               (P130015)
 Task Team Leader:             Sumith Pilapitiya
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 07-Jun-2013              Estimated Board Date: 03-Oct-2013
 Managing Unit:                SASDI                Lending Instrument:        Specific Investment Loan
 Sector:                       General Agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
 Theme:                        Biodiversity (50%), Climate Change (50%)
 Financing (in USD Million)
     Financing Source                                                                           Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             0.00
     Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                   5.00
     Total                                                                                          5.00
 Environmental Category        B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No

 B. Project Objectives
 The development objective of the proposed project is to assist the GoN to develop and implement
 climate-resilient biodiversity plans for selected protected areas and to improve the livelihoods of
 communities in the buffer zones


 C. Project Description
 The proposed project would be designed to increase the resilience of endangered species, ecosystems
 and ecological processes while improving the well being of natural resource dependent communities by
 reducing the decline in biodiversity in two pilot protected areas and its surrounding landscape. Project
 activities would be structured around three themes: (i) improved information, knowledge and capacity
 regarding climate change impacts and resilience measures on the natural habitats of endangered species;
 (ii) improved natural habitats and eco system health; and (iii) improved well being of natural habitat
 dependent communities.
 Component 1: Climate resilient biodiversity management plan development
Global climate change is already having significant effects on species and ecosystems. The effects of
climate change present a new set of challenges to the efforts to protect and conserve biodiversity and
natural habitats of endangered species. Many observations suggest that recent climatic changes in
Nepal have already influenced animal and plant populations in a number of ways: the timing of seasonal
events (e.g. flowering, migration), growth and reproduction rates, and in the distribution of species.
Ultimately, these changes are leading to species and habitat loss. The key to respond to adverse
impacts of climate change on ecosystems and species is a better understanding of climate impacts on
ecosystems and species through knowledge building and adaptation as well development of institutional
and human resources. The proposed project would provide technical assistance for improved
information, knowledge and capacity regarding climate change and resilience measures on the natural
habitats of endangered species by supporting the following indicative activities:


       Climate vulnerability assessments for Shey-Phoksundo National Park (SPNP), Dhorpatan
        Hunting Reserve (DHR) and surrounding conservation landscapes focusing on climate
        vulnerability of terrestrial biodiversity and the communities living in the surrounding
        landscapes;
       Preparation and/or updating of Protected Area Management Plans for SPNP and DHR to be
        climate sensitive;
       Development of a framework for wildlife conservation and ecologically responsible livelihood
        development for communities in the landscape outside SPNP and DHR;
       Preparation of conservation strategies to enhance climate resilience of the focal species;
       Capacity assessment of conservation agencies (DNPWC and DOF), local government bodies
        and buffer zone communities for participatory management of conservation landscapes;
       Institutional and human resource capacity building, conservation education and community
        awareness programs;

Component 2: Management plan implementation

New approaches to the management of ecosystems and biodiversity are required to respond to the
emerging threats of climate change. In response to anticipated effects of climate change adaptation
strategies to facilitate the adjustment of human society and ecological systems to altered climate regimes
would be identified during the climate vulnerability assessments of the pilot PAs. Adaptation measures
would involve a landscape level approach to wildlife conservation since wildlife populations are not
restricted to protected areas. Since conservation landscapes susceptible to climate change would
require targeted support for conservation and recovery programs endangered species, implementation of
conservation strategies developed for the focal species becomes important. Management of
endangered species, natural habitats and improvements in eco system health will be supported through
the following indicative activities:

       Implementation of priority actions of the climate sensitive protected area management plans;
       Investments for key actions of the conservation strategies developed for enhancing climate
        resilience of the focal species;
       Support for habitat improvement activities in the conservation landscapes outside the focal PAs
        as identified in the climate vulnerability assessment;

Component 3: Livelihood enhancement

The rich ecological landscape surrounding the pilot PAs has been integral to the lives, well-being, and
livelihoods of the local community in the buffer zones. These ecosystems and their diversity have
sustained the supply of food, water, fodder, fuelwood, clothing, shelter, medicine, and energy of the
local community. Biodiversity is the foundation of agriculture and rural livelihoods. Community
livelihoods are derived in large part from forestry, fishery, and tourism, and the services performed by
its ecosystems support life (through soil formation, nutrient cycling, primary production, oxygen
production, and habitats) and regulate processes crucial to well-being (air quality, climate, water flow,
soil retention, water purification, and biological and disease control). Biodiversity has thus been crucial
to ensuring food security, income, nutrition, access to improved water, good health, safety, and the
environmental sustainability of the local communities. The ability to adapt to changes in the
environment is also determined in great part by the variation and resilience of species and ecosystems.
Appropriate management of natural systems can therefore play a critical role in contributing to cost
effective adaptation. As the natural habitats of endangered species are changing as a result of climate
change, the livelihoods of the dependent communities are also affected. It is therefore important to
enhance the livelihoods of communities by providing alternative livelihood options. Improving the
well-being of natural habitat dependent communities would be supported through the following
indicative activities:

       Based on the findings of the climate vulnerability assessment, support would be provided for
        activities such as community based eco-tourism, diversification of local products, marketing
        high value products such as fruits, NTFPs, medicinal plants, animal breeds and on-farm fodder
        and forage support;
       Due to the changing habitats there may be an increased incidence of human wildlife conflict.
        Support for specific activities that could be initiated to reduce such incidences such as
        introducing or strengthening insurance or compensation schemes towards crops and livestock
        loss, fencing, and awareness/education would be provided;

Component 4: Project coordination and management

The implementation of the proposed project would be coordinated through a Project Coordination Unit
(PCU) already in existence for coordination of the Strengthening Regional Cooperation for Wildlife
Protection Project. The PCU function has been delegated to the National Trust for Nature
Conservation (NTNC) under the Strengthening Regional Cooperation for Wildlife Protection Project.
This component would support PCU activities such as the day-to-day coordination and supporting the
implementation of the project components, including technical and fiduciary responsibilities.



D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project would be piloted in two mountain Protected Areas (PAs) and the surrounding landscapes.
The PAs are Shey-Phoksundo National Park (SPNP) and Dhorpatan Hunting Reserve (DHR). The PAs
were identified based on specific criteria (II A above) and have high vulnerability to climate change,
contain habitats of endangered species, such as snow leopard and red panda and habitats of high value
and threatened medicinal plants, such as yarcha gunbu and kutki (both have a high livelihood relevance).
The selected PAs include areas affected by human activities and also contain wilderness areas.

SPNP, established in 1984 is an IUCN Management Category II (National Park) located in the
Mid-Western development region of Nepal. The park supports the prime habitat for the highest number
of the snow leopard in Nepal. In addition to climate vulnerability, SPNP is threatened by habitat
destruction, over grazing, poaching of snow leopard and musk deer, hunting of blue sheep and over
harvesting of medicinal plants. The buffer zone is jointly managed by the park and local communities.
DHR is an IUCN Management Category VIII (Game Production/Multiple Use Management Area)
located in the Dhaulagiri Himal range in West Nepal. DHR was established in 1983 under the National
Parks and Wildlife Act of Nepal. Hunting of blue sheep, himalayan tahr, barking deer, wild boar and
some other common bird species is permitted in the reserve, based on a formal hunting license issued by
the Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation (DNPWC). The reserve contains the prime
habitat for blue sheep, which are the main prey species of the snow leopard and has sizable populations
of red panda and snow leopard. Red Panda are found in three hunting blocks in DHR and have a
declining population in Nepal. Currently, the conservation of blue sheep in Nepal is a national concern
because it is not clear if populations were affected by the Maoist insurgency beginning in 1996. In
addition, with a record of poor enforcement of wildlife conservation laws and increased poaching in
Nepal, DHR needs better regulation and management of hunting to ensure conservation of wildlife.

Key endangered and climate vulnerable faunal species such as the snow leopard (Panthera uncial), red
panda (Ailurus fulgens), and plant species such as yarcha gunbu (Ophiocordyceps sinensis) and kutki
(Neopicrorhiza scrophulariiflora) which has medicinal value and of livelihood importance to
communities have been identified as the focal species for conservation under the proposed project. In
addition to climate vulnerability, the key species were selected based on distinctiveness of the species,
threat level, utilitarian value and viable population levels.

The endangered snow leopard (Panthera uncial) occurs over most of the high altitudes of Central Asia
and Himalaya. Little is known about the species’ ecology, status and distribution. The coarse global
population estimate for the snow leopard is 7,400 individuals and the species is classified as endangered
in the IUCN’s Red List. Global warming may bring about unprecedented changes in the snow leopard’s
mountain habitat threatening the very survival of the species. With its wide distribution, precarious
conservation status particularly due to climate change, and immense aesthetic appeal, the snow leopard
is an effective flagship species for wildlife conservation in the Himalayan high altitudes in Nepal and is
a good focal species for the proposed project on enhancing climate resilience of endangered species.

The red panda’s (Ailurus fulgens) natural habitat is in mountains living in elevations of 4,900 feet to
13,000 feet. Such elevations are preferred due to the cool weather and temperature since the red panda
is very sensitive to heat unable to handle temperatures above 25 degrees C. The impact of climate
change has the ability to completely obliterate the red panda population. As climate change occurs,
many damaging events, such as bamboo flowering, could destroy the habitat and the red panda’s way of
life. This is very harmful to the red panda because they have a terrible digestive system making them
very picky eaters and as the selected food sources are gone, they would starve and eventually die.

Flagship species act as symbols for the threats to the broader ecosystem in which they occur, and can
thus provide a catalyst for wide-ranging conservation activities. The caterpillar fungus Ophiocordyceps
sinensis (often referred to as “Cordyceps? or yarcha gunbu) is one of a select group of fungal species for
which there is global concern for conservation and sustainable harvest (Cannon et al. 2009; Negi et al.
2006; Sharma 2004; Winkler 2008), and it clearly qualifies for flagship status. It is advantageous to
think of O. sinensis in this way for two reasons. Firstly, it emphasizes its importance to non-specialists
and provides an easily understood message for the lay community. Secondly, conservation activities in
support of this species can act as a framework for others and a stimulatory mechanism to bring fungi into
the mainstream of conservation decision-making. Interactions with one particular species – Homo
sapiens – cannot be ignored. On the one hand, humans represent by far the greatest threat to survival of
O. sinensis both directly by unsustainable harvest and indirectly through habitat loss, climate change etc.
On the other hand, the very value placed on the product is a powerful incentive to ensure its continuing
availability.
 Kutki (Neopicrorhiza scrophulariiflora) which is a Himalayan medicinal plant is highly threatened by
 large scale exploitation for trade and also by climate change. It grows in alpine meadows and prefers
 moist habitat formed by winter snow. The long term sustainability of the species is threatened in Nepal
 unless proper management action is taken to control excessive harvesting. The estimated trade of N.
 scrophulariiflora is around 650 – 1000 tons/year.


 E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
 Government of Nepal 9GON) has established Environmental Impact Assessment system for
 developmental projects with the formulation of Environmental Protection Rules 1997 as well as sectoral
 policy, laws and guidelines. Based on the formulated Act, regulations, and guidelines, criteria for Initial
 Environmental Examination (IEE)/EIA has established that the development projects certainly require
 environmental assessment study as per the nature of the projects unless they cross the given threshold
 for the disruption of the environmentally sensitive areas and their natural environment . Some of the
 sectoral laws also provide opportunity to conduct environmental assessment studies. Socially, Land
 Acquisition Act 1977, Land Acquisition Rules of 1969 and Buffer Zone Management Rules 1996
 provides direction to guarantee the right to property of Nepalese citizens, although this project do not
 envisage any type of land acquisition due to project activities. As is typical in developing countries,
 enforcement capacity is low and there is a potential for corruption.

 The scale and nature of proposed investments are unlikely to result in any significant adverse
 environmental or social impacts. The capacity of GON to address social issues is quite weak but GON’s
 environmental clearance processes, in principle, are consistent with World Bank environmental and
 public disclosure requirements. However, all activities with an impact on the environment under the
 proposed project will need to be subjected to environmental. The extent of the analyses will depend on a
 given activity and the specific sites selected

 Prior to appraisal, GON would conduct an environmental and social assessment and would develop
 environmental and social management frameworks to ensure that (a) the environmental and social
 baseline condition under which the project will be implemented; (b) relevant investments are screened
 for any potential adverse safeguards related impacts as per IDA and country-specific policies and
 regulations; and (c) necessary mitigation measures that should be put in place are identified as part of
 project preparation for environmental and social sustainability of the project. The environmental and
 social management frameworks will include a framework to address general environmental
 issues, a resettlement framework to address potential livelihood issues and an indigenous
 peoples development plan.

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Parthapriya Ghosh ( SASDS )
 Darshani De Silva ( SASDI )


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered ?      Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP           Yes              As stated above, no major environmental
 4.01                                                      issues are expected in the implementation of
                                                           this project. The primary focus of the project is
                                                           to build capacity through training, better
                                          communication and increased support for
                                          human resources. GON will conduct an
                                          environmental and social assessment and
                                          management framework outlining the
                                          procedures to be followed in screening
                                          subprojects,          allocating        specific
                                          accountabilities, and designing feasible,
                                          cost-effective solutions to impacts that may be
                                          identified. Responsibility for designing and
                                          implementing environmental and social
                                          management plans rests with project
                                          proponents as well as monitoring and
                                          evaluation and the costs of mitigation will be
                                          incorporated into project costs. The project
                                          will have a list of activities that will be
                                          ineligible for funding under the project.

                                          In addition, existing guidelines, for example,
                                          World Bank’s guidelines on health and safety
                                          related issues would be applied for investments
                                          that refurbish infrastructure. A checklist for
                                          applicable guidelines and where these needs to
                                          be applied would be prepared and incorporated
                                          in project design.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes   While this policy is triggered, the project
                                          investments would be designed to result in
                                          better management of natural habitats, as risk
                                          management of climate change vulnerabilities.
                                          Natural habitats would greatly benefit from
                                          realization of project objectives through
                                          enhancing climate resilience of critically
                                          endangered species and by safeguarding their
                                          natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes   Similar to Natural habitats policy, the project
                                          investments is expected to result in better
                                          management of forests. The project envisages
                                          improvements of community well-being in the
                                          buffer zones of selected Protected Areas,
                                          which will include better usage and
                                          management of forest resources. However,
                                          the project will not engage in commercial
                                          forestry activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP   No
4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes   The policy is triggered as there is presence
                                          of indigenous (Adivasi / Janjati)
                                          community in the project area.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              Yes                The policy is triggered as management of
                                                                     protected area may result in loss of
                                                                     livelihood or sources of livelihood for
                                                                     some community members in and around
                                                                     the identified protected areas.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
 Projects on International Waterways              No
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

    Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
 A. 6-May-2013

    Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
 B. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
     The environmental and social assessment and related environmental and social management
     frameworks for the project will commence in early March and expected to be completed by end
     April, 2013.

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:                     Name: Sumith Pilapitiya
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards                   Name: Sanjay Srivastava                                 Date: 02/13/2013
 Coordinator:
 Sector Manager:                       Name: Herbert Acquay                                    Date: 02/13/2013



 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
 affected persons.
