                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/03/2012                                   Report No.: AC6326
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Nepal                                Project ID: P122406
Project Name: Kabeli-A Hydro Electric Project
Task Team Leader: Michael Haney
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5,         Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: SASDE                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             42
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           40.00
         Financing Gap                                                 0.00
                                                                      40.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objectives are (i) to contribute 38.3 MW of generation capacity
to the Integrated Nepal Power System, and (ii) to demonstrate a model of public-private
partnership in development of new hydropower generation.

3. Project Description
The proposed project is a small peaking run-of-river hydropower project that will be built
in Panchthar District in the Eastern Development Region of Nepal (the Kabeli River is
the border of Panchthar and Taplejung districts), a relatively sparsely populated area of
the country. The project area is located in a region that is inhabited largely by Limbus,
Rais, Tamangs, Bahun/Chhetris and small numbers of other groups.

 The proposed project has two components: (i) the Kabeli-A Hydroelectric Project
Component, and (ii) the Ministry of Energy Component (IDA contribution, USD 0.5
million).
 The Kabeli-A Hydroelectric Project (KAHEP) Component will provide debt financing
of the construction of the proposed project in the amount of USD 40 million, representing
slightly less than half of the total estimated project completion cost of around USD 85
million. This component will be implemented by the project company, Kabeli Energy
Limited.

 The Ministry of Energy Component (USD 0.5 million) will provide technical assistance
funds to the Ministry of Energy to allow it to perform its technical due diligence on
behalf of Government of Nepal. With these technical assistance funds, MOE will engage
supervising engineers and other experts, as required, to carry out supervision of the
implementation of KAHEP.

 The power from the proposed project will be evacuated by the Kabeli Corridor 132 kV
Transmission Line, which is under implementation by the Nepal Electricity Authority
with financing from IDA and which will also provide evacuation capacity for the power
generated by small projects in the Kabeli corridor that are being developed by
independent power producers (IPPs). The generation and transmission projects represent
an opening up of eastern Nepal as far as the national power sector infrastructure is
concerned. While the most significant center of industrial demand for electricity is in the
east of the country, few generation projects are located in this part of Nepal.
Consequently, the power that serves the eastern industrial area is transmitted over great
distances from the middle and western regions of the country where it is generated,
resulting in relatively high transmission losses. The development of the proposed
KAHEP, in tandem with the construction of the Kabeli Transmission Line and the
development of other generation projects will help reduce these transmission losses.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Kabeli-A Hydroelectric Project (KAHEP) is located in Panchthar District at the
border of Panchthar and Taplejung Districts, two districts in the Eastern Development
Region of Nepal. Kabeli Khola (small river) is the natural border of the two districts.
Kabeli is a tributary of the Tamor River. The Kabeli joins the Tamor about 5.2 km
downstream of the proposed diversion/dam site. The headworks will be constructed at
Dhuseni of Amarpur Village Development Council (VDC) approximately 2.5 km
upstream of Kabeli Bridge along Mechi Highway. The diverted water will be fed
through an approximately 4.3-kilometer-long headrace tunnel and brought to the semi-
underground powerhouse which will be constructed near the Tamor River in the Pinase
area of Amarpur VDC. The power house will be located on the left bank of Tamor River.

 The project area is located in the Mid-Mountain Physiographic Zone. Most of the
project structures and facilities are located at the valley section (on alluvial flood plains
or on alluvial tars). Small-scale land slips are common in the hilly terrain of Nepal,
particularly in the steep fragile slopes. However, no recent active and significant
landslide features have been reported or noted close to the project sites. The landslide
higher risk zones are 25 to 30 km upstream from the headwork sites: about 40 to 50
landslides are seen within the catchments of Kabeli in the upstream of headworks, away
from the project vicinity. The project area vicinity is characterized by two distinct
climatic zones (sub-tropical and warm-to-cool temperate climate). The monsoon rain
from June to September is the main rainy season when about 80 percent rainfall occurs,
and the monsoon also controls the summer season temperatures and wind pattern.

 The majority of the land use in the project surrounding area is rural agricultural land
followed by forest vegetation. Grass/ bushes, cliff/sand and water bodies are other land
uses. Houses are generally scattered and located at distance from the project site.
Relatively flat land and gentle slopes are used for settlements and cultivation.

  The ICIMOD and UNEP joint study entitled “Inventory of Glaciers, Glacial Lakes and
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods: Monitoring and Early Warning Systems in the Hindu
Kush- Himalayan Region?, Nepal (2001) has identified five glacier lakes in the Kabeli
basin. Most of the glacial lakes of the catchment are small. None of these lakes are
identified as potentially dangerous lakes and there is no evidence of Glacial Lake
Outburst Floods (GLOF) in the Kabeli basin in the past. The Tamor River catchment,
however, has a history of GLOFs. The GLOF risk to the powerhouse located close to
Tamor flood plain is considered to be minimal in view of the distance of powerhouse site
from the glacial lakes in the Tamor catchment.

 While there are patches of community, state and private forests and in and around the
project area, the project area lies outside any protected area (national parks, wildlife
reserves, conservation areas, strict nature reserves, hunting reserves and buffer zones).
The nearest conservation area is the Kanchanjunga Conservation Area which is about 25
km to the north of the project site.

 The forests that are likely to be affected by the project include a private forest of
Thechambu VDC (Terhathum), six community forests (Kabeli Garjite, Thulo Dhunesi,
Kholi Panchakanya, Thulo Dhuseni, Bijulibhanjyang, and Madibung Salleri ), the Pinase
leasehold forest and private forests at Pinase. The dominant tree species occurring near
the project sites are sal (Shorea robusta) in the lower valley areas and pine (Pinus
roxborghii or Pinus wallichiana) in the upper slopes. The herb species in the area are
Imperata cylindrical, Phramites karka, and Arundo donax in the lower valley while
Ageratum conyzoides, Bidens pilosa, Cheilanthes bicolor, Cissampelos pareira, Sida
cordata etc are the major herb species in the upper slopes. The Endangered/Threatened or
Protected plant species found in the forest of the region include Shorea robusta (sakhuwa,
sal tree), Bombax ceiba (simal, silk cotton tree), Dioscorea deltoid (ban tarul, deltier
yam), different lichens species (jhyau, lichens), different species of Orchids (sungava,
orchids). One large simal tree in Pinase is protected by the local Majhi people for worship
of their ancestors and local rituals. All of the above mentioned species are commonly
available in the region. The forests in and around the project sites are generally open and
in degraded conditions. Tree stands are distributed mainly in the steep slope areas where
human settlement and agricultural practices are difficult or impossible. The forest areas
are not a suitable habitat for medium and large animals: only a few mammal species have
been reported occasionally visiting these forests.
 Kabeli River is known to have 31 species of fish out of which one is long-range
migratory species (Tor putitora,) four are medium distance migratory species and the rest
are resident species. The kabre (Glyptothorax spp), a resident fish, is species most valued
by the local population. All the mentioned fish species are also available in the rivers and
streams in the region, including in the Tamor River and its other tributaries.

 As the project area is located in a remote rural setting with no modern industries, the
quality of air and water in the project area are considered generally good. The indoor air
quality, because of the use of fuel-wood for cooking, is considered poor.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
   Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Social and Environmental Impact Assessments of the proposed project were carried
out over 2010 and 2011 and completed in September 2011.

 The anticipated environmental impacts of the project are related to the damming and
diversion of river water; construction of the tunnel; muck and spoil disposal; quarrying of
sand and gravel; operation of heavy machines (aggregate crushing plant, concrete
batching plant, drilling, blasting, heavy vehicles etc); and labor camps. The main
environmental impacts identified are:

  (i) loss and degradation of forest and pressure on forest resources including trees, non-
timber forest products (NTFPs), and wildlife. The project, in total, will occupy 1.57 ha of
forest land at nine different places (the biggest single forest plot that is likely to be
occupied is 0.50 ha). It is estimated that about 200 trees and 153 pole-size bushes and
other vegetation will be cleared from the forest land occupied by the project’s permanent
structures and facilities. Some of these, such as shorea robusta and bombax ceiba, are the
protected species and require government permit for cutting. Forest degradation and loss
of trees and vegetation is possible due to indirect and induced effects (e.g. increased
demand of fuel wood, NTFPs, etc);

  (ii) the disturbance to fish and aquatic species due to the obstruction created by the dam
and due to reduced flow of water in the approximately 5.2 km stretch from the diversion
dam to the confluence with Tamor River). The reduced flow will also adversely affect the
ritual practices of cremations. The impact of reduced river flows will occur for nearly
seven months every year during low-flow period (November to May). These impacts will
be long-term nature; and

 (iii) a number of disturbances arising from various construction activities, facilities, and
the influx of people. The impacts, for example, could include: soil erosions and land
slips, increased land instabilities, obstruction of movement of people and animals, loss of
top soil, water pollution and water and air quality impacts, depletion or degradation of
local spring water sources, cracks in the houses and supra structures, encroachment on
forests, change in river morphology and drainage patterns, pollution and waste from labor
camps, occupational health and safety issues etc. The EIA concludes that the identified
impacts can be mitigated through specific measures suggested in the report.

 Possible adverse project impacts also include permanent land acquisition, temporary
land leasing for various project activities scattered in small pieces in the immediate
project areas, loss of trees and crops. No physical relocation is envisaged. There will be
impacts associated with reduced river flow, particularly during the dry season in the 5.2
km stretch downstream of the dam before Kabeli River joins Tamor River. These include
impact on riverine fishing, cultural and religious practices such as washing, bathing and
cremation practices by the Kabeli River. An influx of construction workers and service
providers is expected in the project area during the construction period. This may expose
the local communities to public health hazards, such as HIV and sexually transmitted
diseases (STD) as well as to dust and noise pollution.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The main long-term environmental impact identified by the EIA is the reduction in
downstream water flow in the Kabeli River, for about 5.2 km between the dam site and
the confluence of Kabeli River with the Tamor River. Flow reduction in the dewatered
stretch of Kabeli River will be significant during the low flow season from November to
May but will also be a factor, to a lesser extent, at other times of the year. The dam will
also be a barrier for fish migration. There will be reduction of flow in the Tamor River as
well, between the confluence with Kabeli and the power house, after which the water is
returned to the Tamor. The impact on the Tamor is likely to be minimal as the Tamor is
much larger than the Kabeli (the flow contributed by Kabeli at the confluence during the
low flow season is around 22 %, and around 10% during the high flow season).

 The project will use the following measures to minimize the impacts: provision of fish
ladder in the dam, release of at least 10% of the minimum monthly flow at all times
through the fish ladder, provision of bathing/dipping channels near cultural sites,
monitoring of flows and impacts during operation and use adaptive/additional mitigation
measures, if necessary.

 The Environmental Impact Assessment (September 2011) recommends continuous
release of at least 10% of the minimum monthly flow (i.e. 0.81 m3/s ) from the dam at all
the time to maintain the minimum flow required by selected aquatic species. In the
stretch of the Kabeli River below the diversion dam and before the confluence with the
Tamor River, the Kabeli River water is required for: (i) cultural use, and (ii) for
sustaining aquatic life (fishes, particularly kavre fish), but the Kabeli River water is not
used for irrigation, drinking, water mills etc. In addition to the minimum release through
the dam, two small perennial local streams join the Kabeli River between the proposed
dam and the confluence with Tamor River and thus contribute to flows in this section of
the river. There will also be contribution from groundwater flows.

 It is estimated that the minimum flow at Kabeli near Kabeli Bazar combining the
minimum release and the contributions from groundwater the local perennial rivulets
would be 1.2 3/s in the month of April (the minimum flow released from the dam is 0.81
m3/s, plus minimum groundwater contribution up to Kabeli Bazar is estimated to be 0.3
m3/s, and plus the minimum contribution by sub-tributaries is 0.16 m3/s). Also there are
even smaller rivulets joining the Kabeli River downstream of the diversion dam but they
are almost dry during the low flow period (November – May, particularly in the months
of February, March and April). From June through October, the river flows will be
greater than the designed flow of the project, and hence it is expected that there will be
sufficient water in this section of the river.

  Cumulative Impact Assessment (CIA): KEL, through an independent consultant,
prepared a Cumulative Impact Assessment (draft, November 2011) of hydropower
development in the Kabeli Basin. Eight hydropower projects, with total generation
capacity of about 101 MW, have been identified in the Kabeli basin. It is likely that these
projects, when developed, will have long-term cumulative effects on the basin. The CIA
evaluates the existing basin condition, identifies recent development trends and assesses
potential basin-level implications of different scenarios of hydropower development in
the basin. Through a consultative process, the CIA has identified “Valued Ecosystem
Components? (VECs) in the Kabeli basin, that is, the most-valued elements of the natural
and social environment. Out of the several VECs related to physical, biological and
socio-economic-cultural aspects, , fish and in particular, the kavre fish, were taken as the
main VECs. The KAHEP EIA has suggested mitigation measures to minimize and abate
the adverse impacts on Kabeli basin VECs that arise from its components and activities.
Some of the potential cumulative basin-level impacts identified by the CIA include:
conversion of and increased pressure on agriculture and forest land (directly as well as
indirectly); increased erosion and sedimentation with impacts on agriculture, livelihood
and hydropower projects themselves; increase in pollution (air, water and noise); reduced
flow at several stretches of the Kabeli river and impacts on the aquatic ecology and loss
of fish diversity; and impacts on traditional economic activities, private property and
livelihood.
  The CIA also notes the possibility of river fragmentation, population displacement,
degradation of terrestrial flora and fauna, pressure on transmission line etc. as a result of
the development of the Kabeli basin for hydropower. The CIA stresses the importance of
all projects effectively implementing the project-level environmental mitigation measures
identified by the respective EIAs, to ensure compliance by contractors and to conduct
monitoring. One of the key recommendations of the CIA is to move towards a holistic,
river-basin wide approach to hydropower planning, development and operation in Nepal.

  At the Kabeli basin level, the CIA recommends the following: (i) enhance coordination
and data sharing (for basin level planning, and protection), (ii) optimize power production
in the Kabeli basin, (iii) all hydropower projects need to collaborate and share in the
protection and development of catchments, (iv) initiate a Catchment Area Treatment
(CAT) Plan incorporating physical and biological measures as a shared responsibility
among the stakeholders for addressing soil erosion and sedimentation issues. The CIA
notes that mitigation of the cumulative impacts is a shared responsibility of all
hydropower projects as well as of government agencies and programs. Coordination
among developers and government agencies is essential. Government of Nepal and its
agencies have an important role to play in providing shared infrastructure (access roads,
transmission lines etc). Government agencies and developers need to coordinate in
sharing data, identifying and following efficient and equitable operating parameters for
the hydropower projects and for implementing basin-level mitigation activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
This project was selected for development by Government of Nepal in the context of a
national screening and ranking exercise that reviewed 138 potential hydropower projects
in the range of 10 to 300 MW for possible offering to private sector developers (Medium
Hydropower Study Project 1997). On the basis of technical, economic, social and
environmental criteria and in consultation with communities that would be affected by
the projects, 24 projects were selected that were considered attractive and to have
minimal negative environmental and social impacts. A fine screening of these 24
projects yielded seven projects, including the proposed Kabeli-A HEP, for priority
development. Alternative sites of the project components (dam, powerhouse, access
roads, etc.) as well as technologies were assessed considering technical, economic, social
and environmental implications.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment. Kabeli Energy Limited completed the Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) Study of Kabeli-A Hydroelectric Project in September 2011. The EIA also
includes an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and recommends specific mitigation
measures for construction and operation periods.

 Construction period mitigation measures: compensatory afforestation (25 trees to be
planted for every tree felled); lease compensation for the forest land; compensation to the
community and leasehold forest user groups equivalent to five years’ production potential
(wood volume, fuel-wood and fodder); assistance to forestry enhancement programs
(particularly for forests close to the construction sites); only required tree/vegetation to be
cleared and only after proper demarcation and tree marking; provision of technical and
financial assistance to the affected community forests and leasehold forest user groups;
provision of kerosene to the workforce for cooking; provision for camp lodging with
LPG cooking facility; prohibition on the sale and purchase of the NTFP and fish in the
camps; ban on construction workers entering the forests; limiting the noisy construction
activities between 6 pm to 6 am; ban on trade of the meat or other products of wild
animals in the construction camps and by/to the workforce; collecting and re-using top
soil; providing alternative access for people and livestock in lieu of obstructed access;
providing suitable slope retaining structures and flood protection structures; using
controlled blasting; benching all excavation of more than 3 m height; protecting
excavated surface against water erosion by suitable drainage and collection; protecting
cut slopes (retaining walls and grass plantation); water sprinkling to reduce dust;
provision of personal protection equipment (air masks, helmets, goggles, boots etc);
ventilation in the tunnel; noise control measures (blasting in day time, no horns close to
village, etc); properly planned and designed muck disposal operation at designated muck
disposal sites; strip quarrying (as opposed to a big borrow pit, and quarrying to be
carried out above flowing water level, and only during the dry season) in the flood plain;
wastewater to be collected in settling tanks/ponds; collection and safe disposal of used
lubricants/grease/toxic chemicals; separate collection of wastewater from mechanical
yard; provision of toilets in the camps and active construction sites; a system for
collection and storage of solid waste from camps and construction sites; and
compensation for houses/structures damaged by vibration/blasting.

 Operation period mitigation measures: continuous release of at least 0.81 m3/s (10% of
the minimum monthly flow) of water through the dam; fish ladder in the dam; support
for communities for nurturing plantations for five years; assistance to forestry and
wildlife enhancement and conservation programs in and around project areas; assistance
for local communities in the Kabeli catchment for improving on-site sanitation and
agricultural practices; developing the muck disposal sites for public use (in consultation
with the community); providing river bank protection measures as needed; and arranging
water supply from alternate sources if existing community water sources/springs within a
200m strip along the tunnel alignment) become affected.

 KEL engaged an independent team of fish experts to review the environmental flow
recommendations and, as needed, to revise or augment these recommendations. The
team interpreted the findings of different assessment methods to Nepalese conditions.
The Modified Tenant Model indicates that at the proposed 10% flow, the ecological
condition of the river stretch in the dewatered zone will be severely degraded for 5
months of the year and fish will be concentrated mostly in pool sections of the river.
However, this situation will improve further downstream as a result of the contribution of
downstream tributaries and groundwater recharge. The findings of the Habitat Simulation
method show that the proposed 10% minimum flow and depth and velocity created by
such release will fulfill the habitat requirement of most of the fish found in the Kabeli
River, the exceptions being Barilius sp and Labeo sp. Finally, the findings of the CRAB
model for the Brown trout have been compared with the snow trout since this is an
important midrange migratory fish with high food value. The data show that the required
discharge, depth and velocity can be maintained in most of the river section after release
of the 10% minimum flow, and the minimum requirement for the survival of fish can be
created after such release. Considering the findings of these three models, fish diversity,
composition and size of the captured fish, the independent review found the proposed
10% minimum release to be appropriate to maintain the downstream aquatic flora and
fauna. The independent assessment supported the mitigation measures recommended in
the EIA, and proposed the following additional measures: carry out a habitat management
program (minimize removal of boulders from the river bed, construction of six pools at
specified locations); undertake plantation work to the extent possible in the areas
upstream of the reservoir; prohibit fishing in the stretch of reduced water flow in the dry
7 months and patrol to enforce prohibition; carry out an aquatic habitat/fish conservation
awareness program; trash rack to minimize fish entrainment; and enhanced monitoring.
If the monitoring results indicate severe impacts on fish, additional mitigation measures
such as open water stocking may be implemented. The initial monitoring program is
proposed for two years with subsequent adjustments to be made based on the findings of
the initial monitoring.

  Social interventions. A Social Action Plan (SAP) was developed on the basis of the
findings and recommendations of the social impact assessment. The SAP is developed to
address all social dimensions of the project, with the aim to mitigate adverse project
impacts and maximize project benefits to local population. The SAP contains an overall
policy framework, a resettlement compensation plan, a vulnerable community
development plan, public health measures, benefit sharing measures, public consultation
and communication strategy, implementation arrangements including grievance redress
and monitoring mechanisms.

 •      Policy framework. This framework was developed in line with relevant domestic
and World Bank policies on involuntary resettlement, indigenous peoples and physical
cultural resources. The framework lays out the principles to guide planning and
implementation of mitigation and development measures under the project, with the
objective that the affected persons be able to maintain at least the same level of living
standard prior to the project implementation and that the project should share benefits by
supporting local development.
 •      Resettlement Compensation and Livelihood Assistance Plan. The RCLAP was
developed in line with the above framework, taking into consideration the feedback from
consultations with local communities. It aims to mitigate the direct project impacts and
to support local development. The package includes: (i) cash compensation payment, (ii)
an agricultural extension program, (iii) vocational training, (iv) a preferential policy for
local people for construction employment opportunities, (v) a monitoring mechanism
over fishing resources, and development of hatcheries and fish provision of fish passage,
(vi) public health measures for local population and construction workers, (vii) assistance
to local communities in building new and repairing existing drinking water and sanitation
schemes and (viii) approaches to address impacts on cultural practices along the river.
  Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP). The VCDP was developed in
compliance with relevant policies in Nepal and World Bank Operation Policy 4.10 on
Indigenous Peoples. In addition to the RCLAP measures and general support programs,
the VCDP describes interventions that target specifically vulnerable communities that
include (i) women-focused activities, (ii) social mobilization and a capacity-building
program for vulnerable groups, (iii) specific provisions for Janajati households; (iv) a
small loan assistance program for the vulnerable women-headed and Dalit households
and (v) specific provisions to guarantee and increase their participation in the project
program activities.
  •      Benefit sharing mechanisms. In consultation with communities in the project
area, KEL has agreed benefits-sharing mechanisms to be supported under the proposed
project. During the construction period, the project will fund local infrastructure works,
including all-season motorable roads in the immediate project area; new and improved
health facilities; drinking water schemes, health services such as clinics, occupation skill
training; upgrading of education facilities, and agricultural extension services. Some of
these are already in the RCLAP and VCDP. These will be further developed in detail in
consultation with local communities and governments.
  •      Consultations with communities indicated their strong preference to receive
assistance in upgrading their access to electricity. Many households in the area already
use solar home systems and have expressed an interest in gaining access to grid-supplied
electricity. The IDA-funded Kabeli Transmission Project includes funds for extending
access to electricity in the Kabeli corridor. In addition, the hydropower royalty that KEL
will pay once the project is operational will also serve as a source of funding for rural
electrification, in keeping with the established procedures for the use of these funds.
  •      Strategy for Public Consultations, Participation and Communication. The
strategy describes the consultations carried out durin the planning phase of the project as
well as the approach and measures to continue during project implementation. This will
ensure community ownership and success of the program activities as well as enhance the
program sustainability.
  •      SAP Implementation Arrangements. KEL will assume overall responsibility for
the SAP implementation. A multi-level organization will be established to implement the
SAP, including the project coordination unit, the Environmental Section of HCPL who
will handle the day-to-day SAP implementation with field offices, a Community
Guidance Committee with representatives from each of the direct project impact area.
Regular monitoring of SAP implementation will be conducted by the implementing
agency as well as by an independent external monitor. The internal monitoring will be
carried out by KEL KAECDU in a regular basis. An independent monitor will be
designated to carry out six-monthly review of the SAP implementation.
  •      Grievance Redress The project will establish a three-tier grievance redress
mechanism. The first tier will be a field-based grievance cell at site. A Public
Information Center has been established at site and includes a register which is open to
receive and register all grievances by local people, in written and oral form. The project
will appoint a Grievance Redress Officer (GRO) at this cell to work with the
communities over grievance registration and resolution. The second tier is a local
Grievance Redress Committee (GRC). It will include the GRO, a representative from the
Kabeli Concerned Stakeholders Committee (formed by the communities) and one
representative of the contractors. This GRC will meet as required to review cases
referred to it by the field cell. The third tier is a project-level grievance committee (GC)
consisting of the project manager, Chief District Officer and the Chairman of the Kabeli
Concerned Stakeholders Committee. The GC will review all cases referred to it by the
GRC. All grievances will be recorded at a register to be established at KAHEP site
offices and all complaints, lodged orally or in writing, will be recorded. A procedure and
timetable for grievance resolution has been developed and is detailed in the SAP. This
mechanism is in the process of being established under the project to handle all project-
related grievances and is partially operational during the planning stage.

 The total SAP cost is estimated at 43 million Nepali Rupees

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the preparation of the EIA and the Social Assessment, extensive consultations
were held with project area communities and stakeholders, including potentially affected
people, community forest groups. The first round of consultations was carried out during
the EIA scoping exercise from April 22- May 1, 2010. Fourteen focus group discussions
with community forest groups, women, Dalits, and indigenous peoples groups were held
in October-November 2010 in different locations in the project area. Local people were
informed about the project and their feedback was solicited. Potential environmental
mitigation options and environmental enhancement measures were also discussed with
the local people. District-level stakeholders such as the District Development Committee
and District Forest Office were also consulted. The findings and recommendations of the
draft EIA and SIA were disseminated and discussed, and further feedback solicited from
the stakeholders. Public consultation/ hearing was organized on 24 July 2011 at the
project site to share the findings of the assessment, explain how the concerns have been
incorporated, to obtain further feedbacks from the project beneficiaries and stakeholder.
The EIA and SA findings were also presented in two district level consultations
organized on 25 July 2011 at Phungling Bazar, district headquarter of Taplejung and on
26 July 2011 at Phidim, district headquarter of Panchthar, which was attended by the
government officers, political parties, INGOs, NGOs and media personnel. A national
level consultation at Kathmandu was held on 1 August 2011.

 KEL has disclosed the EIA and SA through its public website, http://www.kel.com.np.
The executive summaries of the EIA and SA have been translated into Nepali, Limbu,
Bantawa Rai, Khaling Rai and Tamang and disclosed on the KEL website, and project
information is also available at the Project Information Center in Amarpur VDC,
Panchthar District.

 KEL plans to inform and further consult local stakeholders (affected people,
Community Forest Users Groups, etc.) on a regular basis during the implementation of
the project.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/02/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/04/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              08/15/2011
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/02/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/04/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/02/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/02/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/04/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?         Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential       Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        N/A
provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                              Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts         Yes
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements           Yes
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                            Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification              N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                           N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                    Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Michael Haney                          11/29/2011
Environmental Specialist:            Mr Drona Raj Ghimire                      11/29/2011
Social Development Specialist        Mr Chaohua Zhang                          11/29/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                       12/08/2011
  Comments: cleared for disclosure.Please refer to email of October 4, 2011.
Sector Manager:                     Ms Jyoti Shukla                            12/09/2011
  Comments:
