                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/13/2013                                      Report No.: 80697
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P115767                  Original Project Name: Nepal-India
                                              Electricity Transmission and Trade Project
Country: Nepal                                Project ID: P132631
Project Name: Additional Financing for Nepal-India Electricity Transmission and Trade
Project
Task Team Leader: Jie Tang
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 22, 2013      Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2013
Managing Unit: SASDE                          Lending Instrument:
Sector: Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (97%);Public administration-
Energy and mining (3%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);Regional
integration (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             39
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objectives of the NIETTP additional financing are to: (a)
establish cross-border transmission capacity between India and Nepal of about 1000 MW
to facilitate electricity trade between the two countries; and, (b) increase the supply of
electricity in Nepal by the sustainable import of at least 100 MW. With the proposed
Additional Financing, no change in objectives is proposed.

3. Project Description
The original NIETTP includes investments financed by IDA (Components B and C) as
well as linked investments not financed by IDA (Component A).

 Part A: Dhalkebar-Muzaffarpur (D-M) Transmission Line
 •     Component A1: Muzaffarpur-Sursand 400 kV Transmission Line ($32.82m, non-
IDA financed). Design, construction and operation of approximately 90 km of 400 kV
double circuit transmission line between Muzaffarpur and Sursand on the Indian border
with Nepal. This line will be implemented in India by the CPTC.
  •    Component A2: Dhalkebar–Bhittamod 400 kV Transmission Line ($20.71m, non-
IDA financed). Design, construction and operation of approximately 40 km of 400 kV
double circuit transmission line between Bhittamod, on the Nepal border with India, and
Dhalkebar in Nepal. This line will be implemented in Nepal by the PTCN.
  Implementation Status: Institution set up was finished. Bids for supply and installation
contracts for both Nepal and India sections are under evaluation. Signing of the contracts
is expected by June 2013 and project completion by March.

  Part B: Hetauda-Dhalkebar- Duhabi (H-D-D) Transmission Line and Grid
Synchronization
  •      Component B1: Hetauda-Dhalkebar-Duhabi Transmission Line and Substations.
Design, construction and operation of approximately 28 km of 400 kV double circuit
transmission line for the H-D-D line segment, together with concomitant substations in
Nepal.
  Implementation Status: The contract for supply and installation of towers and string of
conductors for was signed on February 3, 2013. The contractor is currently undertaking
the check survey for the full length of the line. Bidding documents for supply of
conductors—dropped from the PDP project and proposed for the Additional Financing—
have been finalized and submitted to the Bank no objection. Design of substation and
preparation of technical specifications for transformers have been completed by the
Owner's Engineer hired by NEA. Contract signing is expected by July and project
completion of by September 2015.
  •      Component B2: Synchronization of Operation of the Nepal and Indian Grids.
Installation of the required power system stabilizers in the major power generating
stations and other measures in Nepal in order to synchronize Nepal's power system with
that of India.
  Implementation Status of B2: Study for the system synchronization was completed.
Procurement of the required equipment will start in early 2014 according the
implementation schedule.

 Part C: Technical Advisory Services
 •     Component C1: Owners' Engineer. Provision of technical advisory services,
through an Owners' Engineer for NEA, for overseeing Part B of the Project.

 Implementation Status: The Owners' Engineer hired is providing technical advisory
services to NEA. The Owner's Engineer has completed the substation design and
preparation of the technical specifications. It will assist NEA in the follow up contract
executions.
 •      Component C2: Transmission System Master Plan. Provision of technical
advisory services to NEA for the preparation of a transmission system master plan for
future transmission system development in Nepal and for development of additional
cross-border interconnections.
  Implementation Status: Request for Proposals was issued to shortlisted firms and bids
received are under evaluation now. Draft report on the master plan is expected by
December 2013.
  •     Component C3: Lenders' Engineer. Provision of technical advisory services,
through a Lenders' Engineer, for enabling results monitoring, highlighting obstacles to
achieving results in a timely manner, and ensuring the development and implementation
of appropriate corrective actions by NEA, Government of Nepal and the Bank.
  Implementation Status of C3: Not yet started and proposed to be dropped.
  •     Component C4: Capacity Development. Provision of technical advisory services
the Ministry of Energy and NEA for capacity building.
  Implementation Status: some of the capacity building activities are on-going.
  The new investment activities for the proposed Additional Financing to the original
Project include:
  •     Conductor for H-D-D 400 kV transmission Line. Additional Financing is
proposed for supply of the conductors for the H-D-D Transmission line under the original
Project. Bidding document for supply of conductors was submitted to the Bank for no
objection.
  •     Hetauda-Bharatpur (H-B) and Bharatpur-Bardaghat (B-B) 220 kV Lines and
Associated Substations. Additional Financing is proposed for continued payments for
continued execution of contracts for supply and installation of the H-B and B-B 220 kV
lines, which are under implementation of the on-going Power Development Project
(PDP) supported by the Bank.
  •     System Integrator for IFMIS of NEA. Supply, installation, commissioning and
maintenance of the Integrated Financial Management Information System important for
strengthening NEA's accounting system and financial management capacity. System
study was completed and Request for Proposal drafted.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The two transmission line (TL) projects proposed for additional financing to NIETTP
have begun under implementation since 2008 and 2009 respectively under the PDP. Both
TL projects have Right-of-Way (RoW) of 30 meters wide and approximately 12.5m X
12.5 m land area is required for construction each tower foundation. The tower height is
42.45 meters. The H-B line runs between Hetauda to Bardaghat in the central Terai
crossing three districts namely Makwanpur, Chitwan and Nawalparasi. Though the
terrain is pre dominantly plain, some part of the TL passes through Churia hills. This TL
adversely impacts Bharatpur, Padampur, Birendranager VDCs of Chitwan district and
Basamadi and Manahari VDCs of Makwanpur district. The B-B line from Bharatpur -
Bardaghat is approximately 70 km long and passes through 9 VDCs and two
municipalities of Makwanpur and Chitwan districts respectively. In Makawanpur district
the project has adversely impacts in Basamadi and Manahari VDCs, and Hetauda
Municipality. Similarly in Chitwan district, the TL will adversely impact Padampur,
Birendranagar, Chainpur, Piple, Pithuwa, Bhandara and Jutepani VDCs and Bharatpur
municipality.
 For the original project, (a) the India portion of the D-M line from Muzaffarpur to the
Nepal border has about 90 m alignment in flat terrain, with a stretch of about 0.75 ha
forest land to be acquired. No other sensitive receptors have been identified along that
stretch; (b) along the Nepal portion of the D-M line from Dhalkebar to India border,
about 40 km long running north-south, there are a few sensitive environmental receptors
along the corridor; and (c) the east to west H-D-D line (the largest component of the
NIETTP) mostly runs parallel to existing infrastructure or in already anthropogenically
impacted areas. Of the 285km length of this line, the initial 18.6 km (Hetauda-
Hurnamadi) stretch of the TL passes through a hilly area. Over the next 23.4 kilometers
(Hurnamadi- Nijgadh), the line route gradually changes from hills to Terai. The
remaining 243.2 km (Nijgadh - New Duhabi) passes through flat plain of Terai and runs
almost parallel to, and on the northern side of the East-West Highway. The substations
will be expanded in Hetauda and Dhalkebar, while a new station will be in Duhabi. The
alignment often co-shares the RoW of the existing 132 kV TL and the Mahendra
Highway, especially in sections where it passes through the core forest area. The
alignment has been selected to entirely avoid going through the critical natural habitat
zones of Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve (KTWR) and the Parsa Wildlife reserve.

 The EA indicates that these TLs do not go through any national park, wildlife reserve,
buffer zone, conservation area, wetlands, or historically and archaeologically important
sites. However the H-D-D line passes close to but still avoids the buffer zone of Koshi
Tappu Wildlife Reserve, which is known to contain sensitive flora and fauna.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
   Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Scope of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment under
 A) The Original Project NIETTP.

  The developers of the Nepalese sections of the original Project (components A2 and B1)
and the Indian section (component A1) have used separate approaches and arrangements
in addressing the social and environmental impacts of the TLs due to different financing,
regulatory and institutional structures in the two countries. For the Nepalese sections of
the TL (components A2 and B1), an independent environmental and social impact
assessment has been completed that is consistent with the World Bank's Safeguards
policies, as well as with the local regulatory requirements in Nepal. The Indian portion
(component A1) will follow a framework approach consistent with Indian requirements
as the exact alignment of the TL and the exact locations of the towers will only be
finalized during implementation (explained below). The original Project is expected to
contribute overall positively to the local economies through improved power supply. The
local populations are also expected to benefit through enhanced employment
opportunities, training, and extension services planned under the Project.

  Environmental assessment and impacts for Nepalese Sections. In accordance with OP
4.01, an Environmental Assessment, as part of the Initial Environmental Examination
(IEE) was undertaken for both the Dhalkebar - Bhittamod section of D-M line in Nepal
(Component A2), as well as the H-D-D TL in Nepal (Component B1). The assessment
included developing baseline environmental and social conditions along the anticipated
RoW as well as identification and evaluation of impact resulting from proposed
intervention. The assessment indicates that environmental and social impacts associated
with the project activities are not direct, irreversible or significant in nature. Hence the
project is rated Environmental Category B. Also in compliance with OP 4.04 Natural
Habitats, the NIETTP avoids critical natural habitats; and includes mitigation measures
for those non-critical areas that the Project would affect. Additionally, as part of the
environmental assessment, in compliance with OP 4.36, the use of such forest land has
been minimized - only a part of the H-D-D line would pass through some forest land -
and to the extent of forest land and trees affected, mitigation measures in accordance to
Nepalese law and regulations are included to be implemented under the Project.

 Social Assessment and Impacts for the Nepalese sections. The total length of TLs in the
Nepalese section is about 325 km (H-D-D line 285 km + Dhalkebar-Bhittamod section of
the D-M line 40 km). NEA has carried out a SIA for the entire length. In accordance with
OP 4.12, involuntary Resettlement has been avoided where possible; and where it would
not be possible to avoid, a RAP has been prepared through which affected persons would
be assisted to improve their livelihoods and standards of living. While preventive
planning approaches have been integrated into the Project using alternative engineering
design options, appropriate mitigation measures have been planned to address residual
adverse impacts. The SIA provides the socioeconomic and demographic profile in the
Project districts, identifies potential positive and adverse impacts resulting from the
Project's interventions, and screens the indigenous communities in the Project areas. In
accordance with OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples, the SIA team carried out extensive
consultations with local communities and governments to identify Project-related impacts
and possible mitigation, as well as recorded their expectations and recommendations for
the Project. The SIA has confirmed the presence of indigenous communities in the
Project areas and a process of free, prior and informed consultations has confirmed their
support for the Project. A Vulnerable People Development Framework (VPDF) has been
prepared that will guide proactive interventions to minimize potential impacts on the
indigenous communities. The exact nature of impacts and interventions will be identified
consultatively during finalization of the exact alignment and location of the TL, towers
and substations. A RAP has been developed to resettle and rehabilitate people who will
be affected due to the known specific locations of TL, towers and substations, while a
Social Impact Management Framework (SIMF) has been developed to address the TLs,
towers and substations whose alignment and specific locations are expected to be
finalized only during implementation (described below).

 Additionally, in compliance with OP 4.11 Physical Culture Resources, during
preparation, some minimal impacts on physical cultural resources have been identified,
and in consultations with the communities, mitigation measures have been included to be
implemented under the Project.

 RAP for TL, towers and substations for the Nepalese sections whose locations are
known. The RAP was developed based on data from a household survey of socio -
economic status and impacts. It indicates that the affected population belongs to 29
different caste/ethnic groups scattered along the TL. Extensive consultations with the
affected households were carried out to record their concerns and to inform them about
Project impacts, and to develop mitigation measures. Overall, the towers and substations
will require 21 hectares (ha) of land; relocation of nine private structures belonging to six
households; and affect 133 households comprising 873 people. The RAP describes in
detail the impacts; compensation policy and entitlements; compensation payment and
relocation arrangements for the private structures, one primary school and three temples;
and institutional setup and monitoring arrangements.

  The SIMF is to be applied within Nepal where exact locations are currently unknown.
The SIMF will be applied to those sections of TL and suspension towers whose
alignment and specific locations will only be finalized during project implementation.
The procedures described in the SIMF have been designed to comply with the relevant
local regulations and the World Bank's Safeguards policies. The SIMF contains a
framework with procedures and guidelines to identify evaluate and prepare plans to
address involuntary resettlement; issues concerning vulnerable communities including
Indigenous Peoples; and consultation and participation and grievance redress
mechanisms. The SIMF also describes policy objectives and principles, planning
approach and requirements, review and approval procedures, and institutional
responsibilities and implementation arrangements. During implementation, a site-specific
RAP and VCDP will be prepared as soon as the exact location of the TL and suspension
towers is established prior to finalization of the engineering designs. The site specific
RAP and the VCDP will be reviewed, monitored and supervised by the independent
environmental and social management unit of the NEA, supported by the Owners'
Engineer and the Bank's Safeguards team. The ITSA-PTCN will include the necessary
provisions for the application of appropriate Safeguards policies as agreed with PTCN, of
which NEA is a shareholder of this developer of the TL.

 B) The proposed Additional Financing

 The H-B line from Hetauda – Bharatpur and B-B line from Bharatpur – Berdaghat (B-
B) currently under implementation for the Bank-supported PDP are proposed for
continuation under the Additional Financing, since implementation of these two lines will
go beyond the closing of the PDP. With the H-B line, 50 land parcels are affected due to
tower pads 465 land parcels due to ROW. It will also impact 140 private residential
structures and 78 animal sheds. With the B-B line, a total of 182 households are affected,
of which 115 households are in Chitwan and 67 households in Makwanpur district. A
total of 197 structures are impacted, of which 43 are non-titleholders. The two lines also
impact 109 cattle sheds, 5 community buildings, one water pumping station and staff
quarter and four cultural properties.

 The B-B and H-B TLs, within the RoW, will affect approximately 193 ha and 187.5 ha
forest land. In several sections of the RoW of both the TLs, the forest quality is degraded
with low height trees (less than 3 m), shrub and grasslands. The species of vegetation
affected are prevalent in the adjoining forests and throughout the Tarai forests in Nepal.
EMAP has estimated that about 16000 trees in B-B RoW and 53000 trees in H-B RoW
and associated substations will have to be cut from community and government forests.
The indirect impact on forest and wildlife is likely from the workforce (fuel wood and
pressure on non-timber forest products), noise and unauthorized activities. The Churia
hill is physically weak/ fragile. Both B-B and H-B TLs at different stretches, pass through
Churia hills. Clearance of vegetation and construction of transmission towers could
increase the natural erosion and landslides events in these areas. Occupational health &
safety as well as pollution by the work force (open defecation, waste disposal etc.) are
other environmental concerns. The EMAP has identified mitigation measures such as
health & safety measures, pollution control measures (toilet, garbage control etc.),
provision of kerosene/cooking fuel to workers, prohibition on purchase of NTFP and no
unauthorized entry to forest, compensatory plantation, awareness & training (forest,
wildlife and environmental conservation) etc. Potential plantation sites and preferred
plant species for planation have been identified adjacent to the respective TLs and
community forests.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No significant, irreversible indirect and/or long term adverse impacts are currently
envisaged.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The original alignment of the H-D-D line was reworked to avoid two recognized
conservation areas - Core and buffer of the Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve; and buffer
area of the Parsa Wildlife Sanctuary. While this has resulted in an increase in the length
of the line, potential adverse impacts have been permanently avoided. For the selection of
locations of the substations, alternative sites were analyzed including specific criteria for
environmental aspects. The alignment of H-B line from Hetauda – Bharatpur and B-B
line from Bharatpur – Berdaghat has also been reworked to reduce impact on forest area
and settlements.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Measures Taken. The project has prepared site specific RAP and VCDP and SIMF for all
the TLs. The RAP follows relevant domestic and World Bank policies. It is developed on
the basis of an inventory survey of impacts and census survey of the affected population
as well as extensive consultations with the local communities The RAP describes in
detail the impacts, compensation policy and entitlements, compensation payment and
relocation arrangements for the private structures, one school and the three temples. It
also describes the institutional setup and monitoring arrangements.

 Extensive consultations were carried out with the vulnerable communities along the
alignment of all the TLs and based on social assessment, consultation results, and
relevant domestic and World Bank policies, VCDPs have been prepared.

 Under NIETTP, a SIMF is prepared for TLs and towers whose alignment and locations
are yet to be finalized during project implementation. This framework is developed to
guide the preparation of the social planning to address impacts under the TLs and
suspension towers. The SIMF covers involuntary resettlement, vulnerable communities
including indigenous peoples, consultation, grievance redress mechanisms and
institutional arrangement. It includes an overall policy framework on resettlement and
indigenous peoples, a resettlement and rehabilitation framework, a vulnerable community
people's development framework, consultation and grievance redress mechanisms,
institutional and monitoring evaluation arrangements.

 Physical cultural resources: Consultations were carried out with local communities over
the relocation impacts and arrangements. Local communities agreed with proposed
arrangements to relocate the temples to nearby sites with better structures. The project
will compensate for the structures and will provide assistance in their relocation and
reconstruction. These are included in the respective RAPs.

 Capacity Assessment. In PDP, the primary responsibility of coordinating work related to
social and environmental safeguards of the H-B and B-B lines rests with the Project
assisted by the Environment and Social Studies Department (ESSD). The ESSD is staffed
with specialized social and environment professionals. ESSD over a period of time has
acquired skill and experience to address social and environmental safeguard issues.
Currently ESSD is working on several Bank funded projects as well, including the PDP,
NIETTP, Kabeli Transmission Project, Kaligan Daki Hydropower Rehabilitation project.
An Environmental and Social Specialist each from ESSD will be posted at the project site
to monitor the implementation of environmental and social safeguards mitigation
measures. The specialists will be responsible for generating monthly progress reports.
The midterm and end term evaluation of implementation process will be carried out by an
independent agency.

  In NIETTP, as mentioned earlier, for the Muzaffarpur-Sursand section of the D-M line
in India (Component A1), the developer CPTC will address the joint supervision
arrangements among themselves in the ITSA-CPTC; and IDA will have no supervision
rights for this component. Similar joint supervision arrangements would be entered into
in the ITSA-PTCN for the Dhalkebar-Bhittamod section of the D-M line (Component
A2) in Nepal, which is also not financed by IDA. However, NEA is a shareholder of the
developer PTCN and IDA would be able to monitor, through NEA the implementation of
this component, including adherence to the Safeguards aspects satisfactory to the Bank.
IDA would of course supervise the H-D-D line and concomitant substations, which it
would be financing.

 While the NEA's capacity is being strengthened for safeguards management through
other ongoing engagements in the power sector in Nepal as well as through NIETTP and
PDP, a two-level monitoring and supervision framework is prepared for the
implementation of the H-D-D line. The PMO will have a specialized Safeguards
Monitoring Unit (SMU); and the construction Contractor has a trained environmental and
social development specialist on their team to assist during implementation. An Owners'
Engineer is assisting the NEA to oversee and monitor the work of the Contractor. In
addition, the Bank team is carrying our regular supervisions of the environmental social
work by NEA and the contractors. For the Dhalkebar-Bhittamod section of the D-M line
in Nepal, PTCN will prepare similar suitable site specific plans to address environmental
management measures specified in the IEE and share them with NEA. PTCN will also
share required information with NEA so that NEA can report to the Bank on compliance
with these requirements each trimester.

 Assessment of Implementation Performance. No physical investment activities are
started under the Original Project. For the H-B and B-B TLs, there are significant delays
in disbursement of compensation and R&R assistances and the consultation, and
communication processes are weak based on findings of recent supervision missions. At
certain locations, work has started without paying compensation to the affected land
owners. These issues have been raised to the top management of NEA following the
recent supervision mission in March 2013. NEA agreed to enhance the social and
environmental capacity of the project team to ensure timely compensation
implementation of land acquisition and consultation in line with the agreed action plans
in a timely manner. Bank also needs to enhance safeguard supervision for both the
NIETTP and on-going two transmission line projects under PDP, which are proposed for
continued implementation after closing of PDP in December 2013, with the proposed
Additional Financing.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
In NIETTP, the key stakeholders are residents of the 77 VDCs and 2 municipalities,
especially those living close to the alignment and locations of the substations across 10
districts in Nepal for the H-D-D line, and those who will bear direct negative potential
impacts by construction and operation of the TL. Also, local, national and regional NGOs
are recognized as important stakeholders, e.g. in nature and wildlife conservation and
social protection. For the Dhalkebar - Bhittamod section of the D-M line in Nepal, such
stakeholders include residents of the 25 VDCs through which the alignment passes.
Extensive consultations were carried out during the project planning process with local
stakeholders, including local communities, various ethnic groups and local governments.
Public meetings were organized during the assessment study and information regarding
the project benefits and impacts was shared with the local residents. In addition, officials
of the Forest Department, and those charged with the protected areas - KTWR and Parsa
sanctuary have also been consulted as key stakeholders. During the IEE preparation, 47
Forest User Groups were also consulted for the H-D-D line.

  In PDP, public consultations were carried out at VDC level as well as at district level for
the H-B and B-B lines. Types of consultations included informal meetings, information
dissemination and public hearing. The main objective of the public consultations were (i)
to inform the local people, NGOs and line agencies on the technical and
environmental/social aspects of the project; (ii) to update the local people about the
present status and on-going activities of the project; (iii) to obtain feedback from the
community on the design and possible mitigation measures for the adverse impacts. The
issues discussed during the consultations included extent of land that will be impacted
due to tower pads and RoW; compensation for land and building; impact on houses and
other structures under the high tension line; other adverse impacts; mitigation measures;
entitlements and project period.

 Disclosure: NEA prepared the Operational Manual (OM) of Social and Environmental
Impact Assessment for sub projects to be financed under additional financing of PDP in
April 2009. The document was disclosed in country on April 5, 2009 and in Bank's
InfoShop on May 05, 2009. As and when alignments were finalized, based on OM, site
specific safeguard documents were prepared and disclosed in country. The EMAP for H-
B line was prepared and disclosed in country on February 28, 2012 and SIA and VCDP
were disclosed in country on March 4, 2012. The EMAP for B-B line was disclosed in
country on June 12, 2012 and VCDP and RAP was disclosed in country on March 20,
2012.

 There were four safeguard documents under NIETTP namely IEE for Nepalese section
of the project (Dhalkebar - Bhittamod and Hetauda – Dhalkebar - Duhabi); EMP for
Dhalkebar - Bhittamod section; RAP and Social Impact Management Framework. IEE,
EMP, RAP and SIMF were disclosed "in country" on February 16, 2011 and on February
17, 2011 in Bank's InfoShop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/16/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/16/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/01/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/16/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/16/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/01/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/16/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/16/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/01/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Jie Tang              04/23/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Drona Raj Ghimire     04/23/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Parthapriya Ghosh     04/23/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Zia Al Jalaly         04/25/2013
  Comments: Cleared. please follow disclosure procedures
Sector Manager:                     Ms Jyoti Shukla          04/29/2013
  Comments:
