                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: 79313
Date prepared/updated: September 20,2013

I. Basic Information

 .
1 B as1c      . D ata
        . ProJect
Country: Nepal                                   Project ID: Pl 45359
Project Name: Pro-poor Urban Regeneration Pilot Project
Task Team Leader: Elisa Muzzini
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/a                    Estimated Board Date: N/a
Managing Unit: SASDU                             Lending Instrument: Japan Social
                                                 Development Fund (JSDF) Grant
Sector: Other Social Services (50%); Other industry (30%); Sub-national government
administration (20%).
Theme: Participation and Civic Engagement (40%); Urban Services and Housing for the Poor
(30%); Cultural Heritage (30%}
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: US$ 2.75 million (Japan Social Development Fund)
Environmental Category: B
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises       Yes []     No [X]
and Emergencies)                                                        I             I
2. Project Objectives:

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to (a) contribute to improving the living conditions
of poor and vulnerable households in selected wards in the historic core of Lalitpur City by
piloting urban regeneration activities and (b) demonstrate the feasibility of an integrated urban
regeneration approach to decision-makers in the Kathmandu Valley. Such urban regeneration
activities would aim at improving local services, conserving local heritage and culture, and
increasing access to income-generating opportunities in cultural industries.

The primary beneficiaries are (a) those individuals directly benefi ting from the urban
regeneration initiatives, the awareness raising activities and capacity building programs carried
out as part of the pilot, as well as (b) the municipal officials who will be trained to implement an
integrated urban regeneration approach. The poor and vulnerable, who are the "target
beneficiaries" of the pi lot, include the income poor, low caste groups, indigenous communities,
the disabled, youth and women, especially those who are single heads of households. Some
3,000 people (670 households) are expected to benefit from the urban regeneration activities.
3. Project Description:
The pilot project would have the following four components:
Component 1: Participatory Action Plan for Pro-poor Urban Regeneration (US$ 150,000).
This component would support the preparation of a participatory action plan for pro-poor urban
regeneration in the historic core ofLalitpur City. Activities would include:
    1.1 Social needs assessment. The social assessment would include a baseline livelihood and
    needs assessment to understand the livelihood strategies of households belonging to different
    income, gender, social and caste groups in the project area. The assessment would identify
    the target beneficiaries for the urban regeneration activities.
   1.2 Market assessment. The market analysis would (a) examine the current state of cultural
   industry (handicraft and cultural tourism) clusters in Lalitpur City; (b) identify potential
   demand and market niches for different cultural heritage sites restoration and related services
   and handicrafts; (c) identify gaps and necessary measures for improving local handicrafts
   products and services; (d) develop a marketing strategy to increase visibility of the project
   site (including possible innovation, such as ICT-based tools, for site interpretation); and (e)
   propose a series of practical measures to enhance the flow of benefits to the poor and
   vulnerable.
   1.3 Site management framework. Activities for the preparation of the site management
   framework would include: (a) mapping and inventory of all physical cultural heritage assets
   in the project area, and stocktaking of past projects and activities in the project area; (b)
   review of existing municipal plans and services; (c) stakeholder analysis and clarification of
   the mandates, roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders for the maintenance of the
   heritage assets, including social accountability mechanisms.
   1.4 Participatory action plan for pro-poor urban regeneration. The Participatory Action
   Plan would build on the results of the social needs and market assessment and ~ite
   management framework to (a) develop a shared vision for the urban regeneration of the
   project area; (b) identify the priorities for the urban regeneration activities and the broad
   areas for which specific calls for proposals would be issued; (c) defme eligibility criteria for
   proposals under the grant facility as well as target criteria for vulnerable/minority groups
   (e.g. women, disable people, etc).

The participatory planning would aim at empowering local communities and building coalitions
of stakeholders (e.g., municipal agencies, NGOs, small businesses) and organize them into a
cohesive group for the implementation of the urban regeneration activities. Emphasis would be
paid to establishing and strengthening representation and voice mechanisms for the poor and
vulnerable to facilitate their participation in decision-making.

Component 2: Grant Facility for Pro-poor Urban Regeneration (US$ 2,000,000 million).
This component would fund a demand-driven, competitive matching grant facility for pro-poor
urban regeneration activities in the project area with three windows, as described below, and the
operational costs of the Grant Facility Administrator. The implementation arrangements of the
facility-funded activities would be formalized during project preparation through an Operational

                                                                                                 2
Manual, which would be reviewed and cleared by the Bank. (See Annex A for more detail on
implementation arrangements for the grant facility.)

    2.1 Pro-poor Municipal Investments and Initiatives Grant Window. The objective of the
   grant wind~w is to support small works implemented by the municipality, such as
   improvements in local infrastructure and basic services and heritage conservation, to enhance
   the living conditions of the poorest and most vulnerable communities in the project area. The
   municipality would be required to provide minimum matching contributions of the order of
   10 percent. Possible initiatives include stone paving and improvements in solid waste
   collection, renovation of traditional water sources known as hitis (stone spouts), especially
   important for the poor, and the maintenance and upgrading of public spaces within a
   community. All civil works financed under this window wlll be constructed with seismic
   resilience and criteria for site selection will take into consideration flood risk.
   2.2 Pro-poor Community-based Initiatives Grant Window. The objective of the grant
   window is to support community-driven initiatives for heritage conservation and the
   enhancement of cultural identity, social cohesion and acceptance of cultural diversity. As is
   standard procedure throughout Nepal, community groups would contribute a minimum of 10
   percent of the costs of the initiatives in cash or in kind. The grant facility could fund
   community-driven initiatives that engage neighborhood groups in protecting their own
   heritage through participatory inventories of their local assets; facilitate community-based
   maintenance and conservation initiatives (e.g., communal courtyards and local shrines);
   support revitalization of disappearing celebrations and ceremonies; and create signage and
   interpret traditional festival routes paying particular attention to benefits for poor
   neighborhoods along the route. Given the high disaster risk in the built environment, a
   seismic risk awareness campaign will be incorporated into the community driven initiatives.
   Commtmities would be responsible for implementing the activities, and carrying out the
   works (except for skilled labor if not available in the communities).
   2.3 Pro-poor Business Development Grant Window. The objective of the grant window is to
   support initiatives by eligible small businesses, NGOs, cooperatives and community-based
   organizations aimed at involving the poorest and most vulnerable in the development of
   traditional handicrafts and cultural tourism related products and services. The grantees would
   be required to provide minimum matching contributions of the order of 10 percent. The
   grant facility could fund subprojects that, e.g.,: provide training and skill development for
   poor artisans to improve technical know-how and the use of time-saving tools and
   techniques; establish a handicraft exhibition and sales promotion facility accessible to poor
   craftsmen to eliminate middlemen; develop a cultural tour of artisan workshops that includes
   poor handicraft producers; develop new fee-based activities that can be provided by poor
   residents (e.g. , storytelling, traditional cuisine and special interest tours such as neighborhood
   temples and celebrations); and provide training and technical assistance for the poor to
   participate in formal and informal sector tourism jobs.

The urban regeneration activities would be selected competitively and based on demand in
accordance with targeting criteria defined as part of the participatory planning process to
maximize the impact in terms of community development and poverty reduction.. The proposals
would be selected based on demonstrated direct benefits to the target poor and vulnerable groups

                                                                                                    3
and alignment with the priorities identified as part of the participatory planning process. The call
for proposals will specify the eligibility criteria for the submission of the proposals.

Component 3. Community Awareness and Local Capacity Building for Pro-poor Urban
Regeneration (US$ 320,000). This component would fund community awareness-raising
initiatives and local capacity building to support the effective implementation of the urban
regeneration activities and the sustainability of the outcomes. Programs would include:

   3.1 Community awareness and strengthening and technical assistance. This subcomponent
   would fund communication programs, workshops, and training to: (a) sensitize poor and
   vulnerable residents on the value of their heritage and its relevance to their wellbeing,
   including opportunities for sustainable pro-poor revenue generating activities; (b) raise
   community awareness and preparedness for disaster risk management in order to help
   residents understand the risk and take ex-ante measures to increase their resilience; (c)
   provide specialized technical support and expertise to grant proponents as required for the
   implementation of initiatives under the Grant Windows.

   3.2 Municipal Capacity Building. This subcomponent would include trammg, seminars,
   workshops, knowledge exchanges and technical assistance to enhance the capacity of
   municipal staff to: (a) conserve, manage and promote the city's cultural heritage as an asset
   for pro-poor economic development; (b) effectively work with community groups, especially
   those representing the poor and vulnerable, on urban regeneration activities; and (c) directly
   foster access of the poor and vulnerable to the socio-economic benefits of cultural industries;
   (d) engage in disaster resilient development and construction techniques to protect future
   income streams, and (e) institutionalize the integrated urban regeneration approach to ensure
   continuity of the activities after project closure. A needs assessment will be carried our
   during project preparation to map ongoing municipal capacity building activities and identify
   gaps.

Component 4. Participatory Monitoring & Evaluation and Knowledge Dissemination,
Project Management and Administration (US$ 280,000). This component would support
technical assistance and training for Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), knowledge disseminati'on,
project management and administration.
   4.1 Participatory M&E and Knowledge Dissemination. This subcomponent would support:
   (a) the development of a Management lnfoimation System (MIS) for the grant facility, and a
   participatory community-based M&E to assess the performance of the grant facility in
   meeting its objectives and adhering to its targeting and funding criteria to maximize benefits
   for the poor and vulnerable; (b) household and community surveys at project start and
   completion to collect data for the grant's monitoring system, including outcome indicators
   data; and (c) the dissemination of lessons learned from the implementation of the grant to
   promote the scaling up of the pilot through similar city-level initiatives.
   4.2 Project Management and Administration. This subcomponent would cover the
   incremental operating costs and the costs of strengthening the project management capacity
   of municipal staff and local communities.




                                                                                                  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The pilot would be implemented in selectec:l wards in the historic core of Lalitpur City. The
project area would include distressed neighborhoods in the buffer zone that surrounds the Durbar
Square Protected Monument Zone. The project area will cover 4 wards (wards 16, 18, 21 and 22)
located in the buffer zone, with a population of 24,900 according to the 2011 popUlation census
data. The selected wards have the highest concentration of poor and vulnerable communities
among the wards in the buffer zone. 1 The pilot would not include the Durbar Square Protected
Monument Zone, which is under the oversight of UNESCO and the Department of Archeology.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
Mr. Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)
Ms. Bandita Sijapati (SASDS)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                         Yes              No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                             X
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                   X

    •   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.1) is triggered because the activities /interventions
        proposed may have low impacts on the natural environment (air quality/ dusts, noise),
        human health and safety, construction related disturbances, temporary disruptions to
        basic services, and temporary obstructions to movement of people and traffic;
    •   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.1 1) is triggered because there are cultural sites in
        ~~~~                                                                                               .

    •   Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered because of the presence ofjanjatis, dalits
        and other vulnerable groups in the project area;
    •   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered in case of disruption of informal
        sources of livelihoods, primarily temporary, due to project interventions. The project
        interventions however, do not involve any involuntary land taking. .




1
 The buffer zone of the Durbar Square comprises 12 wards. Some wards are only partially included in the buffer
zone.

                                                                                                                 5
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project triggers four safeguard policies as indicated above: (a) Environmental Assessment
(OP/BP 4.01 ), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11 ), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.1 0) and
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

Impact on the environment. The pilot project is expected to produce lessons on how to
encourage communities to preserve the local environment, by giving communities a stake in the
urban regeneration process. Any negative environmental impacts of urban regeneration activities
would be limited, short-term and easily mitigated. Possible short-term concerns from the
implementation of urban regeneration activities could include environmental health hazards from
crafts activities, use of hazardous materials in rehabilitation works, increased dust, noise and
construction debris from the construction of small-scale infrastructure, temporary disruption to
basic services such as water supply and electricity and telephone lines, and temporary
obstructions to movement of tourist, people and traffic. The ceiling for works under the grant is
USD 820,000, equivalent to 30% of the grant amount, over a period of four years.

Impact on physical cultural resources. The pilot project is expected to safeguard cultural
property,· and have a positive impact on cultural resources in the long-term. Particular attention
would be paid to ensure compliance with the Bank policy on cultural resources as part of the
implementation of the urban regeneration activities, and the environmental screening mechanism
has been designed to include attention to this area. The pilot would follow the Department of
Archeology's norms and procedures for the conservation and restoration of historic buildings and
for dealing with chance finds during small works.

Impact on indigenous people. Since vulnerable people are the target beneficiaries of the pilot,
indigenous people in the project area will be positively affected by the urban regeneration
activities. The social needs assessment and baseline survey that will be carried out at inception
of the pilot project will identify vulnerable groups at the risk of exclusion from project activities,
and develop measures to enhance project benefits to hitherto excluded groups. The pilot will
comply with Nepal ' s legislations for the protection of the interests of the indigenous people and
vulnerable groups including the "Local Self-Governance Act, 1999," "Interim Constitution of
Nepal 2007," and international conventions such as "ILO Convention 169 on Indigenous
People."

Impact on livelihood due to froject intervention: Though project interventions do not involve
any involuntary land taking , some urban regeneration activities may result in disruption of
informal sources of income leading to temporary loss of income or livelihoods. The social needs
assessment and baseline survey that will be carried out at inception of the pilot will identify any
such risk and mitigation plans will be designed accordingly.

2
    As per the JSDF guidelines, land acquisition costs are not eligible for funding under the grant.

                                                                                                       6
 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
 activities in the project area:

 The long-term impact on the natural environment, physical cultural resources and indigenous
 people in the project area is expected to be positive.

 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
 adverse impacts:

 An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for effective
 safeguards management. For all municipal investments and sub-grant interventions under the
 Grant Facility for Pro-poor Urban Regeneration, the ESMF requires that alternatives be
 considered to minimize adverse environmental and social impacts. Any site selected for project
 intervention will require analysis of various alternatives as part of the environment and social
 screening process. The screening results and analysis of alternatives, as needed on a case-to-case
 basis, will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to approving the municipal investments
 and sub-grant interventions for implementation.

 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

  Given that specific demand-driven urban regeneration activities will only be identified in the
  course of project implementation, a mechanism for screening and assessing possible negative
  short-term environmental and social impacts as well as preparing mitigation plans has been
· developed during project preparation. An ESMF has been prepared and disclosed. The ESMF
  defines (a) the approach for identifying the environmental and social issues associated with the
  activities, (b) the requirements for conducting environmental and social screening and
  environment and social assessment studies for the municipal investments and sub-grants, and (c)
  guidance to identify measures to prevent, mitigate and manage potential adverse impacts and
  enhance positive ones. Accordingly, the ESMF includes a simplified screening checklist of
  proposed initiatives which will be used to determinate the types of environmental and social
  assessment that may be required. Provisions are also included for the preparation of
  Environmental Management Plans/Social Action Plans (EMP/SAP) for specific initiatives, if
  required during implementation. As part of ESMF preparation, a negative list of activities that
  cannot be supported under the pilot project has been developed. The negative list includes any
  municipal investment and sub-grant activity that have high environmental risks and/or require
  the permanent relocation of households or involuntary acquisition ofland and property.

 As part of ESMF preparation, in addition to .Bank OPs, the provisions of Nepal's Environmental
 Protection Act (EPA) I Environmental Protection Rules (EPR) related to heritage sites have been
 reviewed and the Department of Archaeology's guidelines and specifications internalized.
 Accordingly, the ESMF specifies norms and procedures for the conservation and restoration of
 historic buildings and for dealing with chance finds during small civil works. The conservation
 and restoration of historic buildings will use traditional materials and construction techniques as
 per the specifications of the Department of Archeology. The municipality will develop a protocol
 for use by the construction contractors and/or local communities while conducting any
 excavation work, to ensure that any chance finds are recognized and measures are taken for their
                                                                                                  7
protection and conservation. Part of this protocol will be that when there are chance finds of
archaeological material, all excavation work at the site shall stop until the Department of
Archeology can determine if the site needs to be documented or scientifically excavated before
works continue. The protocols and protective measures will be included in the EMPs that will be
prepared for specific initiatives, with a focus on consultations and participation of the local
stakeholders.

The ESMF includes a resettlement policy framework that recommends mechanisms to address
possible temporary disruption of informal sources of income (e.g. temporary displacement of
informal vendors) during construction works in the project area. The ESMF includes an
Indigenous People-Vulnerable Community Development (IP-VCD) Framework. The framework
provides guidelines to prepare and implement Indigenous People-Vulnerable Community
Development (IP-VCD) plans for initiatives that may require one. The IP-VCD will be
customized to describe mechanisms for local consultations with indigenous people and other
vulnerable groups, identify specific activities beneficial to these groups, develop an
implementation plan with necessary budgetary allocation and recommend specific monitoring
indicators.

Since Lalitpur Sub-metropolitan City does not have direct experience with the implementation of
Bank's projects, the ESMF includes capacity strengthening measures including trainings to be
funded by the pilot project. The Project Support Consultants (PSC), which will be hired as a third
party by the municipality to support the Project Management Team (PMT) with project
management and the daily administration of the grant facility, will mobilize environmental and
social experts to provide safeguard support to the municipality. The PSC will also help sub-grant
applicants carry out environmental and social screening of the proposed initiatives, and closely
monitor compliance with the project environmental guidelines and mitigation plans during
implementation.

The ESMF requires both internal and periodic external monitoring: the internal monitoring will
be carried out by the environmental and social expert of the PMT with support from the PSC,
and implementation of the ESMF will be monitored/ reviewed and evaluated by an external/third
party at mid-term and at the end of the project implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Key stakeholders include: beneficiaries of urban regeneration activities, community members
and small businesses, local government members and employees, and NGOs/CBOs actively
involved in working with the poor and the conservation of cultural heritage in the project area.
Consultations with municipal staff and ward-level meetings with key stakeholders and residents
of the project area have been carried out as an input to the preparation of the ESMF. The ESMF
has been disclosed in the country as well as on the Bank's Info Shop. A summary of the ESMF
has been translated in local language and disclosed.




                                                                                                8
B. Disclosure Requiremelils Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank           .                                  July 5, 2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                         August 1, 2013
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                       September 26, 2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                                N/a
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                              July 5, 2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                         August 1, 2013
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                       September 26, 2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                              July 5, 2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                         August 1, 2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                        September 26,2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Not Required
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environme~t Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including        Yes [X]     No[]       NIA [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector    Yes
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP           Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or   Yes [ ]    No [X]       N/A []
degradation of critical natural habitats?


                                                                                                9
If the project would result in significant conversion or     N/A
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Mana_gcment
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]     No[]      NIA [X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes f   1   No [ ]     NIA [X]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a          NIA
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 -Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [X]      No [ ]     N/A []
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate      Yes
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [X]      No [ ]    NIA []
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           Yes
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the      Yes
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [X]      No []     NIA []
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           Yes
safe&ruards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes [ ]     No []     NIA [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to     NIA
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if       NIA
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes[]       No [ ]    NIA [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the                 NIA
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?

                                                                                              10
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been                N/A
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Watenvays
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]   No []      N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the      N/A
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:      N/A
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                      NIA
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]   No [ ]     NIA [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, beenprepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer             N/A
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X]   No [ ]     NIA []
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]     No [ ]    N/A []
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?




                                                                                            11
D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                                                  Name                            Date
 Task Team Leader:                               Elisa Muzzini                                        ocrl~~l~o\~
                                                                                                             I
 Environmental Specialist:                       Orona Raj Ghimire
 Social Development Specialist                   Parthapriya Ghosh
 Additional Environmental and/or                 Bandita Sijapati
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Zia Aljalaly A                   · #a.. [;l~I ~            09/25/2013
  Comments: Gtv~ ~ ~~                                               '/0'' br\.33\j~ 6 p jt'3 p 4 81/
 J..{ • {J)   "f . I'D   ~~   4 . I ;}.   p~                    7 c.hs ft,
                                                                   I         II       "'-       \
                                                                                                    fvv~ .
 Sector Manager:                          (" J   Ming Zhang       (/     v                            oqf~l~l~
   Comments:                              y                    I       ~~
                                                                                      v                I
                                                                                                            I
                                                                       \          l         .




                                                                                                                  12
