                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6465


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/20/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Nepal                                 Project ID: P125359
Project Name: First 1000 Days
Task Team Leader: Albertus Voetberg
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 21,         Estimated Board Date: May 10, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: SASHN                         Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and
                                             Maintenance Loan
Sector: Health (82%);Public administration- Health (18%)
Theme: Child health (30%);Nutrition and food security (30%);Social safety nets
(20%);Population and reproductive health (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           30.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                       0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Development Objective for the proposed project is to enable Nepal to improve the
nutritional status of pregnant women and children under the age of 2.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project will adopt a results based approach with final disbursements only to be made after
results have been achieved and independently verified. By adopting such a modality, the project
moves away from the more traditional input focused approach, to directly focusing and
contracting on intermediate outputs and desired outcomes, allowing the implementing
organizations to identify the best approach to achieving these results in their particular context.

 Implementing organizations will be mainly community based, mobilized during the initial
phase of the project to carry out activities with the target populations at VDC level in order to
improve nutritional outcomes through the achievement of specified interim results. The
activities to be carried out will be formulated in a #Rapid Result Proposal# to be reviewed and
approved by the District Development Committee. This arrangement will draw on the
experience of CDD projects, education sector projects, and other competitive small grant
programs, which require results to be achieved before final payments are made.

 The Ministry of Local Development will be the implementing agency. It will establish multi-
sectoral teams at district level to support the implementing agencies in the formulation and
implementation of Rapid Result Proposals, and process payments to implementing organizations.
The National Planning Commission (NPC) will be the project coordinating agency in accordance
with its mandate to coordinate Nepal#s efforts in Food and Nutrition Security. The NPC will not
have a role in implementing project activities or in the disbursement of project funds.

 The project follows a life-cycle approach, targeting the beneficiaries in specific stages that are
relevant to the PDO: (1) teenage and adolescent girls; (2) pregnant women; (3) children 0-6
months of age; and (4) children 6-24 months of age. The scale of the project will be determined
by the number of districts (20 as an initial assumption), the selection criteria for which will be
elaborated during project preparation.

 All initial Rapid Result Proposals will be required to establish, within a specified time period,
wide-spread knowledge and understanding of the importance of and the nutritional outcomes of
the first 1,000 days and the factors that influence these outcomes such as indicated in paragraph
8. Subsequent Rapid Result Proposals will elaborate action plans to influence these factors, as
deemed most appropriate, relevant and feasible by the community groups. Proposals will be
vetted by the multisectoral teams at district level and submitted to the DDC for approval.

 Guidelines for the drafting and submission of Rapid Result Proposals will be developed during
project preparation. These guidelines are intended to help potential implementing agencies in
formulating their proposals by providing a clear set of instructions or suggestions for drafting
proposals of acceptable technical quality, provide a menu for potential results to be achieved, and
to ensure that all proposals are similarly formatted. The issue of implementation capacity and
the possibility of partnering with technical or more specialized organizations will be elaborated
upon in the guidelines.

 NPC will organize a multi-sector #Nutrition Learning Forum# at least twice during the
implementation of the project, bringing together all involved organizations with a view to share
experiences and learn what has worked well and what has worked not so well. A specific
learning agenda for this forum will be developed during the first year of implementation.

 In order to support implementing organizations accessing public sector services, the project will
establish linkages with existing IDA operations, the health and education SWAps, the Keeping
Girls in School Project, the Social Safety Nets Project, the Poverty Alleviation Fund and the
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project, all of which have strong focus on reaching women
and disadvantaged communities.

 The project will have three disbursement categories: a) expenses incurred under MoUs for
results, b) expenses incurred for results verification and c) expenses incurred for the support to
implementing organizations such as capacity building and coaching. However, the Task Team
will try to identify a co-financier during project preparation that would take on the responsibility
of collecting baseline data and verify the results obtained in the districts. An alternative would
the identification of a Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) for the same purpose.

D. Project location (if known)
Nepal

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
No additional environmental risks are envisaged that are not already mitigated under the
safeguard measures put in place under the existing sector programs (education and health) and
projects (Poverty Alleviation Fund # PAF -, Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project #
RWSSP - and Keeping Girls in School Project # KGISP-). Acquisition of land, potentially
required for the construction of latrines, will follow the safeguard measures as elaborated under
RWSSP. The Safeguard Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) is triggered and the
proposed project will adopt a Gender and Social Inclusion strategy.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
   Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 X
    The Government of Nepal has recognized 59 different indigenous groups, also known as
Janajatis, practicing a mix of Hindu, Kirat, Animism and Muslim religions. The nutritional
status of Janajatis is more likely to be compromised because of social, geographic and economic
barriers.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 12/14/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   No specific safeguard-related studies will be needed.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                        Mr Albertus Voetberg                                   09/06/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Mr Sanjay Srivastava                                   10/20/2011
      Comments: Cleared on understanding that there shall be no civil works under thr project. OP4.10 is
      not relevant due to unlikely affect on IPs in project areas w.r.t chacteristics defined in OD 4.20, para 5.
    Sector Manager:                          Ms Julie McLaughlin                                    09/19/2011
      Comments: While nutrition is likely to be a greater problem among the most marginalized
      populations, including indigenous, I find the application of the indigenouse peoples safeguard policy
      questionable.




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
