                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/20/2011                                   Report No.: AC6500
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Nicaragua                           Project ID: P123447
Project Name: Rural Roads Infrastructure Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Ralf-Michael Kaltheier
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 3,        Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: LCSTR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%);General transportation sector
(10%);Public administration- Transportation (10%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
(10%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (30%);Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             35.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              5.00
                                                                         5.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project's development objective is to improve the access of the rural population in
the project areas to markets, and to social and administrative services through
improvements in the road infrastructure. The project will also contribute towards
strengthening the institutional capacity in Nicaragua#s road sector for asset management
and disaster risk management and to generating additional short-term employment
opportunities for the local population in the project areas.

3. Project Description
The proposed Project components include: (i) Component 1: Rural Road Improvements
and Maintenance including: improvements to adoquines standards for selected rural road
sections (target 88km), and periodic maintenance on main roads (40km target), (ii)
Component 2: Institutional Development to enhance road asset management and disaster
risk management capacities in MTI as well as capacity building and training of MTI staff
and (iii) Component 3: Project Management to finance partial costs for supervision
services plus ancillary office and field equipment costs of the main coordination unit.

 (i) Component 1: Rural Road Improvements and Maintenance (estimated cost US$ 30.6
million, of which US$ 26 million IDA financed)

 Sub-component 1.1: Rural road improvements (estimated cost US$ 27.0 million of
which US$ 23.0 million IDA financed): This sub-component will finance priority road
improvement works for about 88km of roads in key productive regions with adoquines
surfacing, or other technical and economic viable surface replacement options using both
Community Modules for Adoquines (Módulos Comunitarios de Adoquinado, MCA)
approaches and the private sector as appropriate. The proposed delivery concept is to use
larger contractors (for the earthworks components of the works), and major suppliers (for
the adoquines) as per procurement considerations. MCAs are then left to the less
equipment intensive but more labor intensive tasks of laying the adoquines, and
constructing simple drainage facilities and structures. Many of the productive zones have
unreliable road infrastructure which is intransitable during the rainy season. This sub-
component will contribute to removing infrastructural bottlenecks, and improve access to
essential markets and services for the target population in the intervention regions.

  Sub-Component 1.2: Periodic maintenance under FOMAV (estimated cost US$ 3.6
million of which US$ 3.0 million IDA financed: This sub-component will finance
periodic maintenance works for about 40km of identified priority sections of the core
trunk road network under FOMAV. This sub-component will contribute to alleviating the
transport logistics burden on priority sections of the core road network, leading to
reduced transport costs, greater productivity, and overall benefit to the Nicaraguan
economy. The asphalt resurfacing under the periodic maintenance sub-component will
follow standard country technical specifications which are in line with international
standards.

  (ii) Component 2: Institutional Development (estimated cost US$ 3.5 million, all IDA
financed)

  Sub-Component 2.1: Institutional Strengthening of MTI (estimated cost US$ 2 million,
all IDA financed): This sub-component will finance technical assistance, non-
consultancy and consultancy services for enhanced road asset management and disaster
risk management capacities in MTI as well as capacity building and training of MTI staff.
Identified activities include: (i) detailed road inventory, traffic, and condition survey for
6000km of the core road network, (ii) training in RED, RONET, and HDM-4 modelling
(including provision of new HDM4-version 2.0 licenses), (iii) review of existing design
standards and manuals, and preparation of a design manual for managing geotechnical
risk in road projects, (iv) gender user surveys, (v) academic study courses in engineering
and related disciplines, (vi) training in social and environmental management (MTI DGA
staff), and (vii) other trainings, trips and conferences.
 Sub-Component 2.2: Institutional Strengthening of FOMAV (estimated cost US$ 0.5
million, all IDA financed): This sub-component will finance training activities for
FOMAV staff, as well as for consultancy services to carry out priority studies relevant for
FOMAV. This sub-component will therefore contribute to strengthening an institution
that has a critical role in the road asset sustainability mandate. Identified activities
include: (i) study into the institutional structure, role, and sustainability of FOMAV and
recommendations for institutional, management and financing reforms, (ii) training in
social and environmental management (FOMAV staff), and (iii) other trainings, trips and
conferences related to road maintenance.

 Sub-Component 2.3: Specific Studies and Designs (estimated cost US$ 1.0 million, all
IDA financed): This sub-component will also finance the costs for final studies and
engineering designs of proposed road sections, and other studies geared towards helping
the Project to achieve its objectives in a sustainable manner (including social,
environmental, axle load, road safety among others). Under this sub-component, the
Project will also finance technical assistance to develop a comprehensive adoquines roads
program in the productive zones of the country. Identified activities include: (i) final
design studies for proposed Project roads, (ii) study for the overhaul of the axle load
control system, (iii) carrying out a Nicaragua Road Safety Management Capacity
Review, (iv) study for baseline rural accessibility index indicator of proposed Project
roads, (v) study to develop a comprehensive adoquines roads program in the productive
zones of the country, (vi) mid-term Project impact evaluation review, and (vii) social and
environmental studies.

  (iii) Component 3: Project Management (estimated cost US$ 0.5 million, all IDA
financed)

 This component will finance partial costs for supervision services plus ancillary office
and field equipment costs of the main coordination unit.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is being developed as a road improvement program for the main agriculture,
livestock, and fisheries producing regions of the country. Taking geographical equity,
local demand prioritization, and the existence of financing available under previous or
current projects into consideration, MTI identified five key departments (Rivas,
Matagalpa, Leon, Granada, Managua) with seven priority road sections totaling 88km.
The determination of the road sections to finance followed a two-prong staged approach.
First, five equally weighted criteria were applied: (i) productivity of the region, (ii)
population, (iii) connectivity to the rest of the core road network, (iv) incidence of
poverty, and (v) natural disaster vulnerability (floods and landslides only). Second, the
highest priority roads were picked according to Ministry of Transport#s information,
while taking into account geographical equity balance considerations, and whether
regions have received financing in the recent past or there exists other secured or planned
financing. The physical characteristics of these regions reflect the predominance of
agricultural and resource based livelihoods. These roads also connect the productive
regions to semi-urban commercial and administrative centers. All civil works will be
done along the existing right of way, with very few steep sections, and are small in nature
(mostly community executed and consisting on a sand-cement base with adoquines
placed on top). These facts limit significantly potential environmental and social impacts,
because the project will improve unpaved roads already in use by vehicles. No project
components or activities are located in environmentally sensitive zones or indigenous
territories.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
   Mr Daniel Mira-Salama (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) was conducted within each of the seven
areas of influence of the proposed roads to be resurfaced through the Project. These
assessments have been received and reviewed by the Bank. Public consultations and
disclosure of the ESAs have been conducted for each of the seven road sections between
September and October 2011. Public consultations included a wide range of stakeholders
such as local residents, authorities, public service providers, agricultural producers, etc.
The seven draft ESAs received by the Bank indicate that only minor negative impacts are
expected as a result of the project, and appropriate mitigation measures can be put in
place to reduce them. At the same time, the ESAs underline that resurfacing of existing
dirt roads with adoquines will generate significant positive social impacts. In addition to
expected positive outcomes and impacts related to reduced transportation costs and
increased accessibility to markets and public services, the Project will: (i) create direct
and indirect employment opportunities in poor regions where local residents welcome
these opportunities to supplement their incomes; (ii) build valuable technical skills
among local residents, including youth and women, that will be essential for their
productive participation in the new social and economic opportunities created through
increased accessibility to markets and public services; (iii) reduce regional disparities and
promote the social and physical integration of all residents within the project areas; (iv)
improve road safety; and (v) reduce vulnerabilities to natural disasters, through better
road designs and more efficient drainage structures.

  The social risks associated with the Project are limited due to the nature and location of
the proposed interventions. All road works will take place within the existing road way,
and in the case of the proposed minor drainage and erosion control measures, within
existing Rights of Way. Therefore, as was the case in previous similar World Bank
financed road projects in Nicaragua, all civil works are expected to proceed without any
need to acquire land or displace any physical assets. In addition, although two road
sections pass through areas that conserve some features of pre-Hispanic occupations by
indigenous peoples (i.e. Rivas # Veracruz and Río Blanco-Mulukuku), for example
traditional ceramics and woodworks, the beneficiary communities are now largely
integrated with the regional society and mainstream Nicaraguan culture. Interviews with
area residents confirmed that they do not self-identify as members of culturally distinct
collectives, nor do they possess customary social or political institutions. All
beneficiaries are engaged in widespread socio-economic and political pursuits such as
subsistence and commercial agriculture, raising animals, transport, tourism, and
participate in municipal activities including health care and education.

  Both the civil works and the road maintenance components are expected to involve a
significant proportion of women who are directly employed as engineers, accountants,
traffic controllers and maintenance workers. Furthermore, in response to demand from
single parent female headed households, learning sessions have been designed to mitigate
cultural barriers to women#s employment in construction and maintenance activities. The
Project will also establish detailed socioeconomic baselines for the seven road sections to
be rehabilitated. This will strengthen MTI#s monitoring and evaluation capacity, and also
help to improve the effectiveness of the socioeconomic criteria used to prioritize future
transport sector investments.

 Based on OP 4.01, the project was classified as Category B, as the associated potential
environmental and social impacts are moderate to low, site specific, and expected
primarily during construction. As a result of the project there will be positive impacts
such as reduction on suspended dust from unpaved roads, noise and travel time
reductions. The road maintenance component will also improve road surface conditions
and drainage, and reduce road erosion. None of the road candidates involve crossing
through any environmentally sensitive zone. Maintenance works involve minor activities
such as surface cleaning, repairing of drainage structures, patching of potholes, and
resurfacing of asphalt, none of which are expected to have any significant impact.

 Following the legislation of Nicaragua, a Valoración Ambiental y Social
(Environmental and Social Assessment ESA) has been prepared for each of the seven
road sections. Each ESA was prepared by a special unit within the MTI, called the
Environmental and Social Management Division (DGA). The ESAs have been submitted
to the Bank, consulted with the relevant stakeholders, and disclosed. The corresponding
environmental license, issued by the departmental delegation of the MARENA
(Ministerio del Ambiente y los Recursos Naturales, Environment and Natural Resources
Ministry), will be acquired previous to the beginning of works. Each ESA includes an
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for construction and operation, which details
mitigation measures, monitoring, responsibilities and specific procedures (such as waste
management plans, encampment plans, banks of material management plans when
applicable). These EMPs will be included in any bidding process, and are compulsory to
comply with. The project has incorporated the associated costs in the budget for
contractor#s works.

  The DGA, which has been involved in previous Bank operations and has benefitted
from direct training on Bank safeguards over the years, will be overseeing environment
and social related project activities both for the rural road works improvement component
and the periodic maintenance works. The DGA has a positive track record of
implementation evaluated throughout the years with their continuous involvement in four
previous IDA operations.

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): OP 4.04 is triggered only on a precautionary basis. No
project components or activities are expected to directly or indirectly cause any
significant conversion of or loss to any existing natural habitats. However, there are some
road sections with river crossings, which require protection of river beds and/or
reforestation to reduce erosion and landslides. Appropriate provisions have been included
in the EMPs received by the Bank.

 Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09): This policy is not triggered. No pesticide or herbicide
will be utilized during road construction or road maintenance under the project. The
elimination of vegetation at the edges of the roads is done mechanically or manually,
with no chemicals involved.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): OP 4.11 is triggered on a precautionary
basis. All civil works are taking place within the right of way of existing roads, and thus
no impact to any physical or cultural resource (PCR) is expected. However, there will be
land movements and material bank#s usage, and chance findings may occur. The ESAs
submitted to IDA already include chance finding mechanisms and corresponding
protocols of action.

 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): This policy is not triggered. No project components
or activities are located in environmentally sensitive zones or indigenous territories.
Further, interviews with area residents confirmed that they do not self-identify as
members of culturally distinct collectives, nor do they possess customary social or
political institutions.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): This policy is not triggered. All road works will
take place within the existing road way, and in the case of the proposed minor drainage
and erosion control measures, within existing Rights of Way. Therefore, all civil works
are expected to proceed without any need to acquire land or displace any physical assets.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No specific long term or indirect negative impact is expected, as the seven sections
identified will improve unpaved roads already in use by vehicles, and as such will not
imply opening of new ways, or disruption of previously unspoiled areas.

  Improved access to goods and services within the project area is expected to encourage
beneficiaries to shift to more modern farming techniques and diversify their income
sources. Anticipated human capital gains are also expected to lead to improved health and
literacy outcomes, thereby improving the overall welfare and social resilience of the
beneficiary communities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
These are all existing roads that will be rehabilitated, therefore alternative layouts are not
applicable. The adoquines construction option has proven to be technically efficient, and
is preferred for this type of roads over more capital-intensive road construction
techniques particularly in consideration of its environmental impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Bank has been supporting road network improvements in Nicaragua and building the
institutional capacities of the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure (MTI) for over 15
years. Previous Bank-funded projects in the road sector did not require any involuntary
resettlement, impacts on indigenous peoples or significant adverse environmental
impacts, and none are expected during the implementation of the proposed project. The
MTI will again be the implementing agency for the proposed Project. MTI has managed
previous Bank projects very well, through a specifically created coordination unit Unidad
Coordinadora de Proyectos #Banco Mundial (UCP-BM) which has experience with four
other Bank lending operations in the roads sector. This considerable previous experience
has increased the familiarity of MTI officials with Bank policies and procedures, as well
as enabled the smooth operation of project operations and due diligence on fiduciary and
safeguards matters. MTI will maintain overall responsibility for the Project (with line
reporting to Minister and Vice Minister) from the Head of the coordination unit.

 During project preparation, the Bank team assessed the adequacy of MTI#s existing
safeguards management tools, procedures and institutional arrangements to the nature
and scope of the proposed Project. Given that the scope and nature of all potentially
adverse impacts are relatively minor and essentially restricted to the construction phase,
both MTI and FOMAV institutional capacity to manage safeguard risks were judged to
be satisfactory. Nonetheless, based on this evaluation, the Bank recommended and the
GoN agreed that both MTI and FOMAV schedule consultancies and workshops to
improve their environmental and social management practices, for which the proposed
project has allocated specific resources under Component 2.
 As a result of MTI#s previous exposure to Bank safeguards, the organization has
developed appropriate environmental and social manuals and procedures that have guided
Project design and will be applied during implementation. A special unit within the MTI,
called the Environmental and Social Management Division (DGA), which has been
strengthened over the years on safeguards related issues, will be overseeing project
activities both for the rural road works improvement component and the periodic
maintenance works. The DGA prepared the environmental and social assessments
required for the Fourth Rural Roads Project as well as the current proposed operation.
The Road Maintenance Fund FOMAV (Fondo de Mantenimiento Vial) will rely on the
DGA for assistance. This arrangement has proven to be effective during previous
projects.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Following Nicaraguan legislation, a Valoración Ambiental y Social (Environmental and
Social Assessment ESA) has been prepared for each of the seven road sections. The draft
ESAs have been submitted to the Bank by the DGA, and have been consulted with
relevant stakeholders, including municipal officials, producer organizations, and local
residents, and results have been included in the assessments. MTI also provides each of
the Community Modules for Adoquines (Módulos Comunitarios de Adoquinado) with
copies of their environmental and social manuals.

 MCAs are a local labor-based method of constructing adoquines roads. This approach
generates employment opportunities in the short term, helps in technology transfer and
builds technical skills. MCAs can also engender a sense of community and ownership for
the roads with participation from the local mayors and residents, and present certain cost
control advantages too since beneficiary communities# main incentives is not financial
gain, but rather to maximize the benefits of the roads.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/20/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/20/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/20/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             N/A
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Ralf-Michael Kaltheier                   10/20/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Daniel Mira-Salama                       10/20/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Jason Jacques Paiement                   10/20/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                          10/20/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Aurelio Menendez                         10/20/2011
  Comments:
