                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/04/2012                                  Report No.: AC6798
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P108974                   Original Project Name: Nicaragua
                                               Hurricane Felix Emergency Recovery
                                               Project
Country: Nicaragua                             Project ID: P132108
Project Name: Hurricane Felix Emergency Recovery Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Enrique Pantoja
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 3, 2012 Estimated Board Date: November 13, 2012
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Housing construction
(40%);Other social services (9%);Health (8%);Sub-national government administration
(3%)
Theme: Natural disaster management (67%);Other rural development (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              5
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to support the sustainable recovery of the
communities affected by Hurricane Felix in the North Atlantic Autonomous Region
(RAAN) of Nicaragua.

3. Project Description
An additional grant in an amount of US$5.0 million equivalent will be provided to the
Republic of Nicaragua for the Hurricane Felix Emergency Recovery Project (P108974)
supported by Credit 4392-NI. The proposed Additional Financing (AF) Grant is sought to
cover cost overruns related to social/community infrastructure, thus allowing the
completion of the original Project activities for Component 3 (Reconstruction of Housing
and Social Infrastructure). The Project Development Objective, components, activities
and Project area will remain unchanged.
 The Government of the North Atlantic Autonomous Region (GRAAN) will continue to
be the implementing agency, supported by a specialized Implementation Team, which
includes a Technical Coordinator, an Infrastructure Coordinator, a Social Communication
Specialist, an M&E officer, and qualified fiduciary staff.

 Summary of original Project Components

 The PDO is being achieved through four components:

  Component 1 - Early Recovery: This component was completed in August 2012, and
financed critical rehabilitation and recovery activities such as provision of early
reconstruction materials, housing rehabilitation for over 3,000 families, restoration of
small family gardens, and fishing gear. Component 1 also financed implementation
capacity strengthening of GRAAN and SINAPRED.

  Component 2 - Strengthening of Small-Scale Fisheries Sector: This component seeks to
restore and improve the economic conditions of men and women working in the small-
scale fisheries sector in the region. In addition to training and provision of fishing
equipment, it includes the establishment of a revolving fund to provide credit to affected
fisher folk, including inter alia, for boats and working capital.

 Component 3 – Reconstruction of Housing and Social Infrastructure: This component
aims to reestablish the social and economic environment of affected communities by
providing safer and culturally responsive housing and social infrastructure. As part of the
social infrastructure, this component supports the reconstruction of community churches
and centers as well as small health clinics.

 Component 4 – Institutional Strengthening for Project Management, Coordination and
Monitoring and Evaluation: The objective of thi component is to strengthen the
institutional capacity of the GRAAN to implement the project, and in general, to lead
regional development efforts.

 The proposed Additional Financing will be used to reach the original targets of the
social/community infrastructure under Component 3, and will include funds for adequate
project management and M&E under Component 4. This infrastructure includes
community centers and churches that double up as emergency shelters, and small health
centers that bring services to isolated communities.

  Specifically, (a) under Component 3, where the original targets had been reduced by
almost 50 percent, the AF will allow to restore these targets. Accordingly, the AF will
support the supervision and construction of eight churches, eight community centers, and
two small health centers, and will allow equipping the health centers and completing the
training on improved construction techniques; and (b) Under Component 4, the AF will
finance Project management, Monitoring and Evaluation. As originally described, this
would include, among others, coordination, training, financial management, external
auditing, and implementation of the Communication Strategy.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project focuses on RAAN, the region most affected by Hurricane Felix, and one of
the poorest regions in one of the poorest countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. A
large rainforest crossed by several large rivers covers the region, characterized by a hot
and humid climate and a sparse yet multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and multi-lingual
population. Given its culture and history, RAAN (along with the South Atlantic
Autonomous Region or RAAS) has enjoyed partial autonomy since the mid 1980s.

 Under the Project, rehabilitation and reconstruction works have taken place, and the
additional ones will be implemented, in already settled and mainly rural communities in
the six most affected municipalities (out of a total of eight municipalities in the region).
These municipalities include Puerto Cabezas, Rosita, Siuna, Bonanza, Prinzapolka and
Waspam. The bulk of Project activities, however, will benefit selected communities of
Puerto Cabezas, the most affected municipality.

 The environment in the region has been under increasing pressure due to the advance of
the agricultural frontier, deterioration of the quality of many forests due to selective
exploitation of commercial trees, and generalized lack of natural resources management.
Hurricane Felix had substantial impacts on the vulnerable regional environment, from
which the region is still recovering. It devastated almost 500,000 hectares of regional
forest, leaving many trees on the ground, as well as large areas of the region's coastal
ecosystem, estuaries and lagoons. In particular, before making landfall, it hit hard the
Cayos Miskitos, one of the richest areas for fisheries in Nicaragua (lobster and fish) and a
unique marine ecosystem that ensures food security and the economic livelihoods for
roughly 30 indigenous communities on the Northern Coast of the RAAN.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
   Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (AFTG1)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The parent Project is considered Category "B." The AF will not change this category
since no new activities will be carried out, there are no changes proposed in the original
scope of reconstruction works or other project activities nor is there expansion of the
Project's geographic area. As with the original Project, in general, no large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts are thus expected. Reflecting these factors, the
same safeguards that were originally triggered would also apply under the additional
financing. These include: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats
(OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Indigenous Peoples
(OP/BP 4.10), all of which are elaborated below:

 (a) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The AF will finance small-scale
infrastructure works. Given the technical characteristics of the works proposed in the AF,
the location, and the small scale of the works, no significant environmental impacts are
foreseen. The original EA/ESMP of the project includes general measures to prevent,
mitigate and/or compensate the negative environmental impacts.

 (b) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). Under the AF small infrastructure works will be
implemented in town centers or villages. However, the parent Project had financed works
in sensitive areas of RAAN.

 (c) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). Although it is not expected that the small
infrastructure works will require extensive material removal or excavation, in case
historical, cultural or physical properties are found a chance find procedure should be
implemented according with national law and the Bank's policy. It is noted that during
project implementation no physical cultural resource has been found.

 (d) Indigenous People (OP/BP4.10). Given that the regional population is predominantly
multi-cultural, multi ethnic, and indigenous, the entire project was designed and is being
implemented to be consistent and in full compliance with OP 4.10.

 (e) Involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). As expected, no resettlement (physical
displacement or economic impacts due to taking of land for project activities) have taken
place. It should be noted that in the Project area most land is communally owned (even
though not all land has been demarcated or collectively titled) and accepted traditional
practices for the allocation of land for social / community infrastructure already exist.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Future operation of the small health clinics poses some environmental risk as they will
offer small surgery and natal care services. To address this, the Ministry of Health
(MINSA) has prepared acceptable plans for the management of solid waste (including
medical waste) and standards for the construction of each clinic, which would include a
sanitary cell and small incinerator.

 The legal, social and ecological environments facing the lobster fishery in eastern
Nicaragua are complex and difficult to anticipate. Lobsters are the single most valuable
marine species commercialized in the area, which has led to considerable build-up of
pressure on the species. In the interest of protecting the long term sustainability of the
lobster fishery, authorities throughout the Caribbean have imposed month-long fishing
bans. Similarly, in an attempt to reduce the incidence of crippling decompression
sickness among lobster divers, government authorities have proposed replacing divers
with lobster traps. Many worry that both these measures will exacerbate already high
unemployment and poverty in the region. Several project interventions are intended to
help mitigate these future impacts by providing more suitable equipment to local fishers,
and technical assistance for adding value to under-utilized species found locally in
abundance.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the parent Project an Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management
Plan (EA/EMP) was done, including the original activities under Component 3. This
EA/EMP was approved by the Secretary of Natural Resources and Environment
(SERENA) as the environmental authority in the RAAN (Environmental Certification
010/2011).

 To date, the borrower, through GRAAN, has addressed safeguard policy issues in a
satisfactory manner. Safeguards ratings have been consistently rated Satisfactory (S) and
there are no outstanding social or environmental compliance issues. The Bank has
corroborated safeguard compliance through intensive supervision by an environmental
and a social specialist, more recently in May 2012. Their field visits have been recorded
in Aide Memoirs shared with Government, and more recently, made public as part of the
Bank's disclosure policy. All required safeguard instruments (Environmental Analysis /
Management Plan and a Social Assessment) were prepared by the Government, with the
expert assistance of specialized consulting firms. These instruments were completed
following broad-based consultations and have been published in country and the Bank's
website.

 A Social Assessment was completed during implementation based on broad
consultations, and its recommendations have been subsequently applied. For example,
focus more on managing risks and achieving results than on functions and processes,
contracting a communications specialist, design and implementation of beneficiary
surveys to assess satisfaction with the reconstruction process, among others. In addition,
a social communication strategy was prepared and is under implementation to ensure that
communities are well informed about the Project, its various programs, and the criteria
for the selection of beneficiaries.

 The EA/EMP has been implemented adequately, and no remedial actions have been
required. It should be noted that due to initial implementation delays, construction of
community churches and centers, the civil works requiring more attention from an
environmental perspective, have only started recently, while the contracting of the small
health clinics is underway. Reconstruction and rehabilitation of houses, which is far more
completed, have not resulted in any substantial environmental impact, as corroborated
during visits to target communities. In addition, new sustainable bamboo technologies for
housing are being promoted under the project on a pilot basis.

 The safeguard instruments currently under implementation will remain valid under the
AF since they were prepared taking into consideration the original activities, targets, and
Project area.

 Institutional arrangements for Safeguard Compliance

 The Executive Secretariat of the National System for Disaster Prevention, Mitigation
and Response (SE-SINAPRED) completed implementation of Component 1 in August
2012. Supervision missions helped to corroborate that no major social and environmental
negative impacts resulted from activities under this component. The main activity under
this component was rehabilitation of roofs for traditional housing. These roofs were
rehabilitated with improved technical specifications and any debris from the construction
process adequately dealt with. From a social perspective, the selection of beneficiaries
proved to be one of the thorniest issues. The adequacy, equity and transparency of the
selection process were ensured by achieving broad agreements with the eligibility criteria
through communications campaigns and local assemblies.

  GRAAN is the main implementing agency, providing overall coordination and directly
in charge of the components 2, 3 and 4. Current arrangements for safeguard compliance
are considered adequate. GRAAN has an Environmental Secretariat (SERENA) and an
External Cooperation and Development Secretariat (SCED) which monitor
environmental and social issues respectively. Moreover, the Technical Coordinator of
the Project is in charge of coordinating all supervision, and the Planning Officer of
putting together field information. The staff dedicated to the project is mostly from the
region, ensuring that beneficiaries are provided with culturally appropriate follow up and
that communication with beneficiaries is carried out in their preferred language.
Moreover, GRAAN has been assisted by several co-executing sector agencies such as the
National Fisheries Agency (INPESCA), the National Housing Institute (INVUR), the
Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure (MTI), and the Ministry of Health (MINSA).
Finally, GRAAN has contracted, with financing from the original Credit, supervision
firms for the construction of community churches and centers, and the small health
clinics. These firms will help follow up on the adequate implementation of the EMP.
 The Planning Officer is in charge on maintaining the database of beneficiaries, which
was established to promote transparency and accountability. Any third party interested in
non-confidential information from this database can have access to it. Moreover,
satisfaction surveys with key project activities are carried out periodically. Incidentally,
recent surveys show that most beneficiaries are satisfied with project implementation and
activities.

 Lessons learned

 Emergency recovery projects require intensive implementation support, considering that
implementing agencies are dealing with a post-disaster and changing situation. Although
the learning curve of GRAAN has been slow, the reliance on staff from the region has
facilitated consultation and participation of communities and the provision of culturally
appropriate benefits.

  Having activities targeted to women and specific indicators to monitor access to Project
benefits have facilitated mainstreaming of gender equity concerns during implementation.
A good example of this is the small credit program for women who work in the small
fisheries sector, which provides capital and training.

 Ongoing supervision will be necessary to ensure continued satisfactory compliance with
safeguard policies, especially paying attention to the communications and grievance
redress mechanisms.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
RAAN is predominantly a multi-cultural and multi-ethnic region with a majority of
population of indigenous ethnic origin (including Miskitus, and to a lesser extent Sumu-
Mayagna and Creoles). Given these characteristics, the entire project has been designed
and implemented to be consistent with and in full compliance with OP 4.10 (Indigenous
Peoples), including, inter alia, identification of beneficiaries and activities through broad-
based consultations and use of traditional mechanisms to ensure continued community
participation during implementation.

 The majority of the project beneficiaries (above 95 percent) has been, and will continue
to be, indigenous community members (based on self-identification). Regional and local
government institutions are led and managed by indigenous/ethnic peoples, and local
NGOs and civil society organizations (CSOs) are also the representative bodies of local
indigenous/ethnic people. To understand and mitigate potential social risks, ethnic
conflicts, gender inequities, and institutional weaknesses relevant to RAAN, a social
assessment was prepared and published, and its recommendations regarding the
communications strategy, among others, effectively taken into consideration during
implementation.

 Community participation during implementation has been promoted through traditional
organizations and decision-making mechanisms at the community and territorial level. As
identified in the social assessment, these include, community councils, faith-based
organizations, communal assemblies, councils of elders, women's associations and fisher
folk groups. A social communication strategy complements the safeguard instruments
and includes weekly broadcasts about project activities on popular local radio stations
where potential beneficiaries are encouraged to contact project officials with any
questions or concerns that they may have. Special attention is being paid by GRAAN to
social inclusion and gender equity. This is evident from the eligibility criteria designed to
prioritize the needs of vulnerable people with no alternative support to rebuild their
hurricane ravaged homes and assets. Also, the project results matrix includes specific
indicators to monitor the share of benefits that actually go to women. As a result of the
gender segregated nature of the fish resale business - where pikineras are exclusively
women - they have received the majority of the small loans under the project's
microfinance component. Despite project delays, recent surveys show that most
beneficiaries are satisfied with the project benefits, as well as its consultation and
participation mechanisms.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/21/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/21/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/11/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/11/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/11/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   N/A
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         N/A
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Enrique Pantoja                   09/17/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez     09/17/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Jason Jacques Paiement            09/17/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Enrique Pantoja                   10/02/2012
  Comments:
