                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/10/2012                                      Report No.: AC6693
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P089989                 Original Project Name: Nicaragua Rural
                                             Telecom
Country: Nicaragua                           Project ID: P129264
Project Name: Nicaragua Rural Telecom Additional Finance
Task Team Leader: Arturo Muente Kunigami
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 10, 2012       Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2012
Managing Unit: TWICT                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Telecommunications (95%);Sub-national government administration (5%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              5
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            1.50
                                                                       1.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the proposed additional financing (AF) credit, in an amount of SDR3.25
million (US$5 million equivalent) to the Republic of Nicaragua for the Rural
Telecommunications Project (P089989, Cr.4168), is to finance the costs associated with
scaling-up activities for providing telecommunications services in Nicaragua’s Caribbean
costal region and the Department of Rio San Juan, both regions being of high priority for
the Government of Nicaragua.

  The total cost of the current project is US$10.2 million, of which US$7 million is
provided by IDA and US$3.2 million by the Government of Nicaragua. The Project’s
Development Objective (PDO) is to: “increase access to and reduce costs of
telecommunications services in rural areas of Nicaragua?. Specific objectives include the
following: (i) to benefit rural areas where some of Nicaragua’s poorest and most isolated
inhabitants live; (ii) to build critical infrastructure at a very low cost compared with other
infrastructure projects; (iii) to use infrastructure built by the project in other important
government initiatives in the finance, decentralization, education and public health
sectors, and to also support more transparent and accountable governance; and (iv) to
promote increased private sector investment and facilitate communications and
remittances to rural populations from Nicaragua’s sizable immigrant communities in the
U.S. and Costa Rica, among others.

 The Project is progressing well overall. Telecommunications services and infrastructure
have been extended to rural areas, and prices for internet access in rural areas have been
reduced dramatically. The project is being successfully managed by the Institutional
Development Unit (IDU), a small, highly specialized unit embedded in TELCOR
(Telecommunications and Postal Institute of Nicaragua). The Project’s original closing
date was June 30, 2011. After initial delays in declaring the project effective (due to
changes in Government personnel ), project performance has steadily improved. In
recognition of this history, a one-year extension was granted until June 30, 2012.

  Including Nicaragua’s Caribbean costal region and Rio San Juan would offer telecom
coverage to most of rural Nicaragua, thereby filling a significant gap in access. The AF
will include the expansion of activities under all three components: (1) expansion of
telecommunication infrastructure in rural areas; (2) institutional strengthening of the
sector regulator and technical assistance to rural communities; and (3) project
management and auditing. The AF will also include the revision of project indicators, to
include, among others, core ICT indicators as required by current guidelines and changes
in targets to take the scaled-up activities into account. The new activities would be fully
consistent with the Development Objectives of the ongoing Rural Telecommunications
Project (Cr.4168).

3. Project Description
Consistent with the Government's Caribbean Coast Development Strategy (Plan de
Desarrollo de la Costa Caribe) to increase access to telecommunication services in the
region by at least 40 percent, in October 2011 the Government requested US$5 million in
Additional Financing for new activities to amplify the impact of the ongoing Rural
Telecommunications Project (with Government co-financing of US$1.5 million). In this
context, no changes are proposed to the existing PDO.

  The activities to be financed under the proposed AF would be implemented over a
period of thirty-six months. The AF is expected to bring ICT infrastructure and the skills
to use technology to rural and low-income areas that currently do not have (or have only
limited) access to telecom services, thus contributing to social and economic
development of the targeted regions. The AF would extend activities under all three
existing project components:

 Component 1: Rural Access (US$2.6 million, of which IDA $2.6 million) - The
objective of this component is to stimulate the demand and supply of broadband internet,
mobile coverage, public payphones, and telecenters in underserved rural communities in
Caribbean costal region and Rio San Juan using competitive mechanisms (such as output-
based aid or OBA) for private sector operators to build and operate shared infrastructure.
The OBA tender process has proven a successful mechanism for private sector
involvement in installing, operating, and maintaining telecommunications infrastructure
under the ongoing Project. Activities under this component will seek to provide
telecommunication infrastructure and services to at least forty underserved communities
concentrated in twenty municipalities in RAAS and RAAN, as well as six municipalities
in the Department of Rio San Juan. These activities are expected to benefit over 200,000
people . In addition, activities under this component will continue to offer incentives
such as competitive pricing for private sector telecommunications services to increase
coverage of mobile networks on a commercially-sustainable basis. This approach will
better enable public entities (including national and regional government institutions),
individual consumers, and businesses to become internet and phone subscribers.
Furthermore, the Project will continue to expand the network of telecenters in the
Caribbean costal region and Rio San Juan using the successful business model of local
ownership (including Municipal Governments, NGOs, local private sector, and capacity
building) established under the ongoing Rural Telecommunications Project.

  Component 2: Regulatory Capacity Strengthening and Technical Assistance to
Communities (US$2.0 million, of which IDA $1.0 million) - This component aims to
strengthen the institutional capacity of TELCOR to design projects by conducting
detailed pre-feasibility studies and preparing tender documents. In addition, this
component will continue to provide relevant training to TELCOR and local government
staff in targeted ICT areas. Finally, activities under this component will help to establish
a Regional e-Government Data Center for the Caribbean Coastal area to support the
design and implementation of at least four e-Government applications such as distance
learning programs to strengthen productive capacity and programs to improve the quality
of education, as well as health and disaster prevention services. The Center will help to
foster the region's transition into a knowledge-based economy. Internet or mobile
applications and capacity-building activities will be chosen by TELCOR and local
regional authorities based on proposals made by national and local government agencies,
private sector, NGOs, and academic institutions.

 Component 3: Project Management, Audit and Contingencies (US$1.9 million, of which
IDA $1.4) - This component will finance the provision of technical assistance,
equipment, training, and operating costs needed to establish, operate, and strengthen the
Institutional Development Unit (IDU/TELCOR). Additional funding will enable these
units to more effectively coordinate, monitor, and evaluate implementation of project
activities (including periodic audits).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed additional credit would help to finance the costs associated with scaling-up
activities to enhance the impact the project in Nicaragua’s Caribbean coastal region--
which includes the North Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAN), South Atlantic
Autonomous Region (RAAS) – and the Department of Rio San Juan, both regions being
of high priority for the Government of Nicaragua The scope of the project will include
Biological Reserves of Indio Maíz and the Bosawás Biosphere Reserve and Indigenous
and Afro-Nicaraguan peoples living in these areas are expected to benefit from the
project activities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
   Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental category of the project will continue to be “B?. That is, the
environmental and social impacts of the project expected to be minimal and manageable
to an accepted level. The AF will continue to trigger OP4.01 on Environmental
Assessment. In addition, the AF will trigger OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats, OP4.10 on
Indigenous Peoples, OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources, and OP4.12 on
Involuntary Resettlement.
  As the Original Project did not take place in indigenous territories, OP 4.10 was not
triggered in the Original Project. Consequently, the recipient has carried out Social and
Environmental Impact Assessments, which include a series of free, prior and informed
consultations in indigenous and afro-descent communities that are expected to become
beneficiaries of the project. The assessments have also taken into account compliance
with safeguards requirements during implementation of the parent phase. The
assessments confirmed the adequate implementation of the tools prepared by
IDU/TELCOR, including the “Environmental Screening Framework? as well as the
“Social Framework and Communications Manual (SFCM)?, which were used for
consultations in the 37 sit where the telecommunications towers were installed. The
assessment concluded the adequate and appropriate use of the manual in carrying out free
and informed consultations prior to construction of the infrastructure financed during the
Original Project. The assessment acknowledges the positive impact it had in mitigating
social conflicts and for ensuring social and operational sustainability of the project.
  Given the results of the assessments and the location of the current projects’
investments, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) have been
prepared and disclosed in Nicaragua and the Bank’s InfoShop.
  The Social and Environmental impacts of the Nicaragua Rural Telecom Project are
expected to be manageable given the type of planned interventions under this project.
  The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will ensure that the current project
adequately consults the communities living in the project area and ensures genuine broad
community support as well as any additional measures required to maximize their
culturally appropriate benefits and/or avoid potentially adverse impacts. The study had
overall satisfactory results, which include some of the following:
  a.     The people surveyed considered telecommunications services to be a real need
that will bring significant efficiencies to their daily activities and help to reduce costs.
For example, use of a phone by a fisherman to keep informed about market demand, or
the transaction cost savings made by making a call as opposed to taking a two-hour boat
ride into town; in the latter case, both the monetary cost (boat fare) as well as the time
cost can be considerable. In addition, the vast majority of the people surveyed considered
the installation of ICT infrastructure (towers and antennas) as harmless.
  b.     The social impacts derived from the Project can be managed adequately during
the phases of design, construction, and operation by following the Social Framework and
Communications Manual summarized in the Social Assessment (SA).
  The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) outlines the principles and procedures for
possible resettlement and/or compensation of subproject-affected people, and establishes
standards for identifying, assessing and mitigating negative impacts of program
supported activities. In addition, the RPF will guide the preparation and implementation
of resettlement action plans (RAPs) for each individual sub project that triggers the
involuntary resettlement policy.
  The Project triggers the policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), on
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) to address
the potential environmental and social impacts related to site selection, construction and
operation of the telecommunication facilities. An Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) was prepared to screen, assess, and mitigate environmental impacts
related to the triggered policies (OP 4.01, OP 4.04 and OP/BP 4.11). The EMF also
outlines the process to prepare the necessary Environmental Management Plans (EMP)
for each investment activity.
  The Environmental Assessment (EA) concluded that the expected impacts of the
proposed AF are manageable provided that the recommendations provided in the
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) are taken into account when preparing
the site specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) each investment activity
during implementation. The EMP requirements will be translated into bidding and
contract documents to ensure that mitigation and other requirements are clearly
communicated to contractors; equally, that competent environment inspectors monitor
performance of the contractor responsible for installing, operating, and maintaining the
telecommunications systems.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect and or long term impacts are anticipated as a result of the proposed
civil works. These consist of relatively small civil works which are not expected to
generate significant environmental impact. But in light of the fact that Central America
is a natural disaster-prone area, site selection and tower design and installation will take
into the specific natural constraints to minimize risks to the public and environment.
Towers construction will be designed to withstand major natural disasters (i.e.
earthquakes, floods, landslides) and provide adequate opportunity to lay down or remove
in case of hurricanes to avoid injury to the public. As appropriate, each civil works
contract would specify the required structural safety and exposure to natural hazards to be
considered in the design and construction of tower and telecommunication facilities. A
rigorous monitoring and quality assurance procedure will be included in the contracts to
ensure compliance with environmental health and safety standards as outlined in the
EMF. Consideration has also been given to migratory and marine birds that could be in
the area of influence of the project infrastructure. Design criteria have been considered in
the EMF in this regard to minimize impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower in collaboration with the project preparation team (including consultants)
has prepared the necessary safeguards instruments, notably the Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the
Environmental Management Framework (EMF), which were finalized and disclosed prior
to appraisal. The recommended and agreed follow-up activities as stated in the Project
Operational Manual would be implemented during the project life. At each supervision
mission stage and mid-term review stage the process would be reevaluated and necessary
adjustments will also be made as appropriate to the prevalent conditions.

 Overall technical capacity at TELCOR is high however the Implementation Unit needs
support to implement environmental and social aspects of the projects. This capacity is
being strengthened by the hiring of environmental and social specialists to follow up on
activities and provide the necessary support during implementation. These specialists
will be in charge of coordinating and implementing all the activities related to the
environmental and social safeguards, including the IPPF, RPF, and EMF and associated
EMPs. This has been included in the activities financed by the Project.

 Additional support will be provided to these specialists by the Bank supervision team as
needed.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The IPPF, RPF and EMF have been disclosed on TELCOR’s website and at the WB’s
Infoshop. During preparation of these safeguards instruments, consultations with key
stakeholders were held at six representative sample locations in the RAAN, RAAS and
Rio San Juan. The Draft documents have been disclosed for public comments that will be
documented in the final disclosed versions. Several meetings were held among team
members and local stakeholders to coordinate and understand the objectives of the
assessments. Interviews were held with mayors, vice-mayors, administrators, and project
technicians, authorities, and people in randomly selected urban and rural communities.
Further, consultation workshops will be carried out locally in the areas of influence of
each subproject on a needs basis.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/27/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/09/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/09/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/24/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/09/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/09/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/24/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/09/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/09/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Arturo Muente Kunigami   05/09/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui       05/09/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Jason Jacques Paiement   05/09/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Doyle Gallegos           05/09/2012
  Comments:
