                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6017


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/31/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Nicaragua                           Project ID: P123447
Project Name: Rural Roads Infrastructure Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Ralf-Michael Kaltheier
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: February 16, 2012
Managing Unit: LCSTR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (70%);General transportation sector (10%);Public
administration- Transportation (10%);Agricultural marketing and trade (10%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (30%);Small and medium enterprise support (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            30.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               5.00
                                                                         5.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project#s development objective is to improve the access of the target rural population and
their products to markets and public services through improvements in the road infrastructure.
Efforts will also be made in strengthening the road sector institutional, asset management and
disaster risk management capacities as well as contributing to employment generation
opportunities for the local population. The primary target group for the proposed project is the
rural population living in the priority centers of productivity, especially farmers and agribusiness
interests connected to, living along, and using the target roads for personal and commercial
purposes.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project is provisionally estimated to cost US$35 million. During preparation, a
decision will be reached as to whether it will be a stand-alone project or a project that forms part
of a program that would include potential co-financing or parallel financing by other donors. The
following project components are under consideration:
 (i) Component 1: Civil Works (estimated cost US$ 30 million)
  #      Sub-component 1.1: Rural road works improvement (estimated cost US$ 28 million):
This sub-component would finance priority road improvement works in key productive regions
using adoquines, and any other viable surface replacement options using both MCA approaches
and the private sector.
  #      Sub-Component 1.2: Periodic maintenance works with Road Maintenance Fund FOMAV
(estimated cost US$ 2 million). This sub-component would finance periodic maintenance works
on identified priority roads of the core road network under FOMAV.
  (ii) Component 2: Institutional Strengthening, Project Management and Studies (estimated cost
US$ 4.5 million)
  #      Sub-Component 2.1: Institutional Strengthening of MTI (estimated cost US$ 2 million;
this sub-component would finance capacity building and training of MTI staff and building road
management capacities in different sub-sectors.
  #      Sub-Component 2.2: Institutional Strengthening of FOMAV (estimated cost US$ 0.5
million).; This sub-component would finance training activities for FOMAV staff, as well as for
consultancy services to carry out priority studies in FOMAV.
  #      Sub-Component 2.3: Studies (estimated cost US$ 2 million). This sub-component would
finance the costs for feasibility studies and engineering designs of proposed road sections, other
needed studies, and consultancy services for the update of national transport plans.
  (iii) Component 3: Project Management (estimated cost US$ 0.5 million)
  #      This component would finance the operating costs of the main coordination unit (eligible
operating expenses).

D. Project location (if known)
Road works and maintenance projects will be located in the main rural centers of production
nationwide. The number and location of sections involved will be decided during project
preparation.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Bank has been supporting road network improvements in Nicaragua and building the
institutional capacities of the Transport and Infrastructure Ministry (MTI) for over 15 years.
Previous Bank-funded projects in the road sector did not require any involuntary resettlement,
impacts on indigenous peoples or significant adverse environmental impacts, and none are
expected during the implementation of proposed project. The MTI will again be the
implementing agency for the proposed Project. MTI has managed previous Bank projects very
well, through a specifically created coordination unit Unidad Coordinadora de Proyectos #Banco
Mundial (UCP-BM) which has experience with over five Bank lending operations in the roads
sector. This experience has given the personnel familiarity with Bank procedures and policies, as
well as enabled the smooth operation of project operations and due diligence on fiduciary and
safeguards matters. MTI will maintain overall responsibility for the Project (with line reporting
to Minister and Vice Minister) from the Head of the coordination unit. A special unit within the
MTI, called the Environmental and Social Management Division (DGA), which has been
strengthened over the years on safeguards related issues, will be overseeing project activities
both for the rural road works improvement component and the periodic maintenance works.

 The MTI, throughout all the experience gained along the years, has developed appropriate
environmental and social manuals and procedures that will be applied during project design and
implementation. These include a satisfactory Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) for ensuring compliance with National legislation and Bank safeguard requirements.
The ESMF was consulted with key stakeholders and disclosed in accordance with Bank policy.
The Framework includes chance finds procedures for cultural property as well as steps for
consultation (including with street vendors) during project preparation and implementation. The
ESMF also includes environmental and social screening and mitigation measures that are applied
previous to and during construction. The MTI has carried out all tasks related to safeguard
policies in the previous projects, demonstrating its capacity and understanding of them. For
example, the DGA prepared the environmental and social assessments required for the Fourth
Rural Roads Project. The Road Maintenance Fund FOMAV (Fondo de Mantenimiento Vial)
does not have institutional capacity for implementation of safeguard policies and has to rely on
the DGA for assistance. This arrangement has proven to be effective during previous projects.

 During project preparation, the Bank team will further assess the adequacy of MTI#s existing
safeguards management tools, procedures and institutional arrangements to the nature and scope
of the proposed Project. Based on this evaluation, further capacity building and technical
strengthening needs will be proposed, if necessary.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
   Mr Daniel Mira-Salama (LCSEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    In the understanding that the exact location of the rural road works improvement component
will be decided during project preparation and/or implementation, this policy is going to be
applied under the Project through an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF). These frameworks have been prepared in the past for similar activities by the
implementing agency, and they will be reviewed and updated as necessary. Each activity of the
Project will undergo environmental screening following the ESMF guidelines to determine
eligibility for financing. Eligible subprojects will include only those that do not involve complex
issues with regard to other environmental safeguards policies including significant impacts on
cultural property impacts on critical natural habitats, indigenous peoples or involuntary
resettlement. Each intervention will be managed through an environmental assessment process.
Cumulative impacts of sub-projects to be selected during implementation will be assessed as part
of the corresponding EIA, under the ESMF guidelines, and any specific provisions to manage
these would be included in the relevant Environmental Management Plan (EMP). If the exact
locations of any road segments are determined during preparation, EIA studies will be carried
out and EMPs will be prepared for those road segments prior to appraisal.

     Proposed Instrument. The current ESMF used for the Fourth rural roads project and its
corresponding Additional Financing will be updated, tailored to the specific requirements of the
current project, and applied by MTI during execution. The framework will support three
essential goals: (a) increasing social and environmental sustainability of activities financed under
loan; (b) complying with national environmental legislation, and (c) complying with Bank’s
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No         TBD
Environmental and Social Safeguards Policies.

     Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Process. Once specific activities and locations are
determined, they will be required to follow the procedures outlined in the ESMF to ensure
compliance with safeguards policies applicable to the subproject. The ESMF will include a
detailed environmental assessment methodology for the assessment of sub-projects including: (a)
procedures for environmental and social screening of activities; (b) procedures for preparation of
EAs and EMPs including draft TORs and guidelines for mitigation measures; (c) procedures and
guidelines on public consultation and disclosure procedures; and (d) procedures for clearance of
EAs.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                          X
    Although the Project is not expected to have any major impacts on existing natural habitats,
some minor interventions will have to consider some aspects of natural habitats. The ESMF will
incorporate procedures for adequate screening, area identification, and introduction of mitigation
measures. The ESMF will contain guidance on how to properly evaluate direct and indirect
impacts on Natural Habitats, and ways to avoid or mitigate them. The selected road sections will
be based on existing rights of way, and none of the sections will involve significant conversion
or degradation of natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
    The ESMF will include clear screening mechanisms to prevent any activities from taking
places in forest and forested areas. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                      X
    Some of the road maintenance activities could potentially entail the use of herbicides and
other products to clean up road margins and prevent growth of undesired vegetation. During
project preparation the team will assess the common practices in Nicaragua, in order to ensure
that maintenance works do not involve the use of pesticides, or if they do, they follow Bank#s
guidelines and recommendations.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
    Although no PCR are expected on the project areas, the policy is being triggered on a
precautionary manner. The ESMF will include clear steps in case of chance findings, and project
screening and preparation mechanisms will be in place to evaluate and screen for any cultural
resources that may be present in project areas according to the applicable laws, norms and Bank
requirements.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
    Indigenous peoples constitute approximately 6% of Nicaragua#s total population. Many are
concentrated in the North Atlantic region; however, sizable minorities are also located in the
Central and Pacific regions including parts of Matagalpa, Leon and Rivas, among others. As
some of the roads to be rehabilitated through the project could be located in the vicinity of these
indigenous communities, a Social Assessment (SA) will be conducted to ensure that all project
beneficiaries are properly consulted during project design and implementation. The social
assessment will include consultations with indigenous peoples# legal and traditional
representatives and community members to verify their broad community support for the project.
No investments will be considered in cases where community support for the project is found to
be lacking. The findings of the social assessment will be used in the preparation of an Indigenous
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). The IPPF will be agreed with the MTI and will be included
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No          TBD
in the ESMF. In case if the exact locations of road segments under the project are determined
during preparation and if during the screening process Indigenous People are identified to be
physically present in these road segments# area of influence, an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP)
would also be prepared in addition to the SA prior to appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                           X
    The project supported road works and maintenance activities will not require any land
acquisition or impose any restrictions of access to land or associated resources. However, the
Bank team will assess the possibility that any technical assistance activities could be directly and
significantly related to potential future investments, regardless of the source of funding, that
could result in involuntary resettlement.
     If the findings of this assessment suggest that involuntary resettlement could be required for
any activities that are judged to be directly and significantly related to the Bank-assisted project,
a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.
However in the event that this policy is determined not to apply, the existing ESMF screening
process will continue to ensure that all road works and maintenance activities are carried out
within existing road rights of way, and that none of the studies to be financed are related to any
other activities resulting in involuntary resettlement.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
    This Project will not involve dams. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
    This Project does not involve work on international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X
    This Project will not include disputed areas.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/01/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   07/01/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   It is expected that the Environmental Management Framework for this project will be
   launched and completed before project appraisal.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Ralf-Michael Kaltheier   05/31/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Glenn S. Morgan          05/31/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Aurelio Menendez         05/31/2011
   Comments:
