                                                                                      67776

                        INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                               Report No.: XXXX


Date ISDS PreparedlUpdated: 03/19/2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Nicaragua                           Proiect ID: P130124
Project Name: Education Strategy Sector Support Project (ESSSP)
Task Team Leader: Michael Drabble
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2012    Estimated Board Date: NIA
Managing Unit: LCSHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Preschool(25%); Secondary Educationf75%)
Theme: Education for All(100%)
IBRD Arnount (US$m.):                     0.00
IDA Arnount (US$m.):                      0.00
GEF Arnount (US$m.):                      0.00
PCF Arnount (US$m.):                      0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
    - European Union                     37.70
    -   Global Partnership for Education 16.70
        BORROWERIRECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                      54.40



B. Project Objectives

1.     The Project Development Objective is to increase access to preschool and lower
secondary education in participatfng municipalities, and improve learning conditions for all
students at these levels nationwide.

C. Project Description

2.     Similar to IDA- financed Second Support to the Education Sector Project (P ASEN II),
the concept for this Project would be to target interventions in selected municipalities where: (i)
poverty levels are highest; (ii) key education indicators are the worst; and (iii) there is an unmet
demand for access to education services. The Education Strategy Sector Support Project
(ESSSP) will target 65 municipalities. Specifically, interventions financed by the Global



                                                 1
Partnership for Education (GPE) for preschool education will target 25 municipalities and
                                                                                              l
interventions financed by the EU for lower secondary education will target 52 municipalities ,
12 municipalities within the 65 participating municipalities are the same under both GPE and EU
financing.    Including PASEN II, the Ministry of Education (MINED) will reach 95
municipalities,63 percent of ail the municipalities nationwide. The ESSSP and PASEN II will
share 10 municipalities.

3.      The targeting criteria discussed with MINED for the selection of participating
l11unicipalities under the ESSSP include:

               Prcschool (GPE)                          Lowcr Secondary Education (EU)
Enrollment rates (3-5 years)                       Enrollment rates (12-14 years)
Transition rates from preschool to prunary Transition rates from pnmary to lower
education                                          secondary education
Retention rates within for preschool               Retention rates within lower secondary
                                                   education
Out of 'Schoo\ population between 3-5 years of out of school population between 12-14 years
age                                                ofage
                                  Poverty rates in municipalities

4.            The proposed four-year Project would have three components:

             Ci)   Preschool Education, including infrastructure, curriculum development, teacher
              training, student learning materials;
              (ii) Lower Secondarv Education, including infrastructure, curriculum reform, teacher
              training, Iearning materials; and
              (iii) InstitutionaI Strengthening of MINED. to improve management of preschool
              education and community participation, and ensurc smooth project implcmcntation.

5.      Component 1. Preschooi Education: (Estimated total cost: US$13 million). This
component would aim to increase preschool enrollment of 3-5 year olds and improve quality of
both formaI and community preschool services. Preference would be given to expanding formaI
preschool enrollment but where this cannot be justified demographically, opening of new
commllnity-based preschools wOlild aiso be slipported. The project would finance the
constructionlrehabilitation and equipping of preschool classrooms, curriculum development,
professional development for both community-based and formaI preschool teachers, and
provision of learning materials adapted for the needs of childrcn aged 3-5, including those in
ethnie minority and indigenous areas. 2

6.     Compone nt 2: Lower Secondary Education (estimated cost: US$38 million). This
component would aim to increase enrollment and completion rates, and improve the leaming
environment, at the lower secondary level. It would incIude a large infrastructure sub-
component which would strengthen the "core" schools ("escue/a de base ") of 250 "nucleos

1   The largcr nurnocr of 11lll11icipalitics targctcd undcr the EU rcllccis the brgcr tinancing providcd b)' the EU comparcd \Vith the GPE,
!   Componcnt 1 would he Iinanced b)' the Global Partncrship for Education and adrninistcrcd by the World Bank,



                                                                            2
educativos" in the participating municipalities, with additional classrooms, ICT laboratories,
furniture, equipment for initial vocational training, sanitary facilities, recreational areas,
administrative offices, etc. These "core" schools would in turn make these facilities available to
the surrounding primary schools in the nue/eo educativo, particularly for in-service teacher
training. Secondly, this component would support education and training of lower secondary
teachers, many of whom lack formaI teacher certification. Universities would be contracted to
provide certification-based training on a part-time basis for up to 4,000 in-service teachers, while
Escuelas Normales (Teacher Training Institutions) and the nucleos educativos would be used for
upgrading of' instructional skills of aIl lower secondary teachers (up to 6,000). Public
universities have demonstrated capacity to handle this task, with a network of 12 regional
training centers (in addition to campuses in Managua and Leon) which currently offer part-time
certification-based training to over 8,000 preschool, priinary and secondary teachers. The
Escuelas Normales would select trainers with extensive secondary level instructional experience,
who would then receive additional training in the new curriculum, textbooks and pedagogical
techniques. The training at the nue/eo educativo level would build off of the successful TEPCEs
model, which mobilizes both mentors and peers to provide practical instructional and lesson
planning support at monthly meetings. New training curricula, training materials, training of
trainers, technical assistance and pro gram logistics would be supported by the project. Thirdly,
the project would finance printin~ and distribution of required textbooks and teacher guides to all
secondary schools in the country.

7.      Component 3. Institutional Strengthening of MINED (estimated total cost: U8$2
million). This component would strengthen the educational, operational and administrative
capacity of MINED, particularly for the management of preschool education. The project would
support training, technical assistance, equipment and software to strengthen the Department of
Preschool Education at central and regionallevels, and activities to implement MINED's model
of "shared responsibility" at the locallevel 4 • In addition, the component might include technical
assistance for MINED to pilot the implementation of the "nue/eo educativo" model in sorne
participating municipalities with a view to prepare the re-organization of education service
delivery nationwide.

8.     As part of Component 3, the Project would also support the financial management,
procurement and control activities associated with the management and operation of this Project,
including staff, training, financial audits and administrative costs, using the same implementation
mechanisms as PASEN II.

D. Project location (if known)
9.      The Project will focus on the poorest municipalities in Nicaragua, including the two
Atlantic autonomous regions.




1 The secondary education component would be entirely financcd through an Administrative Agreement between the World Bank and European
Union (EU).
4 Component 3 would be financed by the Global Partnership for Education and administered by the World Bank




                                                                   3
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

10.     Overall capacity at MINED is weak and requires strengthening for planning and
implementation. MINED and the Coordination Office with the Autonomous Regions Educational
System (Oficina de Enlace con el Sistema Educativo de las Regiones Autonomas-SEAR) will be
in charge of coordinating and implementing aH the activities related to the social safeguards,
including the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
These two institutions will benefit from sorne capacity building through the implementation of
the IPP prepared for PASEN II and approved by the World Bank. PASEN II is expected to be
effective in March 2012. Nonetheless, this new intervention (ESSSP) would support additional
capacity-building activities to ensure that the implementation of the. above mentioned Plan and
the Framework is in accordance with the Bank's standards and that the Project is in compliance.

 Il.    The General Directorate of School Infrastructure (GDSI) (Direccion General de
Infraestructura Escolar) of MINED will be responsible for coordinating, monitoring and evaluating
the implementation of the civil works activities financed under the ESSSP. The capacity of the
GDIE will need to be strengthened to ensure that environmental safeguards are taken into
consideration and respective activities are in compliance with the Bank's policies. PASEN II is
expected to finance the institutional strengthening of the GDEI both at the central level and in 5
Education Departmental Delegations. The ESSSP would also include additional capacity-building
under the third component of the Project in order to cover the new municipalities not included in
PASEN II. In particular, the capacity-building will include the setting up of GDEI offices in ail the
new Education Departmental Delegations under the ESSSP with adequate staffing, equipment and
training.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Mr. Gunars Platais, Sr. Environmental Economist (LCSEN)
    Ms. Mary Lisbeth Gonzâlez, Sr. Social Development Specialist (LCSSO)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safe2uard Policies Tri22ered                                            Yes           No          TBD
EnvÎronmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                    X
The interventions will imply construction activities, thereby triggering OPIBP 4.01 (Environment). An
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ES MF) will be prepared for the Project. The precise
location of the school civil works activities within each of the targeted municipalities will not be known
until the Project begins. The ESMF would include topics such as construction site eligibility and
screening criteria, which would be included in the pre-feasibility study procedure to be described both in
the ESMF and in the Project Operational Manual. The school-site selection would be the first activity
executed through the pre-feasibility studies to be financedboth by PASEN II and the ESSSP. The site
screening procedures would include criteria to identify any adverse impacts on natural habitats, forested
areas, physical cultural resources, and/or any need for land conversion. The GDIE wou Id be responsible
for conducting the pre-feasibility studies in the schools, including the design, planning and architectural
designs of both classrooms and complementary infrastructure. If the civil work needs identified in one
school exçeeds the capacity of the local GDIE office, MINED will contract out the pre-feasibility study.
The actual civil works would be contracted out to local firms, and supervision of contract execution
(quality control) would also be outsourced to private engineering firms.

                                                    4
Safeguard Policies Tri22ered                                        1    Yes      1     No      1   TBD

The ESMF wou Id include the appropriate environmental measures for mitigating impacts of small-scale
construction including worker health and safety (consistent with Worlèl Bank Group Environment Health,
and Safety Guidelines (2007), management of debris, noise management, dust control, and student safety
during construction, among other pertinent aspects. In addition, the ESMF will include adequate
measures related to tire and safety requirements for all the structures to be built and refurbished. If local
standards do not exist, the ESMF will consider other intemationally accepted standards. The Project
Operational Manual to be prepared for the ESSSP will include basic construction designs for preschool
and K-9 schools. Several designs would be prepared to take into account issues related to structural
safety and exposure to natural hazards, such as flooding, hurricane winds and earthquake, which have
occurred in the past in Nicaragua. The use of different designs based on geographical features of the
location of the civil works and on the different natural risks will be retlected in the ESMF. The Project
would support a training prograf!1 on environmental impact mitigation and on the requirements of the
Indigenous Peoples policy for the communities of the 43 municipalities where civil works would be
financed by the Project.

As part of the civil works activities, the Project will involve the beneficiary communities during the pre-
feasibility and the construction phase. The communities will have to endorse the selection of the
constructionlrehabilitation site and be consulted on the scope of the civil works. Once the civil works is
completed the commuoity will be requested to become responsible for the regular maintenance of the
civil works.

Finally, as mentioned previously the new intervention would support capacity-building activities to be
described in the Project Appraisal Document, the Project Operational Manual and the ESMF to enable the
GDSI to carry out the monitoring and quality assurance procedures to comply with the standards to be
detined in the ESMF.
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                       1             1     X       1
The Project will not finance civil works which would have adverse impacts on natural habitats. The pre-
feasibility study will include a procedure with specifie criteria to identify and exclude any civil works
activities that could have an adverse impact on natural habits
ForestsiOPIBP 4.36)                                                 1             1     X       1
The Project will not finance civil works which would have adverse impacts on forest or forest dependent
communities. The pre-feasibility study will include a procedure with specifie criteria to identify and
exclude any civil works activities that could have an adverse impact on forest or forest dependent
communities.
Pest Mana2ement (OP 4.09)                                           1             1     X       1
This Project will not include any procurement of pesticides and will not affect pest management in any
way.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                            1             1     X      J
Given that construction activity will be. minimal and Iimited to existing are as occupied by the schools, no
significant physical cultural resources issues have been identitied. The ESMF will contain screening
criteria to avoid areas of high cultural significance and procedures for handling chance finds during
construction.
Indi2enous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                     1 .    X       1           l
Given that this Project will focus on the Atlantic autonomous regions, and the fact the indigenous
populations are inherently Iinked as potential beneficiaries and afTected peoples from the proposed
activities under this strategy, the Indigenous Peoples safeguard policy (OP 4.10) will he triggered.
The Social Assessment (SA) and Indigenous Peoples Plan (lPP) prepared under PASEN II will he

                                                     5
Safe~ard     Policies Trif:t2ered                              1    Yes     1    No . 1 TBD
updated based on the new municipalities and activities covered by ESSSP. The revised SA and IPP
will be prepared and implemented, in consultation with Indigenous Peoples at community and
organizationallevels, to ensure appropriate indigenous peoples participation. The Project will place
special emphasis in supporting Intercultural bilingual education (lBE) or bilingual intercultural
education (BIE) particularly in the Atlantic Caribbean Coast (RAAN, RAAS and RJ). This is an
intercultural and bilingual model of education designed for contexts with two (or more) cultures and
languages. The Project will aim at strengthening this model to improve the education levels of the
indigenous and afro-descendants communities, which rank among the poorest and most vulnerable
groups in the country. The Project will also seek to promote the access of women of aIl ethnic'
groups to education.

Due to the short period of time, probably less than three months between the launch of PASEN II and
the ESSSP, the updated IPP and SA to be prepared for the ESSSP will not include a review of the
operational effectiveness of the IPPJ>repared un der PASEN II.
Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.121                             J X 1                    J
The Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy will be triggered. A Resettlement Policy Framework will
be prepared for the Project. The RPF would screen out any new construction that could require
involuntary land acquisition, displacement or restriction of access to resources. Any civil works
activities identified to require involuntary land acquisition, displacement or restriction of access to
resources would not be eligible to be financed by the Project. Land donations might occur under the
Project. The RPF will include specifie measures and limits on the extent of the land which people or
communities cou Id donate and will also include a process to verify how land donations were done.
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                       1            1    X      1
The proposed Project will not involve the construction of dams and will not depend upon an existing dam
or the construction of a dam.
Projects on International Waterwan (OPIBP 7.50)                   1            1    X'     1
The proposed Project will not affect international waterways.
Projects in Dis()uted Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                          1            1    X      1
The Project will not be situated in any disputed areas.

Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared:
   15/02/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the P AD-stage ISDS:
   NIA




                                                  6
  C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
     The specifie studies and their timingS should be specified in the P AD-stage ISDS.


  IV. APPROVALS

Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leaders: Michael Drabble

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
  Comments:

Sector Manager:                                                                                                                         2 J \ -Z
  Comments:




  J Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Polie)' requircs that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in-

  country. at publicl)' accessible locations and in a fonn and language that are accessible 10 pOlenliall)' affecled persons.



                                                                           7
