                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/19/2012                                  Report No.: AC6800
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P106283                 Original Project Name: Nicaragua Rural
                                             Water Supply and Sanitation Project
                                             (PRASNICA)
Country: Nicaragua                           Project ID: P132102
Project Name: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27,      Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: LCSWS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (40%);Sanitation (40%);General water, sanitation and flood
protection sector (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              6
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.39
                                                                       0.39
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Nicaragua Rural Water and Sanitation Project supports the following strategic
objectives of the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Nicaragua (FY08–12):
(a) infrastructure and sustainable development, and (b) human capital development to
improve social equity and opportunity. This project also responds directly to the
Government's development objectives, as improvements in water and sanitation have
been explicitly outlined in the National Development Plan (PND). The Sectoral Strategy
Area III of the PND, Infrastructure and Sustainable Development, aims to increase
coverage and quality of infrastructure to support economic growth and attain the MDGs.
The plan outlines the Government's intention to promote the sustainability of water and
sanitation infrastructure and service expansion in rural areas through community
participation and education, and the coordination of agencies such as FISE and the
municipalities.
  Beyond the Bank's CPS and the government's PND and alignment with the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper, the proposed project also supports progress toward the
drinking water and sanitation targets contained in MDG No. 7, "Ensure Environmental
Sustainability." Because of its geographic scope targeting rural and indigenous areas, the
project is expected to have a strong de facto poverty focus. Improving access to water
services also has a much stronger impact on women and children because they
traditionally are tasked with washing clothes and taking care of children, often fetching
water from distant sources.

 The Project Development Objective is to increase access by project beneficiaries to
sustainable (the concept of sustainable access goes beyond the mere provision of physical
infrastructure and includes a series of dimensions capturing the sustainability of such
service provision, as defined by the Water and Sanitation Committees (CAPS) scorecard
presented in Annex 3) water and sanitation services in rural areas (rural areas in the
context of the water and sanitation sector in Nicaragua are defined as dispersed
communities and small towns with less than 5,000 inhabitants that are not served by
ENACAL).

 The Project Development Objective for the Additional Financing remains the same as in
the PRASNICA parent project, that is, to increase access by Project beneficiaries to
sustainable water and sanitation services in rural areas.

3. Project Description
The proposed operation would assist the Government of Nicaragua in strengthening its
ongoing efforts to increase access to water and sanitation services in rural areas of the
country. Since a formal decision in 2004 (prior to that date, the national water and sewer
utility, ENACAL, was in charge of rural investments in WSS), FISE has been the
governmental body in charge of investments in rural water and sanitation solutions. FISE
is currently implementing several donor-funded rural WSS projects, one of which is a
large, multisector rural investment project funded by IDB (InterAmerican Development
Bank) and KfW (German Development Bank) for which WSS represents a key sector,
and several smaller projects financed by CIDA (Canadian International Development
Agency) and COSUDE (Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation).

 For this purpose, the operation would finance investments to increase access to water
and sanitation services in the country's rural areas (Component 1) including the country's
two autonomous regions on the Atlantic Coast (the RAAS and the RAAN) and several
communities along the Alto Coco and Bocay area which have the lowest levels of
coverage and a large indigenous population (Component 2). The Project would also
develop a series of pilots to test concepts new to the country (Component 3). Component
4 will finance Project management activities and strengthen the rural WSS institutions.

 As with the original Project, the Additional Financing includes investments in the four
components described below:
 Component 1. The Additional Financing will scale up existing PRASNICA activities in
the Pacific region.
 Component 2. The Additional Financing will cover technical cost overruns in order to
complete planned PRASNICA activities in Component 2 areas (RAAS, RAAN and Alto
Coco and Bocay).
 Component 3. The Additional Financing will scale up the PRASNICA's Corn Island
integrated sustainable development pilot project.
 Component 4. The Additional Financing will scale up existing PRASNICA institutional
strengthening activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will increase access to water and sanitation services in rural areas of
Nicaragua and in municipalities with populations of less than 5,000 people. An important
component of the project will increase W&S access in two autonomous regions on the
Atlantic Coast, the Region Autonoma del Atlantico Sur (RAAS) and the Region
Autonoma del Atlantico Norte (RAAN), plus the Alto-Coco and Bocay area.

 The proposed Additional Financing would help to finance the costs associated with
scaling-up activities to enhance the impact of the project in Nicaragua's rural areas,
including the Caribbean coastal region-which includes the North Atlantic Autonomous
Region (RAAN) and South Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAS), and the Alto Coco
and Bocay area, regions being of high priority for the Government of Nicaragua.

  Approximately 14% of the people of Nicaragua identify themselves as indigenous.
There are 10 autochthonous groups: 6 on the Atlantic Coast and 4 in the Pacific, Central
and Northern regions of the country. Although coverage of water and sanitation systems
has increased country-wide, it is not clear that Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendant
communities have been able to access water and sanitation sub-projects to the same
degree as the general population. Component 2 of the project is exclusively targeted to
improving access to water and sanitation systems in the autonomous regions of RAAN,
RAAS and Alto Coco and Bocay, where the bulk of ethnic groups live. Through
Component 2, the Project will benefit around 42 communities, and it is expected that at
least 35% of these (about 15 communities) are indigenous and/or afro-descendents.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSWS)
   Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (LCSEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental. As the Project will include civil works, there will be minor environmental
impacts such as digging trenches to install pipes or clearing small, vegetated areas to
install a latrine. Since these are small-scale systems for rural, often dispersed populations,
no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are likely or expected. The Safeguard
Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) is triggered and an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared to screen, assess, and mitigate
environmental and social impacts related to site selection, construction and operation of
the water and sanitation facilities. This framework contains an environmental assessment
of the project and an environmental management plan.

 Although some works will be implemented on the Caribbean coast (the RAAN, RAAS
and Alto-Coco and Bocay), the Project does not trigger the Natural Habitats safeguard
policy (OP 4.04) since all works will be small-scale and located within already
established communities. These works will not represent a significant conversion, loss or
degradation of natural habitats directly or indirectly. The Environmental and Social
Management Framework contains guidance on the selection of the minor works in this
Project as well as information on the location of protected areas, both of which should
minimize any impacts on the coastal ecosystems. No civil works will be eligible which
may have adverse impacts on natural habitats. The screening process for reviewing
proposed sub-projects includes criteria which explicitly excludes such works from Project
support.

 With respect to the triggering of the Physical Cultural Resources Safeguard, the
Environmental and Social Management Framework contains measures and instructions in
the case of any "chance finds" of archeological materials. A screening mechanism is
included in the ESMF to screen for and mitigate potential impacts on cultural resources.

 The Safeguards Compliance Review concluded that the expected impacts of the
proposed Additional Financing are manageable provided that the recommendations
outlined in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) are taken into
account for each investment activity during implementation. The ESMF requirements
will be translated into bidding and contract documents to ensure that mitigation and other
requirements are clearly communicated to contractors; and that competent environment
inspectors monitor performance of the contractor responsible for installing, operating,
and maintaining the water and sanitation systems.
 The ESMF and associated updates of the parent Project have all been prepared by the
Client in accordance with national laws and World Bank operational policy requirements,
have been reviewed by the environmental safeguards specialists, cleared by the line
Sector Manager, and disclosed publicly in-country and on the World Bank's website. The
Task Team determines that no new requirements are needed for this Additional Financing
to comply with the applicable environmental safeguards policies.

 Social safeguards.

 .
 O.P. 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The small civil works of the Project (water
connections, wells, stand-pipes, latrines or basic sanitation units) are mostly installations
at the household level or stand-pipes designed to serve a small number of households,
therefore, no land acquisition or relocation of the population is foreseen or will be
eligible under the Project. For that reason, the O.P. 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is
not triggered.

 OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. There are no potential large-scale or significant
negative irreversible impacts of this Project on the Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan
populations.

 The Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples Plan (IAPP), covering the entire Country,
was elaborated by the GoN in consultation with the Regional and Territorial
Governments, including through consultations carried out by an interdisciplinary team in
15 communities in the Project area, 10 of which are Indigenous or Afro-Nicaraguan. The
IAPP outlines the principles and procedures required to be employed in all indigenous
and afro-Nicaraguan beneficiary communities, and it has been agreed with the regional
governments and Indigenous Groups. The IAPP has been a key instrument in the Project
in that its focus goes beyond the construction of water and sanitation systems by building
a platform for interventions in indigenous territories.

 OP 4.10's requirements for free, prior and informed consultation and broad community
support are operationalized in this Project through the social intervention scheme
implemented in the entire Project. This scheme requires social specialists (both within
FISE and within the team of the sub-project's contractor) to support: community
organization, particularly related to the establishment and/or legalization of the
community WSS committees (CAPS); effective participation of women in key CAPS
positions; community selection of their preferred water option (hand-pumps, automated
pumps, etc); family selection of individual sanitation schemes, allowing enhancements to
the unit according to personal preference; and good hygiene practices. The communities
are organized and committed to contribute to the sub-project in cash and in-kind, to
purchase their water meters, and to pay for operation and maintenance of the systems. As
part of the process, after been informed about the sub-project, its alternatives, costs and
approach, the community registers its agreement to the sub-project in the form of an act,
registering also the alternative selected and the agreement to contribute, operate and
maintain the intervention. The community is also trained to manage and maintain the
systems. In indigenous areas, the social intervention is carried out by locally-hired staff,
in the language of the beneficiaries. The IAPP also requires that the operational manuals
and procedures are adopted to ensure cultural adequacy and relevant references so that
they can be understood by for the indigenous beneficiaries.

 Besides community participation before, during and after the project, the IAPP requires
the participation of key stakeholders - such as the Governments of GRAAN, GRAAS,
and Territorial Governments of Alto Coco and Bocay, Pacific, Central and Northern
Regions - to make decisions pertaining to the water sector, service options, tariffs,
community contributions, and manuals and instruments they choose to adopt. This
Project and the measures it implements through the IAPP have presented the territories of
Alto Coco and Bocay with their first opportunity to participate in a water and sanitation
project with FISE, and this is the first time that funds will be assigned specifically to
them. Through the IAPP, for the first time in the water sector, a diagnostic analysis was
carried out in the Indigenous regions of the Pacific, Central and North regions to invite
inhabitants to participate in Project benefits in a culturally-adequate manner. Perhaps the
most significant contribution of the IAPP to the water sector, which goes beyond the
PRASNICA, is the fact that the Regional Governments have used the instruments and
methodology of PRASNICA to create their own Department of water and sanitation of
GRAAN and GRAAS.

 During the first three years of project implementation, Component 2 experienced delays
in implementation of the actual installation of water and sanitation systems. In order to
create a solid platform for the implementation of public works in these regions,
institutional arrangements and agreements needed to be reached between the Regional
Governments, Territorial Governments, municipalities, and Indigenous and Afro-
Nicaraguan communities. This process took longer than expected. However, to date, all
coordination agreements have been signed, the Operational Manuals (MEPAS , PGC )
have been adapted to respond to the needs of these regions, the Municipal Water and
Sanitation units are being created, and the FISE's regional (local) supervisors are on the
ground. As a result, the institutional capital (particularly social capital) among
participating institutions (FISE, GRAAN, GRAAS, municipalities, CAPS) has been
enriched. Currently there are 8 Afro-Nicaraguan and/or Indigenous communities
benefiting from social and technical assistance, and these communities will soon receive
water and sanitation works. The social and technical work in the remaining Afro-
Nicaraguan and/or Indigenous communities is expected to start in the next couple of
months.

 A performance review of the existing IAPP was carried out by the Project Team,
including (in addition to meetings and discussion with FISE) visits to communities,
discussion with Regional Governments (RAAS / RAAN) and participation in related
workshops carried out in the field. The performance of the IAPP was reviewed in the
preparation mission of this Additional Financing, carried out from September 4 to 13,
2012, involving discussions with FISE, and inputs from the Regional Governments and
other sources (such as the social consultants already working in the Atlantic areas). It was
determined that the principles and procedures adopted within the existing IAPP continue
to be relevant for the Additional Financing. In addition, it was determined that the
existing IAPP has been very successful at ensuring that Project benefits are delivered in
culturally appropriate ways and reach Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan communities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Environmental Safeguards: No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are
anticipated as a result of the proposed civil works. These consist of relatively small civil
works which are not expected to generate significant environmental impact. But in light
of the fact that Central America is a natural disaster-prone area, site selection and design
and installation of water tanks (reservoirs) and pumping stations will take into account
the specific natural constraints to minimize risks to the public and the environment.
Water tanks (reservoirs) construction will be designed to withstand major natural
disasters (i.e. earthquakes, floods, landslides). As appropriate, each civil works contract
would specify the required structural safety and exposure to natural hazards to be
considered in the design and construction of water and sanitation facilities. A rigorous
monitoring and quality assurance procedure will be included in the contracts to ensure
compliance with environmental health and safety standards as outlined in the ESMF.

 Social safeguards: The coordination with Regional and Territorial Governments should
have positive impacts throughout Project implementation and for future sectoral
development. It has taken many institutional efforts to agree with stakeholders (Regional
Governments of GRAAN, GRAAS, Territory Governments, Mayors, communities) on
adaptation of manuals, instruments, procedures, and processes. The activities under the
IAPP have paved the way for implementation of Component 2 in RAAN, RAAS, Alto
Coco and Bocay.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None for the project as a whole; however, FISE requires each sub-project to consider at
least 2 alternatives in a report that take into account basic environmental requirements
and a site evaluation.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental: The borrower has a system of environmental management to manage
minor and expected project impacts. This system has been in place for over 15 years and
has been recently updated for the purposes of certification ISO 14001. Therefore, FISE
has the experience to manage the environmental impacts of this Project. FISE employs an
ecologist with a degree in Ecology and Natural Resources with Specialization in
Watersheds and Forests as well as a Masters Degree in Hydrogeological Technology and
another Masters in Management of Water Resources and Hydrogeology in Managua.
FISE has recently hired an environmental consultant to reinforce the environmental
management unit. FISE also has experience coordinating with at least 20 technical
specialists (architects and engineers) in their 17 regional offices throughout Nicaragua.
FISE's well-developed environmental procedures have served as the model for the
Nicaraguan national environmental agency.

  Overall technical capacity at FISE is adequate; however the Environmental
Management Unit needs support to implement environmental aspects of the additional
activities contemplated for this Additional Financing. This capacity is being strengthened
by the hiring of an environmental specialist to help follow up on activities and provide
the necessary support during implementation. This has been included in the activities
financed by the Project.

 Additional support will be provided to these specialists by the Bank supervision team as
needed.

 Social safeguards: Indigenous Peoples. The IAPP will be the same as for the parent
PRASNICA project. Under the Additional Financing, FISE will be able to implement all
the activities pending to complete the original IAPP. The additional financing for the
IAPP is calculated at around USD80,000 for activities to be implemented in the Pacific,
Center and North, RAAN and RAAS and Indigenous Territories of Alto Coco and Bocay.
As with the parent PRASNICA project, the Additional Financing will be implemented by
the ORID (office for regulation and institutional development) of FISE in coordination
with the Regional Governments of GRAAN and GRAAS, the Indigenous Territories,
mayors, ARAS and UMAS, and the FISE local offices.

  Under the Parent Project, the IAPP sought full participation of stakeholders, which took
longer than expected and brought delays to the implementation of Component 2.
However, now that these comprehensive social assessment and consultation processes
have been completed, the Additional Financing will allow for works to take place based
on a solid socio-cultural foundation and will increase financing of several activities to
ensure the Project is delivered in a culturally-adequate and timely manner. The
complementary activities of the IAPP will benefit not only in the new communities
covered by the Additional Financing, but also the communities financed by the Parent
Project, in which the social work will be reinforced. Some of those activities include:
consultations/training with Mayors of indigenous areas, elaboration of guidelines with
them that can assist them in prioritizing water and sanitation projects in Indigenous and
Afro-Nicaraguan communities within their Annual Municipal Plans (PIMMs), translation
and publication of manuals and other water and sanitation related information to local
languages, and tailored workshops and training for Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan
groups. Permanent consultations with communities before, during and after project
completion will continue in projects financed under the Additional Financing: The local
and traditional authorities are being informed, consulted, and invited to provide inputs
and participate in meetings, discussions and workshops related to the sub-projects in their
areas. As part of the social and technical activities (already in place through the Parent
project), a set of discussions are held with the communities about available WSS
solutions, the respective tariff associated with each solution, and the need for
organizational improvements (creation / legalization of CAPS), amongst other topics.
Once the WSS solutions and the complementary arrangements have been defined, the
final engineering designs are prepared, and the works executed. As part of the process,
after being informed about the project, its alternatives, costs and approach, the
community registers in the form of an act its agreement to the project, registering also the
alternative selected, and the agreement to contribute, operate and maintain the
intervention. Upon conclusion of the works, the social assistance continues for a period
of between 3 and 6 months in order to ensure consolidation of community arrangements,
proper use of the WSS systems, and hygiene practices.

 The gender strategy, which encourages strong participation of women in CAPS amongst
other activities, will also continue with the Additional Financing, and an assessment of
participation of Indigenous women in projects and CAPS will be conducted.

 FISE has the capacity to implement all necessary safeguard measures. The Bank team is
available to support FISE in its efforts.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environmental: The key stakeholders are the water users, municipalities and
environmental NGOs. Consultations on the environmental framework were held on April
1, 2008 in Bluefields and April 2, 2008 in Jinotega. Consultations on the Environmental
Framework were held in Managua on April 11, 2008. The Environmental Framework
was made available in InfoShop and in-country in March 2008. In-country, the
Framework was placed on the FISE website and hard copies were made available in the
17 territorial offices and Managua. FISE placed their Manual for Environmental
Management, the source document for most of the Environmental Framework for the
project, on their website in February of 2008. Additionally, during the process of
developing each sub-project, the communities were informed of the impending works.
Before any studies or final designs were carried out, the communities were consulted in
public meetings to determine if there was demand for a sub-project and to take their
concerns into consideration. Recently, updates to the PRASNICA framework for the
Adaptation of Nicaragua's Water Supplies to Climate Change Project were publicly
consulted and disclosed in June 2012 both in-country and on the World Bank website.

 Social - Indigenous Peoples. Some key stakeholders are: the Regional FISE teams in the
RAAN and RAAS, Regional and Territory Governments of RAAN and RAAS, Mayors,
Municipal Water and Sanitation Units (UMAS), Water and Sanitation Committees
(CAPS), Regional water and sanitation advisers (ARAS), Indigenous Authorities of the
Pacific, Central and Northern regions, RAAN and RAAS regions, and the communities,
particularly women and children.
 The national IAPP prepared for PRASNICA (2008) included consultation with 15
communities in the project area (10 of which are Afro-Nicaraguan communities), and
RAAN and RAAS authorities, including Alto Coco and Bocay. The original IAPP was
disclosed in-country and World Bank website in 2008. In 2012 it was updated to include
the methodology, process and results of the consultations held in 2008, with the
information on the Plan itself and its actions remaining unchanged. The Plan was re-
disclosed in-country and World Bank website on September 7, 2012, and on the World
Bank website on September 10, 2012. The Additional Financing will finance activities in
the same areas of the Parent Project, and will provide complementary funds for the
implementation of this Plan.

 As indicated above, the Additional Financing will continue to finance permanent
consultations with communities before, during and up to six months after every sub-
project completion. The consultation scheme is built into the Project design, as part of the
social management included in the terms of reference of social firms or individual social
contractors. The above is done with the support of the FISE and regional social
specialists. Moreover, other consultations to be financed with the Additional Financing
are: (1) Consultations/sensitivity training with Mayors in Indigenous areas to create
guidelines that will help them prioritize sub-projects originating in ethnic communities
within their Annual Municipal Plans; (2) Consultations with women on their participation
in CAPS and sub-project management; (3) Consultations with 3 communities - Miskito,
Mayagna and Criole English - on changes of behavior in water management, hand
washing, utilization of latrines and water meters, and tariff payment at the home, schools
and community level. As a result, a hygiene campaign and educational materials will be
developed and applied in ethnic communities.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     09/24/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 09/25/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/25/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     09/07/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 09/07/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/10/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss                09/15/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui                       09/17/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo                  09/16/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                          10/02/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Wambui G. Gichuri                        09/20/2012
  Comments:
