                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/20/2012                                    Report No.: 74846
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P106283                 Original Project Name: Nicaragua Rural
                                             Water Supply and Sanitation Project
                                             (PRASNICA)
Country: Nicaragua                           Project ID: P132102
Project Name: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27,      Estimated Board Date: January 22, 2013
2012
Managing Unit: LCSWS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (40%);Sanitation (40%);General water, sanitation and flood
protection sector (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              6
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.39
                                                                       0.39
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Nicaragua Rural Water and Sanitation Project supports the following strategic
objectives of the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Nicaragua (FY08–12):
(a) infrastructure and sustainable development, and (b) human capital development to
improve social equity and opportunity. This project also responds directly to the
Government's development objectives, as improvements in water and sanitation have
been explicitly outlined in the National Development Plan (PND). The Sectoral Strategy
Area III of the PND, Infrastructure and Sustainable Development, aims to increase
coverage and quality of infrastructure to support economic growth and attain the MDGs.
The plan outlines the Government's intention to promote the sustainability of water and
sanitation infrastructure and service expansion in rural areas through community
participation and education, and the coordination of agencies such as FISE and the
municipalities.
  Beyond the Bank's CPS and the government's PND and alignment with the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper, the proposed project also supports progress toward the
drinking water and sanitation targets contained in MDG No. 7, "Ensure Environmental
Sustainability." Because of its geographic scope targeting rural and indigenous areas, the
project is expected to have a strong de facto poverty focus. Improving access to water
services also has a much stronger impact on women and children because they
traditionally are tasked with washing clothes and taking care of children, often fetching
water from distant sources.

 The Project Development Objective is to increase access by project beneficiaries to
sustainable (the concept of sustainable access goes beyond the mere provision of physical
infrastructure and includes a series of dimensions capturing the sustainability of such
service provision, as defined by the Water and Sanitation Committees (CAPS) scorecard
presented in Annex 3) water and sanitation services in rural areas (rural areas in the
context of the water and sanitation sector in Nicaragua are defined as dispersed
communities and small towns with less than 5,000 inhabitants that are not served by
ENACAL).

 The Project Development Objective for the Additional Financing remains the same as in
the PRASNICA parent Project, that is, to increase access by Project beneficiaries to
sustainable water and sanitation services in rural areas.

3. Project Description
The proposed operation would assist the Government of Nicaragua in strengthening its
ongoing efforts to increase access to water and sanitation services in rural areas of the
country. Since a formal decision in 2004 (prior to that date, the national water and sewer
utility, ENACAL, was in charge of rural investments in WSS), FISE has been the
governmental body in charge of investments in rural water and sanitation solutions. FISE
is currently implementing several donor-funded rural WSS projects, one of which is a
large, multisector rural investment project funded by IDB (InterAmerican Development
Bank) and KfW (German Development Bank) for which WSS represents a key sector,
and several smaller projects financed by CIDA (Canadian International Development
Agency) and COSUDE (Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation).

 For this purpose, the operation would finance investments to increase access to water
and sanitation services in the country's rural areas (Component 1) including the country's
two autonomous regions on the Atlantic Coast (the RAAS and the RAAN) and several
communities along the Alto Wanky and Bocay area which have the lowest levels of
coverage and a large indigenous population (Component 2). The Project would also
develop a series of pilots to test concepts new to the country (Component 3). Component
4 will finance Project management activities and strengthen the rural WSS institutions.

 The parent Project and its Additional Financing include investments in the four
components described below:
 Component 1. The existing PRASNICA investments consist in the construction or
rehabilitation of small-scale, minor water supply schemes including boreholes or springs
catchment, conduction lines, water tanks and distribution systems; as well as on-site
sanitation solutions such as latrines or septic tanks to increase coverage of WSS services
in rural Pacific side of Nicaragua. The Additional Financing will scale up existing
PRASNICA activities in the Pacific region, following the same type of interventions.

  Component 2. The existing PRASNICA activities are similar in their nature to these
under Component 1, but focused on the increase coverage of WSS services in the rural
areas of RAAS, RAAN and Alto Wanky and Bocay. The Additional Financing will cover
technical cost overruns in order to complete planned PRASNICA activities in Component
2.

  Component 3. Developing, carrying out, monitoring and evaluating and documenting a
series of WSS pilot subprojects and the accompanying intervention strategies to address
some of the challenges of the rural WSS sector and establish best practice models of
intervention in the WSS sector. The existing PRASNICA has 3 sub-projects: (i) Corn
Island Integrated Development; (ii) Sanitation Markets and (iii) Management models to
improve WSS services. Sub-projects (ii) and (iii) do not include physical investments, but
only studies, goods, workshops and overall technical assistance. The Pilot Sub-project
(iii) includes, in additional to technical assistance activities, investments for improved
WSS, mainly focused on on-site sanitation, rehabilitation and/or construction of wells,
tanks and distribution systems, all located in the Corn Island. The Additional Financing
will scale up the PRASNICA's Corn Island integrated sustainable development pilot
project.

 Component 4. (a) Institutional Strengthening: Supporting and strengthening WSS Rural
Sector Support Institutions to ensure that the existing and new WSS systems and their
WSS Committees are made more sustainable through the provision of technical
assistance; (b) Project Management and Monitoring: Supporting FISE to implement,
manage, monitor and evaluate the Project. The Additional Financing will scale up
existing PRASNICA institutional strengthening and project management activities. No
physical investments are expected under this component aside from potential minor
office rehabilitations.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will increase access to water and sanitation services in rural areas of
Nicaragua and in municipalities with populations of less than 5,000 people. An important
component of the project will increase W&S access in two autonomous regions on the
Atlantic Coast, the Region Autonoma del Atlantico Sur (RAAS) and the Region
Autonoma del Atlantico Norte (RAAN), plus the Alto Wanky and Bocay area.

 The proposed Additional Financing would help to finance the costs associated with
scaling-up and cost overrun activities to enhance the impact of the Project in Nicaragua's
rural areas, including the Caribbean Coastal region-which includes the North Atlantic
Autonomous Region (RAAN) and South Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAS), and the
Alto Wanky and Bocay area, regions being of high priority for the Government of
Nicaragua.

 The investments involve dispersed and small-scale minor infrastructure works, such as
small wells, gravity augmented pumps and/or electric pumps, water storage tanks,
aqueducts, household connections and on-site sanitation in around 180 communities in
the existing PRASNICA; and approximately 30-40 new communities with Additional
Funds. These communities are distributed in the entire country. Most of the systems rely
on groundwater sources (wells with hand pumps, gravity augmented pumps and/or
electric pumps). There will be no disposal of sewers (treated or untreated) in any
waterways (only on-site sanitation solutions are contemplated).

 There will be no direct abstraction from either of the transboundary waterways located
on the borders with Honduras or Costa Rica under the proposed investments under either
operation, and total estimated additional water abstraction is therefore null. If some
systems were to use surface water from small tributaries, the extraction would be non
material (since the estimated average flow of the rural communities is 3.5 l/s), therefore
not affecting quantitatively or qualitatively waterways. Furthermore, none of the Project
activities will take place in disputed areas.

  Social Context. Approximately 14% of the people of Nicaragua identify themselves as
indigenous. There are 10 autochthonous groups: 6 on the Atlantic Coast and 4 in the
Pacific, Central and Northern regions of the country. Although coverage of water and
sanitation systems has increased country-wide, it is not clear that Indigenous Peoples and
Afro-descendant communities have been able to access water and sanitation sub-projects
to the same degree as the general population. Component 2 of the project is exclusively
targeted to improving access to water and sanitation systems in the autonomous regions
of RAAN, RAAS and Alto Wanky and Bocay, where the bulk of ethnic groups live.
Through Component 2, the Project will benefit around 42 communities (including
Pransnica parant project and Additional Financing), and it is expected that at least 35% of
these (about 15 communities) are indigenous and/or afro-descendents.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSWS)
   Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (LCSEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Safeguards. As the Project will include civil works, there will be minor
environmental impacts such as digging trenches to install pipes or clearing small,
vegetated areas to install a latrine. Since these are small-scale systems for rural, often
dispersed populations, no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are likely or
expected. The Safeguard Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) is triggered and
an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared to screen,
assess, and mitigate environmental and social impacts related to site selection,
construction and operation of the water and sanitation facilities. This framework contains
an environmental assessment of the project and an environmental management plan.

 Although some works will be implemented on the Caribbean coast (the RAAN, RAAS
and Alto Wanky and Bocay), the Project does not trigger the Natural Habitats safeguard
policy (OP 4.04) since all works will be small-scale and located within already
established communities. These works will not represent a significant conversion, loss or
degradation of natural habitats directly or indirectly. The Environmental and Social
Management Framework contains guidance on the selection of the minor works in this
Project as well as information on the location of protected areas, both of which should
minimize any impacts on the coastal ecosystems. No civil works will be eligible which
may have adverse impacts on natural habitats. The screening process for reviewing
proposed sub-projects includes criteria which explicitly excludes such works from Project
support.

 With respect to the triggering of the Physical Cultural Resources Safeguard, the
Environmental and Social Management Framework contains measures and instructions in
the case of any "chance finds" of archeological materials. A screening mechanism is
included in the ESMF to screen for and mitigate potential impacts on cultural resources.

 During the preparation of the Additional Financing, a Safeguards Compliance Review
was carried out and concluded that the expected impacts of the proposed Additional
Financing are manageable provided that the recommendations outlined in the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) are taken into account for
each investment activity during implementation. The ESMF requirements will be
translated into bidding and contract documents to ensure that mitigation and other
requirements are clearly communicated to contractors; and that competent environment
inspectors monitor performance of the contractor responsible for installing, operating,
and maintaining the water and sanitation systems.
  The ESMF and associated updates of the parent Project have all been prepared by the
Client in accordance with national laws and World Bank operational policy requirements,
have been reviewed by the environmental safeguards specialists, cleared by the line
Sector Manager, and disclosed publicly in-country and on the World Bank's website.

 For the Additional Financing, the Project team determines that the environmental
safeguards already triggered to the parent Project will not be changed and no new
requirements are needed to comply with the applicable environmental safeguards
policies.

  Legal Safeguards. The Additional Financing provided the opportunity to revisit the
applicability of OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways to the original project.
While there is no direct water use from transboundary waterways by the proposed
investments under either operation, and the impacts associated with infrastructure
investments financed by both operations are expected to be negligible, the Project team
has deemed it prudent to trigger this safeguard for both the parent Project and the
Additional Financing, considering that some beneficiary communities are located in
transboundary watersheds. The main areas of influence of OP 7.50 are the Alto Coco and
Rio San Juan watersheds, and a riparian notification was sent to the governments of
Costa Rica and Honduras on November 13 2012 in compliance with this Policy. The
Project team has carefully considered any potential transboundary impacts of these
ongoing and proposed investments. Considering the nature of the investments (small-
scale and disperse infrastructure) and from experience of the ongoing project effective
since 2008, the Bank is satisfied that the ongoing PRASNICA project and the proposed
Additional Financing will cause no harm to other riparians and that no activities are
expected to have any material adverse effects on the water quantity or quality of any of
these waterways or on any of the riparians. To exemplify the non-materiality of the
impacts, the typical extraction from a rural water community corresponds to around 3 l/s,
while the flow of the Rio San Juan, that is shared between Nicaragua and Costa Rica, is
about 100,000 times that amount.
  The OP/BP 7.60 Projects in Disputes Areas will not be triggered because there are no
interventions of the Project (either parent Prasnica and its Additional Financing) in
Disputed Areas.

 Social safeguards.

 O.P. 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The small civil works of the Project (water
connections, wells, stand-pipes, latrines or basic sanitation units) are mostly installations
at the household level or stand-pipes designed to serve a small number of households,
therefore, no land acquisition or relocation of the population is foreseen or will be
eligible under the Project. For that reason, the O.P. 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is
not triggered.

 OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. There are no potential large-scale or significant
negative irreversible impacts of this Project on the Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan
populations.

 The Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples Plan (IAPP), covering the entire Country,
was elaborated by the GoN in consultation with the Regional and Territorial
Governments, including through consultations carried out by an interdisciplinary team in
15 communities in the Project area, 10 of which are Indigenous or Afro-Nicaraguan. The
IAPP outlines the principles and procedures required to be employed in all indigenous
and afro-Nicaraguan beneficiary communities, and it has been agreed with the regional
governments and Indigenous Groups. The IAPP has been a key instrument in the Project
in that its focus goes beyond the construction of water and sanitation systems by building
a platform for interventions in indigenous territories.

 OP 4.10's requirements for free, prior and informed consultation and broad community
support are operationalized in this Project through the social intervention scheme
implemented in the entire Project. This scheme requires social specialists (both within
FISE and within the team of the sub-project's contractor) to support: community
organization, particularly related to the establishment and/or legalization of the
community WSS committees (CAPS); effective participation of women in key CAPS
positions; community selection of their preferred water option (hand-pumps, automated
pumps, etc); family selection of individual sanitation schemes, allowing enhancements to
the unit according to personal preference; and good hygiene practices. The communities
are organized and committed to contribute to the sub-project in cash and in-kind, to
purchase their water meters, and to pay for operation and maintenance of the systems. As
part of the process, after been informed about the sub-project, its alternatives, costs and
approach, the community registers its agreement to the sub-project in the form of an act,
registering also the alternative selected and the agreement to contribute, operate and
maintain the intervention. The community is also trained to manage and maintain the
systems. In indigenous areas, the social intervention is carried out by locally-hired staff,
in the language of the beneficiaries. The IAPP also requires that the operational manuals
and procedures are adopted to ensure cultural adequacy and relevant references so that
they can be understood by for the indigenous beneficiaries.

 Besides community participation before, during and after the project, the IAPP requires
the participation of key stakeholders - such as the Governments of GRAAN, GRAAS,
and Territorial Governments of Alto Wanky and Bocay, Pacific, Central and Northern
Regions - to make decisions pertaining to the water sector, service options, tariffs,
community contributions, and manuals and instruments they choose to adopt. This
Project and the measures it implements through the IAPP have presented the territories of
Alto Wanky and Bocay with their first opportunity to participate in a water and sanitation
project with FISE, and this is the first time that funds will be assigned specifically to
them. Through the IAPP, for the first time in the water sector, a diagnostic analysis was
carried out in the Indigenous regions of the Pacific, Central and North regions to invite
inhabitants to participate in Project benefits in a culturally-adequate manner. Perhaps the
most significant contribution of the IAPP to the water sector, which goes beyond the
PRASNICA, is the fact that the Regional Governments have used the instruments and
methodology of PRASNICA to create their own Department of water and sanitation of
GRAAN and GRAAS.

 During the first three years of project implementation, Component 2 experienced delays
in implementation of the actual installation of water and sanitation systems. In order to
create a solid platform for the implementation of public works in these regions,
institutional arrangements and agreements needed to be reached between the Regional
Governments, Territorial Governments, municipalities, and Indigenous and Afro-
Nicaraguan communities. This process took longer than expected. However, to date, all
coordination agreements have been signed, the Operational Manuals (MEPAS , PGC )
have been adapted to respond to the needs of these regions, the Municipal Water and
Sanitation units are being created, and the FISE's regional (local) supervisors are on the
ground. As a result, the institutional capital (particularly social capital) among
participating institutions (FISE, GRAAN, GRAAS, municipalities, CAPS) has been
enriched. Currently there are 8 Afro-Nicaraguan and/or Indigenous communities
benefiting from social and technical assistance, and these communities will soon receive
water and sanitation works. The social and technical work in the remaining Afro-
Nicaraguan and/or Indigenous communities is expected to start in the next couple of
months.

 A performance review of the existing IAPP was carried out by the Project Team,
including (in addition to meetings and discussion with FISE) visits to communities,
discussion with Regional Governments (RAAS / RAAN) and participation in related
workshops carried out in the field. The performance of the IAPP was reviewed in the
preparation mission of this Additional Financing, carried out from September 4 to 13,
2012, involving discussions with FISE, and inputs from the Regional Governments and
other sources (such as the social consultants already working in the Atlantic areas). It was
determined that the principles and procedures adopted within the existing IAPP continue
to be relevant for the Additional Financing. In addition, it was determined that the
existing IAPP has been very successful at ensuring that Project benefits are delivered in
culturally appropriate ways and reach Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan communities.

 Summary of Legal and Environmental Saferguards.

 •      Environmental Assessment
 The Project is expected to generate positive impact on the environmental sustainability
in the project areas by improving the access to potable water and sanitation. The Project
will support rural, disperse and small scale civil works to provide water and sanitation.
The Parent Project has been classified as Category "B," requiring a partial assessment of
the potential environmental and social impacts and mitigation measures to prevent and
reduce adverse or negative impacts. The Additional Financing will follow the same
categorization, since no new type of intervention will take place. Any sub-projects
considered as Category A according to the definition of the Bank are not eligible for
funding by the Project.

  The Additional financing will rely on an updated ESMF that screens, assesses, and
mitigates environmental and social impacts related to site selection, construction and
operation of the water and sanitation facilities. This framework contains an
environmental assessment of the project and an environmental management plan. In
addition, the MEPAS also includes a description of eligible types of infrastructure to be
financed by the Project, complementing (and making reference to) the ESMF.

 •     Natural habitats
 No impacts are anticipated since the proposed works do not represent a significant
conversion, loss or degradation of natural habitats directly or indirectly. The ESMF
screening process for reviewing proposed sub-projects includes criteria which explicitly
excludes from Project support works that may have adverse impacts on natural habitats.

 •     Physical Cultural Resources
 Subprojects that affect Physical Cultural Resources will not be eligible for financing
under this Project. However, the Project's overall ESMF contains measures and
guidelines to be implemented in the case of any chance finds of archeological materials
during project execution. ESMPs includes an archeological diagnostic of project sites
when project areas are prone or likely to have physical cultural resources.

 •      Pest management
 This operation will not finance the procurement of pesticides or any other agricultural
chemicals, nor will it lead to their increased use. The Project's ESMF includes measures
to be followed in case project beneficiaries (farmers under the Compensation for
Environmental Services program) already use agrochemicals for their crops.

 •      Forests
 The project will have no impact on the management, utilization or protection of any
forested areas.

 •      Safety of Dams
 The Project will not finance the construction of new or rehabilitation of existing dams
nor will the Project rely on the operation of existing dams. The water systems supported
by the Project largely use wells as primary water source. There are also some systems
that catch water in local streams, but without the need of a dam. Any type of dams would
be ineligible under this project.

 •     International Waterways

 This policy is now triggered for the Additional Financing, and retroactively for the
parent PRASNICA project. The requirements of the safeguard policy were followed
through the notification sent out by the World Bank to the riparian countries (Honduras
and Costa Rica) on November 13 2012, as required by the procedures established in the
OP/BP7.50. However, given the small-scale and disperse nature of investments, there is
reasonable certainty that their potential impacts on the quality and quantity of water flows
to riparians will be non-material (please see section II A 1 – Legal Safeguards, above).

 •     Disputed Areas
 The project will not support any activities in areas known to involve disputed areas as
defined under the policy.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Environmental Safeguards: No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are
anticipated as a result of the proposed civil works. These consist of relatively small civil
works which are not expected to generate significant environmental impact. But in light
of the fact that Central America is a natural disaster-prone area, site selection and design
and installation of water tanks (reservoirs) and pumping stations will take into account
the specific natural constraints to minimize risks to the public and the environment.
Water tanks (reservoirs) construction will be designed to withstand major natural
disasters (i.e. earthquakes, floods, landslides). As appropriate, each civil works contract
would specify the required structural safety and exposure to natural hazards to be
considered in the design and construction of water and sanitation facilities. A rigorous
monitoring and quality assurance procedure will be included in the contracts to ensure
compliance with environmental health and safety standards as outlined in the ESMF.

 Social safeguards: The coordination with Regional and Territorial Governments should
have positive impacts throughout Project implementation and for future sectoral
development. It has taken many institutional efforts to agree with stakeholders (Regional
Governments of GRAAN, GRAAS, Territory Governments, Mayors, communities) on
adaptation of manuals, instruments, procedures, and processes. The activities under the
IAPP have paved the way for implementation of Component 2 in RAAN, RAAS, Alto
Wanky and Bocay.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None for the Project as a whole; however, FISE requires each sub-project to consider at
least 2 alternatives in a report that take into account basic environmental requirements
and a site evaluation.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental: The borrower has a system of environmental management to manage
minor and expected project impacts. This system has been in place for over 15 years and
has been recently updated for the purposes of certification ISO 14001. Therefore, FISE
has the experience to manage the environmental impacts of this Project. FISE employs an
ecologist with a degree in Ecology and Natural Resources with Specialization in
Watersheds and Forests as well as a Masters Degree in Hydrogeological Technology and
another Masters in Management of Water Resources and Hydrogeology in Managua.
FISE has recently hired an environmental consultant to reinforce the environmental
management unit. FISE also has experience coordinating with at least 20 technical
specialists (architects and engineers) in their 17 regional offices throughout Nicaragua.
FISE's well-developed environmental procedures have served as the model for the
Nicaraguan national environmental agency.

  Overall technical capacity at FISE is adequate; however the Environmental
Management Unit needs support to implement environmental aspects of the additional
activities contemplated for this Additional Financing. This capacity is being strengthened
by the hiring of an environmental specialist to help follow up on activities and provide
the necessary support during implementation. This has been included in the activities
financed by the Project.

 Additional support will be provided to these specialists by the Bank supervision team as
needed.

 Social safeguards: Indigenous Peoples. The IAPP will be the same as for the parent
PRASNICA project. Under the Additional Financing, FISE will be able to implement all
the activities pending to complete the original IAPP. The additional financing for the
IAPP is calculated at around USD80,000 for activities to be implemented in the Pacific,
Center and North, RAAN and RAAS and Indigenous Territories of Alto Wanky and
Bocay. As with the parent PRASNICA project, the Additional Financing will be
implemented by the ORID (office for regulation and institutional development) of FISE
in coordination with the Regional Governments of GRAAN and GRAAS, the Indigenous
Territories, mayors, ARAS and UMAS, and the FISE local offices.

  Under the Parent Project, the IAPP sought full participation of stakeholders, which took
longer than expected and brought delays to the implementation of Component 2.
However, now that these comprehensive social assessment and consultation processes
have been completed, the Additional Financing will allow for works to take place based
on a solid socio-cultural foundation and will increase financing of several activities to
ensure the Project is delivered in a culturally-adequate and timely manner. The
complementary activities of the IAPP will benefit not only in the new communities
covered by the Additional Financing, but also the communities financed by the Parent
Project, in which the social work will be reinforced. Some of those activities include:
consultations/training with Mayors of indigenous areas, elaboration of guidelines with
them that can assist them in prioritizing water and sanitation projects in Indigenous and
Afro-Nicaraguan communities within their Annual Municipal Plans (PIMMs), translation
and publication of manuals and other water and sanitation related information to local
languages, and tailored workshops and training for Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan
groups. Permanent consultations with communities before, during and after project
completion will continue in projects financed under the Additional Financing: The local
and traditional authorities are being informed, consulted, and invited to provide inputs
and participate in meetings, discussions and workshops related to the sub-projects in their
areas. As part of the social and technical activities (already in place through the Parent
project), a set of discussions are held with the communities about available WSS
solutions, the respective tariff associated with each solution, and the need for
organizational improvements (creation / legalization of CAPS), amongst other topics.
Once the WSS solutions and the complementary arrangements have been defined, the
final engineering designs are prepared, and the works executed. As part of the process,
after being informed about the project, its alternatives, costs and approach, the
community registers in the form of an act its agreement to the project, registering also the
alternative selected, and the agreement to contribute, operate and maintain the
intervention. Upon conclusion of the works, the social assistance continues for a period
of between 3 and 6 months in order to ensure consolidation of community arrangements,
proper use of the WSS systems, and hygiene practices.

 The gender strategy, which encourages strong participation of women in CAPS amongst
other activities, will also continue with the Additional Financing, and an assessment of
participation of Indigenous women in projects and CAPS will be conducted.

 FISE has the capacity to implement all necessary safeguard measures. The Bank team is
available to support FISE in its efforts.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environmental: The key stakeholders are the water users, municipalities and
environmental NGOs. Consultations on the environmental framework were held on April
1, 2008 in Bluefields and April 2, 2008 in Jinotega. Consultations on the Environmental
Framework were held in Managua on April 11, 2008. The Environmental Framework
was made available in InfoShop and in-country in March 2008. In-country, the
Framework was placed on the FISE website and hard copies were made available in the
17 territorial offices and Managua. FISE placed their Manual for Environmental
Management, the source document for most of the Environmental Framework for the
project, on their website in February of 2008. Additionally, during the process of
developing each sub-project, the communities were informed of the impending works.
Before any studies or final designs were carried out, the communities were consulted in
public meetings to determine if there was demand for a sub-project and to take their
concerns into consideration. Recently, updates to the PRASNICA framework for the
Adaptation of Nicaragua's Water Supplies to Climate Change Project were publicly
consulted and disclosed in June 2012 both in-country and on the World Bank website.

 Social - Indigenous Peoples. Some key stakeholders are: the Regional FISE teams in the
RAAN and RAAS, Regional and Territory Governments of RAAN and RAAS, Mayors,
Municipal Water and Sanitation Units (UMAS), Water and Sanitation Committees
(CAPS), Regional water and sanitation advisers (ARAS), Indigenous Authorities of the
Pacific, Central and Northern regions, RAAN and RAAS regions, and the communities,
particularly women and children.

 The national IAPP prepared for PRASNICA (2008) included consultation with 15
communities in the project area (10 of which are Afro-Nicaraguan communities), and
RAAN and RAAS authorities, including Alto Wanky and Bocay. The original IAPP was
disclosed in-country and World Bank website in 2008. In 2012 it was updated to include
the methodology, process and results of the consultations held in 2008, with the
information on the Plan itself and its actions remaining unchanged. The Plan was re-
disclosed in-country website on September 7, 2012, and on the World Bank website on
September 18, 2012. The Additional Financing will finance activities in the same areas of
the Parent Project, and will provide complementary funds for the implementation of this
Plan.

 As indicated above, the Additional Financing will continue to finance permanent
consultations with communities before, during and up to six months after every sub-
project completion. The consultation scheme is built into the Project design, as part of the
social management included in the terms of reference of social firms or individual social
contractors. The above is done with the support of the FISE and regional social
specialists. Moreover, other consultations to be financed with the Additional Financing
are: (1) Consultations/sensitivity training with Mayors in Indigenous areas to create
guidelines that will help them prioritize sub-projects originating in ethnic communities
within their Annual Municipal Plans; (2) Consultations with women on their participation
in CAPS and sub-project management; (3) Consultations with 3 communities - Miskito,
Mayagna and Criole English - on changes of behavior in water management, hand
washing, utilization of latrines and water meters, and tariff payment at the home, schools
and community level. As a result, a hygiene campaign and educational materials will be
developed and applied in ethnic communities.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     09/24/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 09/25/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/27/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     09/07/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 09/07/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/18/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss                 09/15/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui                        09/17/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo                   09/16/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan                           10/02/2012
  Comments: Project was delegated to Sector Manager.
Sector Manager:                     Ms Wambui G. Gichuri                         11/13/2012
  Comments:
