                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/16/2012                                     Report No.: AC6652
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P106172                  Original Project Name: Nigeria Electricity
                                              and Gas Improvement Project (NEGIP)
Country: Nigeria                              Project ID: P126182
Project Name: Nigeria Electricity and Gas Improvement Project (add. financing)
Task Team Leader: Erik Magnus Fernstrom
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 7,         Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTEG                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General energy sector (90%);Oil and gas (10%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            100
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objectives of the Project are to: (i) improve the availability and
reliability of gas supply to increase power generation in existing public sector power
plants; and (ii) improve the power network’s capacity and efficiency to transmit and
distribute quality electricity to the consumer.

3. Project Description
The following is a brief description of the activities targeted by the project. The proposed
Additional Financing would extend the PRG series developed and proven under NEGIP
to up to three National Integrated Power Project (NIPP) plants newly constructed by
Niger Delta Power Holding Company (NDPHC) to facilitate availability of adequate
volumes of high quality gas required to operate these assets at their design capacity. It
would also provide short-term investment funding to relieve bottlenecks in the
transmission system (increased transformer capacity, etc) to enhance the transmission
system’s ability to “wheel? the increas power supply to population centers, and to
improve revenue recovery and service delivery in distribution (pre-paid meters paired
with energy saving light bulbs - CFLs, distribution system upgrading, etc.). The
Additional Financing further proposes to scale-up TA and capacity building packages to
support the longer term reform agenda and develop the skills and capacities of key sector
institutions such as the Nigeria Bulk Electricity Trading company (NBET) and NERC,
among others. The Additional Financing design consists of the same four components
approved under NEGIP.

 Component 1: PRGs for gas suppliers (original cost: US$ 400 million, revised cost:
US$ 600 million). These PRGs would replicate the PRG structure designed under
NEGIP,

 Component 2: Investments in complementary transmission and distribution
infrastructure (original cost: US$180 million – revised cost: US$ 260 million). The
investments will target network upgrades to remove transmission bottlenecks and
improve electricity distribution to end–users,

 Component 3: Technical Assistance (original cost: US$16.00 million – revised cost:
US$ 34 million). The proposed Additional Financing will provide US$ 18 million to
complement interventions through reform measures and the contractual frameworks
supported by the PRGs. In particular, the scaling up of the technical assistance
component will ensure that the relevant institutions are adequately equipped to deliver
optimal results in terms of implementation and outcomes of the proposed investments and
sector reform.

 Component 4: The proposed Additional Financing also includes funding for PHCN’s
Project Management Unit (PMU) to cover the costs of its Project management and
contract supervision activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is national in scope. The PRGs will cover payments for gas that is being
supplied to NDPHC primarily using existing infrastructure. Gas will be sourced from the
oil and gas fields in the Niger River Delta. The NIPP plants nominated for the contracts
to be covered by PRGs for gas delivery are Alaoji, Olorunsogo, and Sapele. In the cases
of Olorunsogo and Sapele, the gas will be transmitted from the Escravos-Lagos Pipeline
System (ELPS) through existing spur lines (for Sapele) and a new spur line (for
Olorunsogo).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASIS)
   Ms Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
   Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The additional financing has been classified in EA Category B, like the parent project.
There are no large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts. Potential environmental
impacts consist of those associated with (i) the public health and safety risks involved in
transporting gas through existing pipelines and (ii) the rehabilitation and upgrading of
electric transmission and distribution substations and distribution lines.

 Safeguards for Component 1 are being addressed through preparation of pipeline
integrity studies for the existing pipelines and EIAs for new pipelines that will supply gas
to the NIPP power plants under PRGs. The first integrity study has been completed in
the form of an update for the ELPS Integrity Study that was prepared for West African
Gas Pipeline in 2000. NGC is in the process of implementing the study’s recommended
remedial actions, many of which has been completed. Those that are delayed are
primarily repair of pigging facilities, reinstatement of cathodic protection for certain
pipeline segments, and installation of a new SCADA system. These actions are
incorporated in a revised action plan agreed with NGC and monitored by the Bank.
Additional studies will be carried out in accordance with the Environment and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) as required before PRGs involving different existing
pipelines are executed. When a new pipeline is involved, the EIA prepared for the
pipeline according to Nigerian law must also be acceptable to the Bank. EIAs are
disclosed in-country under Nigerian procedures and will be disclosed in the InfoShop.
Integrity studies are not disclosed for reasons of security. The Borrower’s commitment
to a time-bound program for completion of recommended actions in integrity studies will
be a covenant in the legal documents.

  Safeguards for Component 2 are being handled according to the project’s ESMF
described below. In addition, a Resettlement Polic Framework (RPF) originally
prepared but not needed for the parent project is being disclosed for the additional
financing. Land acquisition or resettlement are not anticipated, but OP 4.12 is being
triggered as a precautionary measure in case additional land has to be acquired at a
substation.

  It is possible that OCs / gas companies delivering gas to PHCN or NDPHC power plants
with the backing of Bank PRGs will see new market opportunities not only for export and
for firm domestic consumption (facilitated by this project), but also possible future
growth in domestic consumption thanks to a demonstration of reliable supply of good
quality gas. If so, OCs may decide to drill new gas wells or construct extensions to gas
collection systems. Because of the nature of the production system, gas transport system,
and market, it would be very unusual to know whether any, or which, new wells or
extended collection systems would be directly attributable to gas deliveries under Bank-
guaranteed contracts. Once produced, collected, and processed, gas transported by
pipeline becomes fungible and potentially delivered to any one of a wide variety of end
users. Under these circumstances, it is unrealistic for the Bank to try to reach further
?upstream“ in direct project safeguards work than the integrity studies it is requiring for
the existing pipelines through which the OCs will deliver the gas. The Bank does not
have leverage to apply its policies to such upstream developments. The more realistic
approach is to rely on existing Nigerian regulations and to use Bank resources through
Technical Assistance to help the Government to improve, evaluate and assess their
application to gas production facilities. PRG Project Agreements have an undertaking
from the relevant OCs to the effect that any new wells would be developed in full
compliance with Nigerian law, including requirements for environmental assessment,
public consultation, and disclosure. The OCs that are parties to the Gas Supply and
Aggregation Agreements supported by the Bank’s PRG, would notify the Bank about
their permit applications to the Ministry of Environment and the DPR and confirm to the
Bank that the necessary permits and approvals have been received. In the event of non-
compliance the Bank would have the right to suspend the PRG until such time as the
default is remedied. OCs that have signed PRG Project Agreements have accepted the
notification requirements, but as the PRGs are not yet effective, no notifications have yet
been required. The capacity-building for FME in implementing and enforcing provisions
of Nigerian law with respect to OC gas wells and gas gathering systems is being
strengthened during the parent project through technical assistance that has been fully
implemented. The stakeholder forum that has been constituted under the Project (see
II.A.5 below for its description) will facilitate articulation of any concerns that arise
regarding upstream developments.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The increases in availability of electric power and in the reliability of its delivery should
contribute to economic development and improved quality of life nationally and
regionally. On the other hand, the type, extent and location of future developments near
the power stations and elsewhere is unknown, and therefore their impacts cannot be
predicted specifically. Because unplanned, poorly planned, or badly executed
development can have significant adverse social and environmental impacts, reinforcing
the ability of local and state governments to plan and administer land development and to
monitor and enforce compliance with environmental standards should be a long-term
goal for Nigeria.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Alternatives are not relevant in the case of many of the proposed investments, since they
involve correction of specific problems at existing transmission and distribution facilities.
The same is true for most of the PRGs, since they will apply to gas being supplied
primarily through existing lines. To the extent that there are alternatives, they will be
considered in the course of design and assessment of the individual investments.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environment, Resettlement and Social Unit (ERSU) resident in the PMU prepared
the ESMF and has prepared the ESMPs for the investments being financed in the parent
project under Component 2. ERSU will prepare the ESMPs for the additional
investments in Component 2, ERSU has engaged a specialized consultant to conduct
integrity studies and review EIAs for relevant pipelines other than ELPS.Implementation
of the action plan resulting from those integrity studies will be a covenant in the legal
agreements , following the same template as in the PRGs for PHCN plants in the parent
project, for presentation to the Board for approval. RAPs will also be prepared as and
when necessary.

  The ERSU already has demonstrated satisfactory capacity to address impacts of electric
transmission and distribution projects. TDP, NEDP and NEGIP supervision has shown
that the ERSU#s capacity to implement the ESMF properly for those projects is fully
adequate. ERSU has overseen audits of the substations, prepared ESMPs and RAPs, and
supervised implementation of ESMPs for substation and distribution line improvements.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are Nigerian citizens and businesses that are or would like to be
consumers of electric power, local and regional governments, communities in affected
states, Niger Delta communities and civil society organizations active there,
environmental NGOs, environmental and social development professionals and
institutions. They were first briefed on the parent project and consulted in a stakeholder
workshop that was held jointly by PMU and the Bank at the Bank's country office on
May 2, 2008. Additional workshops have been held at intervals during parent project
implementation (see next paragraph). Consultations specific to individual investments
will be conducted according to procedures defined in the ESMF.

 A Stakeholder Forum chaired by the Minister of Power and including FME, DPR and
other relevant federal and state government agencies, civil society organizations and
industry representatives was constituted before the parent project became effective and
continues to function during the implementation period, to discuss project
implementation issues, give expert opinion, and provide a platform to articulate and
address concerns about social and environmental aspects of project implementation. The
forum has met at least every six months, to coincide with Bank supervision missions, and
may schedule additional meetings if it finds this to be useful or necessary.

 The final draft of the ESMF was disclosed in Nigeria under the auspices of the Federal
Ministry for Environment, Housing and Urban Development on October 21, 2008 and
has been redisclosed for the additional financing at (i) Power Holding Company of
Nigeria- Project Management Unit, 7 Kampala Street, Wuse II, Abuja; (ii) PHCN HQ
Library, Plot 441 Zambezi Crescent, Abuja; (iii) Transmission Company of Nigeria
(TCN) Headquarters, Maitama, Abuja. and the Regional offices at Ijora -Lagos, Kaduna,
Bauchi, Enugu, Port Harcourt, Benin.; (iv) PHCN Distribution Zones, Zone 4 Abuja,
Benin, Ikeja - Lagos, Port Harcourt, Enugu, Kaduna, Jos and Yola. (v) Thermal
Generation Stations Afam; Egbin; Sapele, Omotosho, Olorunsogo; and (vi) Federal
Ministry of Environment and Housing, Plot 444 Aguiyi Ironsi Street, Maitama, Abuja.
 on January 31, 2012 . Disclosure at the InfoShop occurred on October 23, 2008 with
redisclosure on January 30, 2012.

 The RPF had already been reviewed and disclosed along with the ESMF for the parent
project and, though it was not applied in NEGIP, it is being redisclosed with the ESMF in
case it is needed in the additional financing.

 ERSU prepared a generic ESMP for the investments in electric transmission and
distribution under the parent project, and it has been disclosed in country on PHCN's
website and at its regional transmission offices (April 17, 2009) and in the InfoShop
(April 14, 2009). It includes in an annex the information on the environmental issues at
each of the work locations. Individual ESMPs are prepared for each site prior to
clearance to begin work, by incorporating the site-specific information in the text
provided in the generic template. ESMPs for the investments in the additional financing
will be prepared by ERSU, reviewed, and disclosed in country and in the Infoshop prior
to approval for financing.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                    09/01/2008
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                01/31/2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                 01/30/2012
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                    09/01/2008
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                01/31/2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                 01/31/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                 Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Erik Magnus Fernstrom             02/06/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Thomas E. Walton                  02/06/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Paula F. Lytle                    02/06/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Amos Abu                          02/06/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi             02/14/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lucio Monari                      02/14/2012
  Comments:
