                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/23/2013                                     Report No.: AC6921
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P096572                   Original Project Name: THIRD
                                               NATIONAL FADAMA
                                               DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (FADAMA
                                               III)
Country: Nigeria                               Project ID: P130788
Project Name: THIRD NATIONAL FADAMA DEVELOPMENT PROJECT -
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Task Team Leader: Abimbola Adubi
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 29, 2013       Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2013
Managing Unit: AFTA1                           Lending Instrument:
Sector: Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (60%);General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (20%);Irrigation and drainage (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (60%);Trade facilitation and market access
(25%);Other rural development (10%);Participation and civic engagement (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            200
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             30.00
                                                                        30.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective, basic project design and implementation
arrangements would remain the same as in the original project. The proposed AF will
support critical production activities and organization of farmers into out-grower groups
in catchment areas of potential identified SCPZs in six states. The priority value chains to
be supported are rice in Niger, Lagos and Ebonyi states; cassava in Kogi and Ogun states;
sorghum and horticultural crops in Kano state. Implementation of the SCPZ catchment
area activities will be carried out in phases and the first phase would be in Lagos, Niger,
Kogi, Enugu/Anambra and Kano States, starting with the brown fields in Lagos and
Niger States.
3. Project Description
The AF activities will be grouped under the six existing components of the project as
follows:

 Component 1: Capacity Building, Communications and Information Support - This
component originally provided enhanced support to (i) mobilize beneficiaries into
groups, associations and federations; train them to prepare LDPs; enhance their capacities
to demand services; and train them to implement their activities; (ii) build capacity of the
local governments for innovative local planning; integrate community plans to enhance
sustainability; and improve good governance; and (iii) information dissemination and
communication support.

 This component will now be scaled up to provide additional capacity building support to
farmers with emphasis on strengthening linkages between farmers and processing firms
and to develop contracts for agreed quantity and quality of outputs. The component will
explore the diversities of outgrower schemes with regards to structure and management
for products and inputs. Activities proposed will include group sensitization and
community relations, mobilization of commodity focused farmer groups, training of
farmer groups and other stakeholders on business plan development, facilitation of link
between farmer groups and processors, support for implementation of activities covered
by the farmer groups' business plans, training of market-oriented facilitators (in
coordination with service, input and assets provision under components 2, 3, and 5), etc.
The project will also fund the provision of of media vans, undertaking farm broadcasts,
communication production program, and partnership with ministry of
information/existing communication agencies will be undertaken.

  Component 2: Small Scale Community Owned Infrastructure - This component will
continue to provide support to demand driven community owned infrastructure such as
irrigation systems, access roads, rural markets, storage facilities, conservation activities,
seed and plant nurseries, machinery and equipment, etc. for the project beneficiaries in
the staple crop out-grower areas.

 The major focus of this component will be limited to small-scale irrigation infrastructure
for farmers in the catchment areas of identified SCPZs and land development. This may
include de-siltation of canals, building or rehabilitation of secondary canals, rehabilitation
of boreholes, wash-bores or sinking of new ones, land clearing, and leveling.

 Component 3: Advisory Services and Input Support - This component has focused on
registering certified service providers and procurement of advisory services and inputs by
farmer groups. Procurement of advisory services under this component is strictly related
to purchase of inputs (seed, fertilizer, machinery) in the SCPZs. This component will be
strengthened by upgrading the current input support program to receive good quality and
quantity inputs on time. Seed multiplication activities will be encouraged while the
national capacity on production of quality genetic material and agricultural
mechanization centres to support farmers production will be also assisted. Such activities
will be coordinated with component 4 on adapted research, on-farm demonstrations and
FFSB activities.

  This will complement the Growth Enhancement Support (GES) of ATA on input
delivery to farmers to ensure that new varieties are available and adopted with minimal
risk by the farmers. Under this component, the promotion of fertilizer with essential trace
elements (Zn) will be explored as much as possible. The support will also include
intervention on tractorization and mechanization.

 Component 4: Support to the ADPs, Research and On-farm Demonstrations - This
component will continue to finance the support training and mobility of ADP extension
staff, support to private advisory service providers, quality assurance of advisory
providers, training of advisory service facilitators, adapted research, and on-farm
demonstrations. In addition, the component will specifically pilot extension interventions
that may hold promise for scaling up under the planned national extension reform. Such
interventions include support to research-extension-client links (via ARTTCs funded by
WAAPP), revised curricula for public and private service providers, youth-graduate
agropreur program, enhanced quality assurance program, and scaling up of e-extension in
the SCPZs. All activities are aligned with the newly established Federal Department of
Agricultural Extension (FDEA) and the AgDPO support for state level extension
capacity-building program.

  The major support here is to pilot extension reform, adapted R&D, on-farm
demonstrations and facilitates Research-Extension-Client links. The component will
support piloting of limited areas of the extension reform elements in the country with
particular emphasis on delivering pluralistic, demand-driven extension services, using the
farmer-field and business school extension approach-FFBS- in the catchment areas of
identified SCPZs. This will be accomplished by strengthening the capacity of ADPs and
other service providers (private, facilitators, youth and graduates) to deliver advisory
services (focus on training, revised curricula, incentives, extension materials), ability of
ADPs to set professional standards, register, certify, and monitor public and private
service providers in close coordination with FDEA and provide e-extension services
(web- and mobile phone based advisory services, farmer call centers, and SMS services
to farmers) drawing on best global services, such as the FIKS pilot that are appropriate to
the Nigerian situation.. The ability of extension to provide nutrition related messages may
be addressed via the curricula changes. The project will support delivery of extension
services for small-holders through farmer groups (a good practice for cost-effective
delivery) based on their identified extension needs and through existing FFS (on
technically complex topics such as seed multiplication, on-farm demonstrations).

 As to research, the component will help farmer groups to identify their adapted research
needs which will be aligned with the existing WAAPP funded research programs. This
will be done in strict adherence to participatory and community-driven approaches It will
specifically enhance research-extension-client links by collaborating with the pilot
Agriculture Technology Transfer Centers (ARTTC), established by WAAPP, in selected
SPZCs. Until the ARTTCs become operational the project will strengthen and use the
existing REFILS platform. The project will mobilize farmer groups, extension and
private sector clients of ARTTCs, and coordinate the scaling up of on-farm
demonstrations through the FFS approach. Seed multiplication activities under
component 3 will be closely coordinated with component 4 activities on adapted
research, on-farm demonstrations and FFS.

 Component 5: Asset Acquisition for Individual farmer groups - This component will
continue to finance in scaling up the matching grant to disadvantaged and economically
active farmer groups to acquire assets for farming. The groups will establish and
implement a user fee for use of common assets to expand their farm activities and
graduate out of matching grant dependency.

 This component will also support the acquisition of productive assets that are critical to
the production of farmers. The target is to remove all asset constraints along the value
chains of identified priority crops and will include technology enabled production
equipment. This component will cover farming equipment and tools such as sprayers,
water pumps, bull for traction, power tillers; and storage facilities for both produce and
inputs. Production enhancing technologies that is capable of reducing women workload
or with gender bias and vulnerable groups will also be supported. The component will
also support small to medium scale assets that will facilitate federated farmers' access to
markets in other Fadama III participating states along their two priority value chains.


 Component 6: Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation, and EMP Compliance -
This component will continue to finance the overall governance and management of the
project, and invest specifically in strengthening the project coordination, oversight and
administration including M&E, accountability, HRD functions and technical assistance to
implementing agencies.

  Implementation Arrangement: The Executive Agency will remain FMARD and it will
continue to coordinate implementation through NFCO and SFCOs, who will relate with
SCPZ authority and management firms. A Desk Office within the NFCO will be created
to oversee the implementation of ATA interventions. Critical additional staff of a
professional nature will be hired wherever necessary. There will be no change in financial
management, disbursement arrangement and procurement administration. Detail
implementation arrangement is provided in Annex IV. The AF would be used to
consolidate and expand project activities showing strong results over an additional three
year project implementation period. The original project closing date would be extended
from December 31, 2013 to December 31, 2016.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
It is expected that the Project will commence SCPZ catchment area outgrower activities
in Lagos, Niger, Kano, Kogi, Ogun, Enugu, Anambra and Ebonyi States
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS)
   Mr Amos Abu (AFTN1)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 The Project falls into Category B implying that potential environmental and social
impacts will be less adverse, easily remediable and site-specific. No large scale,
significant and/or irreversible impact are anticipated.

 Eight safeguards policies are triggered by this Project. The Project will abide by the
covenants of the three policies of Forestry, Natural Habitats and International Waters.

 The three safeguards instruments of ESMF, RPF and PMP have been prepared by the
client and reviewed and cleared by the Bank. The safeguard instruments for the parent
project were disclosed in-country and the Bank's InfoShop on May 4, 2007. These
instruments have been revised and updated to cover the interventions of the proposed AF
and have been re-disclosed in-country on May 17, 2013 and at InfoShop on June 13,
2013.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
This Project falls into Environmental category B as no adverse long-term impacts are
anticipated. No long-term adverse impacts were identified in the updated and revised
safeguards instruments: Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF);
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The ESMF, IPMP and RPF that were prepared during the original project have been
revised and upgraded for the purposes of this additional financing. These safeguards
instruments have provided mechanisms to identify impacts beyond the generic ones for
which standard mitigation measures are built and to be applied during the implementation
phase. The safeguards impacts identified are not expected to have any long-term or
cumulative impacts. Environmental protection clauses will be included in the contract
documents for small-scale infrastructure like rehabilitation and/or construction of feeder
and Fadama access roads, culverts and bridges. The project may involve the construction,
strengthening or modification of small dams, weirs, or water impoundment for small
scale irrigation. For this reason, the safety of dams policy (OP 4.37) is triggered, even
though the project is not supporting any large dams. The ESMF provides guidance, and
qualified engineers will be engaged for design and supervision. The Safeguards unit
resident in the PMU prepared the ESMF and has prepared the ESMPs for the investments
being financed in the parent project. The safeguards unit already has demonstrated
satisfactory capacity to address impacts of projects funded activities. Fadama III
supervision has shown that the project's capacity to implement the ESMF, IPMP and RPF
properly is adequate.

 Environmental protection criteria. Experience demonstrates that, because of their small
scale, most of the subprojects financed under Fadama III do not have a significant effect
on the environment. Nevertheless, the detailed environmental checklist, developed and
used in the LDP process for subproject screening and qualification, will be maintained
and updated for this Project. Further, an environmental specialist will be maintained at
the SFDO to provide additional technical assistance on environmental matters as well as
provide training to increase environmental awareness of Facilitators and the FCAs

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/05/2013
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/04/2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/18/2013
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/05/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/04/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/18/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/05/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/04/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/18/2013
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                              N/A
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts         N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements           N/A
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                            Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification              N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                           N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Abimbola Adubi          05/06/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Amos Abu                04/11/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Caroline Mary Sage      04/11/2013
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   04/17/2013
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Martien Van Nieuwkoop   04/17/2013
  Comments:
