                                                                                                      106191
                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          APPRAISAL STAGE

Date prepared/updated: March 20, 2013

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Nigeria                                               Project ID: P131973
                                                               Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Housing Finance Project
Task Team Leader: Michael Wong
Estimated Appraisal Date:                                      Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit: Financial and Private Sector                    Lending Instrument: FI
Sector: Housing Finance and Real Estate
Theme
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 300
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:

Environmental Category: FI-2
Is this a transferred project                              Yes [ ]                            No [x ]
Simplified Processing                                      Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                         Yes [ ]           No [x ]
Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:
The Project Development Objective is to increase access to housing finance by deepening the primary and
secondary mortgage markets in the Federal Republic of Nigeria . The project will benefit new mortgagors in
existing market segments in the first 2 years, and lower income market segments after 2 years, including the self-
employed in the micro finance market segment. Secondary beneficiaries of the project will be those employed
directly or indirectly in the housing sector who will benefit through increased activity as housing production is
scaled up. A third tier of beneficiaries will be institutions in the financial sector that will benefit from the growth of
mortgage assets. This includes commercial and microfinance banks (MFB) and institutional investors such as
Pension Fund Administrators (PFAs) who will have a new investment outlet in the form of Mortgage Refinance
Company (MRC) bonds which will match their need for long term investments.

3. Project Description:
Component 1: Line of Credit for the Nigeria Mortgage Refinance Company, NMRC (USD $250 million).
The Project will assist in the development of Nigeria’s mortgage finance market through the provision of long term
funds for the purpose of mortgage refinancing. The line of credit amounting to USD $250 million will be made
available to the Central Bank of Nigeria for the establishment and operation of the NMRC in 6 installments during
the lifetime of the project. The NMRC will be registered as a non-bank under publicly listed limited liability
company rules and regulation with majority ownership coming from the financial institutions and will act as a bridge
between mortgage lenders and the capital markets. The funds lent to NMRC would then be advanced to mortgage
lending institutions as refinancing or in some cases pre-financing of eligible mortgage loans. A requirement to issue
corporate bonds is built into the World Bank loan disbursement to help incentivize move towards sustainability. The
objective of this conditionality is to ensure the sustainability of NMRC by incentivizing the move towards reliance
on its own fund raising capacity. To further assist in this, the Federal Government will provide support in the form
of a guarantee for the bonds in the initial phase of the project. The guarantee would be time bound and limited in
amount, but is seen as a necessary credit enhancement in the context of the Nigerian market.
The project will help expand the reach of mortgage finance down the income distribution by setting targets for the
refinancing of smaller loans. As part of the project design and to encourage greater access to mortgage finance, there
will be a requirement that the portfolios of mortgage loans presented as collateral in a refinance operation should
contain at a minimum a certain proportion of smaller loans. A starting target may be in the range of 30 per cent of
loans being below NGN 5 million. This would be subject to review and regular update through the Project
Operations Manual.

Component 2: Establishment of a mortgage guarantee product targeted at lower income borrowers (US$25
million)
To further support the reach of mortgages down the income distribution, US$25 million equivalent will be used to
develop a guarantee product to bear some of the credit risk for lower income lenders. It will be established in year 2
of the project and will be subject to detailed pricing and market analysis. The Project will fund the product
development including testing and financial modeling, and then launch a competitive process, among private or
public owned non-bank financial institutions to select a mortgage guarantee agent to implement the project. The
Project will finance TA, under Component 4, to design the guarantee product, the development of the detailed
operation manual, the bidding criteria, and the consultation events; and will support the implementation and
monitoring. Furthermore, upon the signing of the agreement with the service provider, the Project will make
available a line of credit to cover the issuances of guarantees.

Component 3: Line of Credit for Housing Microfinance Piloting (USD $15 million)
Component 3 will support development and piloting of new and/or emerging formal housing microfinance (HMF)
products and demonstrate a sustainable business case for these activities. This component will be rolled out in three
consecutive phases: i) tailored technical assistance (TA) to selected MFBs to develop new and/or improve emerging
HMF products (to be funded from Component 4); ii) provision of risk capital to MFBs, in the form of limited soft
loans, to test the new HMF products; and iii) a line of credit to establish initial HMF portfolios.

Component 4: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (USD $10 million)
This component will provide operational assistance to NMRC, support mortgage lender training, housing market
information, policy framework for more inclusive housing market development. Also technical assistance will be
provided to support component 1 and 2, i.e. Securities Exchange, to streamline procedures for bond issuance,
training on housing mortgage to related public institutions, training on housing micro finance, etc.

Collaboration with other projects, GIZ, GEMS, IFC, etc.: The collaboration with GEMS (Investment Climate
and Construction) and GIZ will focus on the business environment for housing and the construction supply chain for
residential homes. The two agencies aim to enhance the supply side of the housing market, while the World Bank
project aims to enhance the funding of the demand side. The collaboration with IFC will focus on working with the
mortgage liquidity facility and primary mortgage institutions.


4. For Category FI projects types of activities or sectors likely to be supported by the FI with Bank financing
or other financial support, and rationale for classification as Category FI-1, FI-2, or FI-3:
In May 2013, Bank Management adopted OP/BP 4.03, the World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector
Activities (World Bank Performance Standards) and the application of this policy to Bank financing or support
which is destined to projects (or components thereof) that are owned, constructed and/or operated by private sector
entities, in place of the World Bank’s Safeguard policies. Consequently, OP/BP 4.03 was used as the environmental
and social policy instrument for this Project.

According to OP/BP 4.03, this project is categorized as FI–2. This is based on the anticipated knowledge that the
proposed portfolio is expected to be comprised of subprojects that have potential limited adverse environmental or
social risks or impacts that are few in number, generally site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed
through mitigation measures; or includes a very limited number of subprojects with potential significant adverse
environmental or social risks or impacts that are diverse, irreversible, or unprecedented.

Consequently, each Participating Financial Institution (PFI), including NMRC, will be required to (i) develop and
operate an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) that incorporates relevant aspects of
Performance Standard 1 on Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts and is
commensurate with the level of environmental and social risk in its portfolio and prospective business activities
supported by the World Bank loan; (ii) apply relevant aspects of Performance Standard 2 to its employees; (iii)
ensure that all subprojects supported by the World Bank comply with applicable national and local laws and
regulations, including those pertaining to home ownership, occupancy, and land tenure. The PFIs must avoid
supporting activities on the WBG Exclusion List.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Kenneth Green, Senior Safeguards Specialist, Consultant
Joseph Akpokodje, Senior Environmental Specialist
Paula Lytle, Senior Social Specialist

6. Performance Standards Applicable                                             Yes             No
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and                             x
Social Risks and Impacts
PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                               x
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                                               x
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                                                     x
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                              x
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management                                       x
of Living Natural Resources
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                                         x
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                                          x


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe key environmental and social risks and impacts likely to be associated with the proposed project,
if Category C, or the Bank-supported portfolio, if Category FI:

It is anticipated that the majority of transactions supported by this Project will be in the services or investments that
will have little environmental or social risks associated with them. Generally, all FIs are exposed to some level of
E&S risk through the activities of their borrowers/investees, which can represent a financial, legal, and/or
reputational risk to the FI. The E&S risks associated with the internal operations of an FI are typically limited to
managing aspects related to labor and working conditions of employees, as well as ensuring the safety of employees
and visitors within its premises. The E&S risk associated with an FI’s lending/investment activities depends on
factors such as the specific E&S circumstances associated with a borrower’s/investee’ s operations, the sector, and
the geographic context, among others.

However, it is recognized that there may be some business activities in which the environmental and social risks and
impacts are significant and require commensurate assessment and management, e.g., land acquisition, labor and
working standards, inappropriate disposal of wastes, or unhealthy or hazardous working conditions. PFIs’ due
diligence will have tools to identify these higher-risk transactions and procedures and guidance will be developed
for screening, assessing, and managing these risks.

Since there is no direct investment in land purchase or acquisition under this project, no involuntary resettlement is
expected. However, as part of the PFI ESMS, there will be a review process to assess if transactions do lead to
specific land acquisition for any sub-loan action and the proper requirements in line with Performance Standards
will be followed.


2. Describe the key features of the client’s Social and Environmental Management System and the capacity to
implement it in a responsible manner:

The PFIs need to addresses environmental and social risks based on the level of perceived risk, the type of financing
undertaken and the amount of leverage that the FI has in obtaining mitigation measures from its borrowers/investees.
When an FI provides project or long-term corporate finance, it is more exposed to the underlying E&S risks of the
borrowers’/investees’ operations but also has the opportunity to manage these risks at the transaction level. This
will require undertaking individual transaction screening and, where necessary, due diligence and monitoring, and
overall E&S risk management in accordance with the resulting E&S risk profile of the portfolio. In parallel, FIs
always need to develop and maintain the requisite capacity for E&S risk management and allocate appropriate
resources for this function.

The day-to-day operations will be managed by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) hosted in the CBN and funded
by the CBN. The PIU will consist of a Project Director and a Deputy Director. Other members of the PIU will
include a Procurement Specialist, Project Accountant, M&E Specialist, and a Sustainability Specialist. The main
implementation modalities, and the institutional arrangements will be detailed in the Project Operations Manual
(POM). In addition, the PIU will coordinate capacity building across the PFIs for enhancing the enabling
environment and build market capacity for improved E&S performance of FIs and their clients.

The World Bank and the GoN have collaborated in producing the Environmental and Social Risk Management
Operations Manual (ESOM) for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) housed in the CBN and the corresponding
PFIs participating in this program. This will ensure that appropriate risk management measures have been identified
for implementation by the loan applicant. The POM will thus be supplemented by specific sustainability tools, the
ESOM for the PIU, along with the ESMS that is established by each PFI. PFIs are required to establish or arrange
for proper capacities to duly implement their ESMS in a manner consistent with the guidance provided in the
ESOM. If a PFI does not have the capacity to implement an ESMS, the World Bank reserves the right to request
PIU to develop an Action Plan that identifies all actions necessary to meet the requirements set forth in the ESOM.


3. Describe the key instruments used by the client to identify and assess risks and impacts, and measures
taken by the client to address environmental and social risks and impacts of the project. Provide an
assessment of client’s capacity to implement the measures described:

A number of proactive considerations are being planned to ensure improved sustainability across the program
activities. This includes creation of the ESOM, application of Environmental and Social Management Systems
(ESMS) across the PFIs, a review of land administration and land tenure issues across World Bank projects in the
country, and approaches to improve green building incentives across the housing industry.

The ESOM provides specific details on the contents and actions for an acceptable ESMS that is necessary to meet
lending requirements of the World Bank. The PFIs are required to develop and operate their ESMS commensurate
with the level of E&S risk in their portfolio and prospective business activities. The ESMS describes key features
such as social and environment policies and procedures; current organization structure and staffing for managing
environmental and social risk; skills and competencies in social and environmental areas; training and awareness of
the institution’s investment, legal, and credit officers on the ESMS; reporting systems to managers; and performance
monitoring procedures. The ESMS should incorporate relevant principles of Performance Standard 1 on Assessment
and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts. The scope and complexity of the ESMS will
depend on the E&S risk of the FI’s lending/investment activities. All FI clients must also manage the working
conditions of their workforce in accordance with relevant aspects of Performance Standard 2 on Labor and Working
Conditions which in the case of the financial sector relates to employment practices and conditions.

Because this Project is categorized as FI-2, the PFIs are required to apply the Performance Standards 1 through 8
(with the exception of PS 7, as there are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area) to higher-risk transactions, more
specifically those involving project finance and long-term corporate finance. Each PFI will assess E&S risks of these
higher-risk transactions according to Performance Standards 1 through 8 and will require its borrowers/investees to
comply with these Performance Standards in their operations.

The WBG requires the CBN PAT to furnish to it, throughout implementation, an annual Environmental and Social
Performance Report (“ESPR?) that summarizes the status of implementation of the ESMS by each participating PFI .


Land Administration and Tenure Study
The objectives of this study are to: (i) provide a comprehensive overview of the policy, legal and institutional
framework related to housing developments; (ii) identify and assess salient factors concerning land tenure, use,
governance, and investment; and (iii) capture how customary land transfers and sales are regularly processed in the
urban housing market. The study will:
 provide detailed information concerning land issues of relevance to project objectives and activities,
 identify major challenges affecting land acquisition and resettlement and lessons learned from ongoing
    experience with large-scale investment projects in the country in urban programs that may have implications for
    project success, and
 provide input into project design.

Building Green Options in the Nigeria Housing Sector
Both the World Bank and IFC have promoted Green Growth across its operations over the past several years.
Several housing and construction initiatives in Nigeria have begun to explore the opportunities and costs associated
with green building in the housing sector and this project will create a window to explore these options as well as
create a mix of incentives to encourage scaling up of these activities.

There is a need to identify the current macro drivers as opportunities in the country for green residential housing
construction coupled with existing barriers. This entails being able to also explain why green buildings opportunities
are not prevalent. Overall, the project will be structuring incentives for promoting not only affordable housing but
also how to make such program and projects “greener?. This work needs to also create a logical and practical
platform for looking at the various themes for energy efficiency, water conservation, waste minimization and the
concepts of using environmentally friendly construction techniques. Such a discussion needs to be founded on the
context of the Nigerian urban housing market.

Secondly, a look at the opportunities and constraints for establishing green mortgage packages is needed. This will
focus on the MRC and how to create opportunities for mortgage lenders to stimulate these initiatives. This will
require evaluation and assessment of other financial mechanisms for green buildings across the globe in similar
contexts (e.g. Mexico and Turkey) and creating lessons learned for the Nigeria housing market.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
For Category FI -- FI’s Policy Statement and Procedures for Screening and Assessing Risks :
   Dates of "in-country" disclosure                                                     September 10, 2013
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                                       September 10, 2013
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the
project decision meeting)

Client’s Environmental and Social Management System
Has the client developed an appropriately detailed ESMS, and does       Yes [ ]       No [X]     N/A [ ]
the client have the technical and organizational capacity to            This is being undertaken
implement it?
Labor and Working Conditions
Does the client have a written human resources policy available to      Yes [ X ]      No []        N/A [ ]
all employees that describes labor and working conditions?              This will be undertaken
Monitoring and Reporting
Has the client agreed to submit an annual Environmental and Social      Yes [ x ]      No [ ]       N/A [ ]
Performance Report to the Bank to report progress on
implementation of its ESMS, and does the Legal Agreement contain
this provision?
 D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                  Name                Date
Task Team Leader:                     Michael Wong        March 24, 2013
Environmental Specialist:           Joseph Akpokodje      March 24, 2013
Social Development Specialist:         Paula Lytle
Additional Environmental and/or       Kenneth Green       March 24, 2013
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Alexandra Bezeredi   September 11, 2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:
  Comments:
