                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6309


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/19/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Nigeria                             Project ID: P123112
Project Name: Irrigation and Water Resources Management Project
Task Team Leader: Shobha Shetty
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 21,      Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2013
2012
Managing Unit: AFTWR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection
sector (50%)
Theme: Water resource management (40%);Rural services and infrastructure
(40%);Other public sector governance (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           400.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              50.00
                                                                        50.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
Improved performance and management of irrigation and water resources infrastructure and
institutions in targeted areas.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
There are three project components as follows:

 Component 1: Irrigation Development and Management

 Sub-component 1.1: Establishment of PPP for performance-based O&M: legal establishment of
viable PPP arrangements for O&M including scheme-level governance arrangements with Water
Users Associations (WUAs) in a leading role, identification and recruitment of technical private
operators specialized in irrigation water management and infrastructure maintenance,
formulation of service agreements with monitorable performance standards for water service
delivery and maintenance of infrastructure functionality, and regulatory arrangements for
oversight of the activities of WUAs and O&M service providers in PPP including periodic
inspections, contract adjustments, and dispute resolution.

  Sub-component 1.2: Improving Irrigation Management: this will support the participatory
planning and implementation of improved procedures for irrigation operation and maintenance.
It will provide training and capacity building for all key stakeholders involved in irrigation
development and management, including RBDAs, private service providers, and WUAs/apex
WUAs to properly handle their respective roles. It will emphasize practical, hands-on activities
to learn by doing in diagnosing performance problems, developing solutions, putting changes in
O&M into practice, monitoring their results and further adapting management based on lessons
learned. The objective of the capacity development will be the application of better O&M
resulting in improved service delivery.

 Sub-component 1.3: Irrigation Infrastructure Investments. The Project will finance the
improvement of existing irrigated schemes including rehabilitation of 11,200 ha and consider an
expansion of existing schemes to the extent of 22,400 ha. The environmental and social impacts
of all expansion of existing schemes will need to be assessed before a final decision can be made
on the extent of improvements/rehabilitation and expansion investments. In particular, mitigation
options and measures to reduce the existing adverse impacts --and those of command area
expansion --on the Hadeija-Nguru Wetlands will merit careful consideration with economic
analyses based on dam operation and irrigation studies. In addition, the project will finance
feasibility studies for rehabilitation and expansion of irrigated areas in for 4-6 other potential
schemes (yet to be identified) with the aim to build a pipeline of viable investments.

 Component 2: Water Resources Management and Dam Operations Improvement

 Sub-component 2.1: Supporting Integrated Water Resource Management. The proposed IWRM
sub-component would be developed with the NIWRMC during project preparation to support
participatory development of viable Catchment Management Plans and, capacity building of
CMOs, Stakeholder Advisory Committees etc. needed for sustainable basin water resources
management institutions as foreseen by the provisions of the forthcoming NIWRMC Act. In
particular, the project will support the large river training works required for atrophied channels
of the Sokoto River below Goronyo Dam just upstream of the Wurno Dam and the Hadejia
River.

 Sub-component 2.2: Dam Operations Improvement and Safety: This component will: (a) ensure
the sustainable operational safety of large dams and ancillary headworks structures in selected
RBDAs via remedial works, dam safety monitoring & assurance programs, adequate O&M
funding, reservoir sedimentation surveys, a dam hydromet & inflow hydrology programme and,
publicly approved and practiced Emergency Action Plans (EAPs) for high spillway discharge &
dambreak contingencies); and (b) support & consolidate the FMWR Dept. of Dams & Reservoirs
and, possibly, set up a National Dam Safety Inspectorate as envisaged by the draft Water
Resources Bill (especially, in light of the 2010 Goronyo Dam failure. in September 2010). This
component could include inter alia, special studies to determine needed dam structural
conditions, potential failure modes & risk analysis; designs and implementation of remedial
works, electro-mechanical repairs and their certification; and TA and operational support for the
FMWR Dam Safety Inspectorate and Dept. of Dams & Reservoirs.

 Component 3. Project Management and M&E: This component would aim to support the
Federal government to implement this project. This will include support for project management,
including fiduciary aspects (procurement, financial management, environmental and social
safeguards), M&E, strategic communications, and documentation. In particular, a strong
monitoring and learning framework will be set up to learn from past and ongoing interventions
for adaptive management all through the process of project planning, implementation, and
evaluation.

  Project Financing: The World Bank and the AFD affirmed their intention to establish a joint-
financing arrangement for the proposed project. The confirmed pipeline amount for the World
Bank is $$400 million while that for AFD is expected to be around $100M for a total of $500
million. While the legal feasibility of such joint financing arrangements will have to be
confirmed during preparation, the two financing partners strongly support the option that would
have the advantage of reduced transaction costs for Nigeria. In order to facilitate the co-financing
arrangements, the two partners will continue to organize joint preparation missions and
synchronize their preparation processes. Additional sources of financing or partnership (such as
GEF, Islamic Development Bank and bilaterals such as JICA) will also be explored during
preparation.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be located in the northern part of Nigeria. The project will focus on gravity
irrigation schemes larger than 500 hectares that require rehabilitation and which will allow
piloting improved scheme O&M performance, initially within 2 (maximum 3) River Basin
Development Authorities, Hadeija-Jama’Are and Sokoto-Rima. The initial list of candidate
schemes under consideration for the first phase include but is not limited to: (i) Kano River
Irrigation Project (KRIP) (ii) Hadeija Valley Irrigation Project (HVIP); (iii) Zobe Irrigation
Project (ZIP); and (iv) Bakalori Irrigation Project (BIP). State-level schemes and schemes in
other RBDAs will be considered for possible inclusion in the project at a later phase.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The borrower has several years experience in applying and implementing World Bank projects.
There are considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance
with World Bank safeguards policies triggered by the proposed project. In Nigeria, the Federal
Ministry of Environment (FMEnv) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental
issues and ensuring compliance with national environmental standards. It has different
departments with field offices in every region of the country. The River Basin Development
Authorities have units with experience in managing land acquisition and relocation for irrigation
development. The project Management Unit will recruit an environmental and social
development specialist that would be responsible and accountable for all safeguard issues. He or
she will be supported by consultants. Further, safeguard specialists in the World Bank team will
provide additional guidance to the TTL and PMU. The project will include a specific
subcomponent to improve dam operations and safety.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS)
   Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
     The project involves the rehabilitation of existing dams and associated irrigation schemes as
well as ancillary facilities. Due to the anticipated potential environmental and social impacts that
may result from the implementation of the above project activities, OP/BP 4.01 is triggered.
While the sites and works for one scheme may be known before appraisal, most of the sites and
schemes will not be known in sufficient details at the time of project preparation. The Borrower
will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that will be
reviewed and approved by the Bank; in addition, for the scheme where the site and works are
known, the Borrower will prepare the Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment/Environmental and Social Management Plan. The ESMF and ESIA/ESMP will be
publicly disclosed countrywide in Nigeria and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                         X
     The rehabilitation and operation of dams and the irrigation schemes could affect downstream
rivers, floodplains, wetlands and other fragile ecological systems thereby triggering OP4.04. The
project may also include interventions in upstream catchments. The ESMF and site specific
ESIAs will contain sections detailing how natural habitat issues would be handled by the project,
including those potentially affecting the Hedejia-Nguru Wetlands and Lake Chad, which are both
RAMSAR sites.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                             X
     Improvement in irrigation operations and maintenance, and expansion of irrigated areas, may
lead to the proliferation of pest and increased use of pesticides, herbicides and other farm inputs.
An integrated pest management (IPM) plan will be prepared and disclosed in Nigeria and World
Bank InfoShop prior appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                              X
     The project will carry out earthworks that may impact on some physical cultural resources.
To mitigate this risk, specific procedures (such as chance find procedures) will be included in the
ESMF and ESIAs/ESMPs as required.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
     World Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12 -involuntary resettlement is triggered because the
government#s procedure for development of new irrigated areas involves the government
acquiring the land, developing canals, roads, and other infrastructure and then reallocating most
or all of the remaining land to farmers. In some cases, rehabilitation works may also require land
acquisition or might require use of government-owned lands that are now being used
(encroached) for farming or other activities. The project may also work in areas where land
concessions are issued by government to private investors. However, the specific dams and
irrigation schemes where the project would intervene will not be known in sufficient details at
the time of project preparation. Therefore, the borrower will prepare Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) that will set out the policies, principles, institutional arrangements, schedules
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No           TBD
and indicative budgets that will take care of anticipated resettlements. These arrangements are
also to ensure that there is a systematic process (as against an hoc one) for the different stages of
the implementation of a framework that assures participation of affected persons, involvement of
relevant institutions and stakeholders, adherence to both World Bank and Government
procedures and requirements, and outline compensation for affected persons. As part of due
diligence the RPF will contain a dedicated section detailing how legacy issues will be handled by
the project if and where they occur. For those schemes where the sites and works are known
during project preparation, Resettlement Action Plans will also be prepared. The RPF (and RAP)
will be sent to the Bank for review and clearance before it is disclosed publicly in country and in
the Bank’s info shop prior to project appraisal. For specific dams and irrigation schemes that will
be eventually selected for rehabilitation during implementation, RAPs or ARAPs and Social
Assessment (SA) would be prepared and disclosed prior to the commencement of civil works as
required.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                           X
     The proposed activities involve rehabilitation of existing large dams and associated irrigation
schemes that depend on these dams for water supply. The client will carry out a detailed
environmental and social and safety audits of these dams prior appraisal. The outcome of the
audit is dam safety and sedimentation reports that would underpin the preparation of dam
specific environment and social management plans, early warning and response systems and
composition of dam safety panel to be put in place by the client.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                      X
     The dams depend on rivers and their tributaries with sources and courses (e.g River Niger,
Sokoto, Rima, Hadeja etc) outside Nigeria. Thus OP/BP 7.50 is triggered. Since Nigeria is a
member of the Niger Basin Authority and Lake Chad Basin Commission, riparian notifications
will be sent to Niger Basin Authority and Lake Chad Basin Commission for onward transmission
to riparian states.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 05/31/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
 Both the ESMF and the RPF (and any ESIA/ESMP and/or RAP) will be prepared and
disclosed by May 2012 prior to appraisal scheduled for September 2012. In addition, riparian
notification will be issued prior to appraisal. Subsequent ESIAs, ESMPs, ARAPs and RAPs
will be prepared and disclosed before the commencement of any civil works. Specifically,
the following safeguards instruments will be prepared:

 Prior to Appraisal:

  i. One detailed site-specific ESIA/ESMP, along with an RPF and ESMF will be prepared
by the client, consulted upon, reviewed by the Bank, and disclosed publicly, in Nigeria and at
the World Bank InfoShop. The Environmental Assessment documents will address impacts
(including cumulative and associated impacts) and mitigation measures and include an
analysis of alternatives.

 ii. Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), social assessment and where applicable, a RAP
to address any land acquisition/involuntary resettlement issues in this project will be prepared
by the client , consulted upon, reviewed by the Bank,and disclosed publicly in Nigeria and at
the InfoShop.

 iii.    Since Nigeria is a member of the Niger Basin Authority and Lake Chad Basin
Commission, riparian notifications will be sent to Niger Basin Authority and Lake Chad
Basin Commission for onward transmission to riparian states.

 iv.      Dam safety audit and the resultant dam safety and sedimentation reports would be
conducted and prepared.

 During Implementation

 (i) Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as and when necessary for the
individual irrigation schemes during project implementation, after locations have been
confirmed, and reviewed and cleared by the Bank. This report will be disclosed and
disseminated according to specifications provided in the Resettlement Policy Framework.
Issues related to resettlement of restriction of access by people will be addressed in the RAP

 (ii)       Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)/ Environmental and
Social Management Plans (ESMPs): will be prepared for individual irrigation schemes in
parallel with the feasibility studies by a team independent to the project design team which
will take into account cumulative impacts. These reports will be disclosed and disseminated
according to specifications provided in the Environmental and Social Management
Framework.

 (iii)     Contractors Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Management Plans
(HSESMPs): In addition, contractors and operators will be required to prepare their own
Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Management Plan (HSESMP), which are based on
   the ESMP for the individual irrigation and the relevant World Bank Group Environmental
   Health and Safety Guidelines.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Ms Shobha Shetty                           06/20/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                   06/20/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala                  06/20/2011
   Comments:
