                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/31/2011                                    Report No.: AC5836
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Nigeria                             Project ID: P121455
Project Name: State Employment and Expenditure for Results Project
Task Team Leader: George Addo Larbi
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2011     Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTPR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: General transportation sector (30%);Sub-national government administration
(25%);Vocational training (20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
(15%);Other social services (10%)
Theme: Improving labor markets (30%);Public expenditure, financial management and
procurement (25%);Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Education for the knowledge
economy (20%);Tax policy and administration (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            200.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]       No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance opportunities for employment
and access to socio-economic services while improving the public expenditure
management systems in the participating states.

3. Project Description
The project has two main components: (A) Employment Opportunities and Access to
Socio-economic Services and (B) Public Financial Management Reforms - under which
selected activities will be implemented to produce outputs that will contribute towards the
achievement of the PDO. The third component is project coordination and
implementation support. Component A will provide grants to support three main
activities: (i) public technical and vocational institutions to provide training and skills
development for the youth ;(ii) engagement of youths by private firms to undertake
labour intensive small public works; and (iii) community driven local development
initiatives.Through Component B (PFM reforms) support will be provided to the
participating states to strengthen the effectiveness of the public expenditure management
system, especially fiscal planning, budget execution and investment planning based on
strategic priorities that define spending behaviour of state governments in the medium
and long term.

 A. Project Components

 Component A: Youth Employment and Access to Socio-economic services
 The objective of this component is to provide support to activities that promote
employment and access to socio-economic services. States have demonstrated
commitment to address youth unemployment by taking their own initiatives and
providing financial support. The project will complement initiatives of states
governments in this area. The component is based on the experiences and approaches that
have been tested and proven to work in other Bank-assisted projects in Nigeria, including
FADAMA and Community Social Development Project (CSDP), Lagos Urban Transport
and LAMATA and Lagos EKO Project. This component will have three sub-components
as follows:

 1.    Youth employment through small public works contracts
 2.    Grants to public technical and vocational training
 centers for youth training
 3.    Grants for community driven development initiatives

 A.1 Youth Employment through small Public Works Contracts

 These grants will support small public works contracts to generate employment in urban
areas for local youths. Following a model that is successfully working in Lagos state, this
activity will generate employment (not limited to militants) through award of small
competitive contracts to the private sector to improve public spaces, reduce
environmental hazards and enhance the efficiency of the existing road space, reduce
vehicle operating cost and improve road safety, in particular pedestrian safety and
maintenance of street lights. Contractors will be required to employ youths from the state
where contracts are being executed.

 Key results will include: (i) increase in the number of youths employed and (ii)
improved quality of urban roads and (iii) clean urban environment.

 A.2. Grants to Public Technical and Vocational Training Centers for Youth:

  The grants aim to increase access and improve the quality of skills acquisition and
development for youth empowerment through existing vocational and technical training
institutions and agriculture training institutions, building on the experience of the Lagos
Eko Secondary Education Project. Apart from the technical and vocational colleges, the
states also have several craft and skill acquisition centers for training of artisans and other
trades and agricultural training institutions (e.g. School to Land). The strategic focus
would be on skills and entrepreneurship development and its relevance to current and
future labor market demands. This will help to address youth unemployment through
vocational and technical skills acquisition to make participants more employable or self-
employed. Areas identified based on studies conducted include, skills and trades related
to the oil and gas industry, and growth areas such as the construction and hospitality and
agro-allied industries. Specifically, these include the following areas of demand and
potential growth in employment: welding and fabrication (particularly pipe fitting and
industrial welding); industrial and underwater diving; marine engineering and small
engine repairs; auto mechanics (including diesel and heavy duty mechanics) # injector
repairs; ship piloting; crane/heavy duty plants operator; instrumentation and control; and
agro-allied manufacturing skills and farming (e.g. fish farming and poultry). Other areas
include fashion design/dress making, hair dressing and the hospitality management. The
project identification mission for SEEFOR also confirmed these areas of demand by the
states and the established industry. Grants to institutions will be used for, inter alia, (i)
instructional materials and other learning inputs; training/re-training opportunities for
teaching staff ; (ii) minor works and the procurement of goods (ICT equipment, S&T
lab equipment; and library books); (iii) support to achieve national accreditation of TVT
courses and (iv) partnership with private sector for job placement and industrial
attachment and (v) development of curriculum in new areas in partnership with the
private sector. Capacity building and technical assistance will also be provided to the
State Ministries of Education and Agriculture who will play a central role in reviewing,
supervising and monitoring the grants program.

 Important results will be (i) Increase access to skills acquisition (ii) improved quality of
skills acquired and employability of graduates (iii) achievement of national accreditation
of selected TVT courses.

  A.3. Grants for Community Driven Development (CDD) Initiatives
  The four states already have CDD type projects either in the form of CSDP and Fadama
III. This sub-component will therefore work with existing institutional arrangements at
the state level to provide additional resources to communities or economic groups for
local development projects. In the case of Delta and Rivers where there is no CSDP, the
relevant government ministry/agency responsible for community development will be
used to oversee implementation with capacity development support provided by the
project. The component will support community driven initiatives/micro projects in
health, education, water, rural roads and rural energy, environment and sanitation, rural
enterprise and livelihood activities, and safety net micro projects, solely executed by the
communities or user groups.

 Component B: Public Financial Management Reforms

 The four selected states are already making some progress in basic public financial
management reforms, though in varying degrees. For example Delta and Rivers states
have passed fiscal responsibility legislation while Rivers and Balyesa states have public
procurement legislation in place but would need technical assistance and guidance in
implementation. Delta state has also made good progress in IFMIS and already has SAP
in place, though will need support in scaling up the system. This component will support
and deepen ongoing reform efforts by the states to develop and modernize their public
financial management systems, processes and institutions with the objective of improving
efficacy and transparency in managing public resources. SEEFOR will support a menu
of PFM reform activities to be selected and implemented by states based on their PFM
reform action plans and progress already made in reforms. Thus not all activities will be
common to all states and will include the following menu which will be elaborated in
Annex 2 and the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The activities to be supported
will include, but not limited to:

  # Strengthened capacity for budget execution and public investment planning and
management, design of pilot sector strategies and monitoring and evaluation unit.
  # Improved accounting, financial reporting, expenditure controls and financial
information systems, as well as audit/oversight and including demand for audit and
financial information.
  # Improvements in personnel and payroll controls;
  # Strengthened public procurement systems and processes, including draft legislation,
and development of regulations and standard bidding documents and public disclosure;
and
  # Improved tax administration (for only Balyesa, Delta and Edo) including tax survey
and registry/data base.

 The component will support the development of social accountability mechanisms in
key areas such as planning, budgeting and public procurement and will involve the public
in the oversight for use of public resources.

 It is important to clarify that there is no direct linkage between components A and B of
the project. In the context of the amnesty program, there is need to demonstrate some
short-term results, hence the youth employment and community driven development sub-
components. PFM challenges will take time to address and may not directly translate into
improved access to services in the short term. However, addressing expenditure
management will provide the foundation for better allocation of resources for priority
areas in the medium to long term. Through the youth employment and access to basic
services component, the project will demonstrate tangible results and aim to influence
government priorities in resource allocation.

 Component C: Project Management, Monitoring and Implementation Support

 C.1 Federal Level Project Coordination: This component will support project
management, coordination, monitoring and implementation support activities at the
federal level. Activities will include capacity building for staff of National Project
Coordination Unit (NPCU) on procurement, financial management and M&E, monitoring
and evaluation activities, cost of mid-term reviews, quality assurance support to states by
the NPCU, cost of external auditing, logistic support to the NPCU and operating costs.
The component will support the NPCU to undertake a limited number of priority and
relevant cross-state studies during project implementation, including M&E and socio-
economic impact of SEEFOR. The NPCU will also establish facilities to enable public
access to information about the project (e.g. project website) and handle project-related
complaints beyond individual participating states.

  Project Management and Coordination at State Level: This component will support
project management, coordination, monitoring and implementation support activities in
the four states. Activities will include capacity building for staff of SPCUs (procurement,
financial management, M&E etc); monitoring and evaluation activities, social and
environmental safeguards, public access to information and complaint handling
mechanisms, the cost of mid-term reviews, logistic support to state coordinating units and
their operating costs.

 Support to the Ministry of Niger Delta Affairs: The MNDA was created to play a
coordinating role for federal government programs in the Niger Delta region. During
project preparation specific request was made to support the MNDA in two areas: (i)
development of a public investment strategy for the Niger Delta Region and (ii)
strengthening the capacity of MNDA in monitoring and evaluation, including training of
the staff. SEEFOR will support the MNDA in design and implementation of these two
activities. It is expected that the MNDA will coordinate with other agencies such as the
NDDC to build synergy and avoid duplication.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will focus on four states: Bayelsa, Edo, Delta and Rivers. In spite of its
economic significance, the proposed project area is ecologically fragile. The project area
is a floodplain of about 20,000 km² including wetlands, creeks and a net work of
drainage. The area can be divided into four ecological zones: coastal barrier islands,
mangrove swamp forests, freshwater swamps, and lowland rainforests. The major
environmental and social problems witnessed in the region are those related to the
petroleum industry activities. The SEEFOR project was developed in close consultation
with the government and other stakeholders to support Youth and Employment Initiative
including training and capacity building in support of an immediate public works
program. This proposed project is expected to have overall positive environmental and
social impacts.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS)
   Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The State Expenditure Effectiveness for Opportunities and Results project is classified as
EA Category B meaning that the project will not be involved in activities that could have
unprecedented adverse environmental and social impacts. However, considering the
activities that would be funded by the project, five World Bank safeguard policies are
triggered by the project: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Natural
Habitats (OP 4.04); (iii) Forests (P 4.36); (iv) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12);
and (v) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09). The required safeguard instruments of
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including an addendum on
Integrated Pest management Plan, and Resettlement Policy framework (RPF) have been
prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in Nigeria and at World Bank InfoShop as
required.

 The project management unit in each of the participating States will have in place a
review process to ensure screening of all sub-projects for their potential environmental
and social impacts. To this end, the sub-project applications will include environmental
screening form showing the estimated impact category of the sub-project. The decision of
the EA category will be based on the environmental and social checklist contained in the
environmental and social management framework. The outcome of the screening and
scoping exercise would be sent to the World Bank for concurrence. After the field
appraisals are done in conjunction with communities, potential impacts will be identified
and a simple or at most a limited environmental review will be conducted. Sub-projects
that cannot develop and implement appropriate and satisfactory mitigation measures or
that will result in unprecedented and cumulative adverse impacts typical of Category A
projects will not be funded by the SEEFOR project.

 The safeguards officer attached to the state PMU will be responsible and accountable
for all environmental and social concerns during project implementation. In addition,
review and clearances of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs),
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans, if applicable
will be handled by State Environmental Protection Agencies before transmittal to the
World Bank for approval. Furthermore, the capacity of safeguards officers charged with
implementing safeguards instruments, and those of community development officers,
State environmental agencies and CSO/NGOs will be built through training and
awareness creation on a range of environmental and social development issues such as
screening, preparation and implementation of site specific EMPs, monitoring and
reporting. Additional guidance and support would be provided by the safeguards experts
in the World Bank team.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term or cumulative adverse impacts were identified in the ESMF, RPF and
IPMP. The potential environmental and social impacts identified in the Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) ,which are minor, site specific and
relatively easy to manage to acceptable levels, are those associated with (i) rehabilitation
and maintenance of existing roads, (ii) community infrastructure and (iii) agricultural
development and commercialization which is expected to lead to increased production
volumes and value added processing and marketing capacity of agribusiness involved in
commodity value chains.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The ESMF and RPF of the SEEFOR project contain sections on #Analysis of
Alternatives# and concluded that the SEEFOR project will not place irreversible adverse
impacts on the bio-physical and social environment. The ESMF and RPF further
emphasize that the #do nothing# scenario would worsen the present situation in the
proposed sectors of the economy.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The State Employment and Expenditure for Results (SEEFOR) project is not expected to
have profound environmental and social impacts. During project preparation the exact
location and potential adverse impacts were not known in sufficient details. The borrower
has therefore prepared the required safeguards instruments of Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) including an addendum on Integrated Pest
management Plan, and Resettlement Policy framework (RPF) have been prepared,
reviewed, approved and are disclosed in Nigeria on April 4, 2011 and at World Bank
InfoShop on April 7, 2011 prior to appraisal. In addition, the borrower has demonstrated
its commitment to mitigating adverse social and environmental impacts in the
implementation of a range of World Bank projects including category A projects. There
are adequate legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with
World Bank safeguards policies triggered by the SEEFOR project. However, compared
with the EIA department of the Federal Ministry of Environment, the capacities of the
participating States in enforcing safeguards compliance are relatively weak. The
SEEFOR project will fund the implementation of ESMF, RPF and IPMP including the
capacity building needs of the federal ministry of environment as identified in the three
documents. The project management unit in each of the participating States will recruit
environmental safeguards specialist to be responsible and accountable for all safeguards
issues. He or she will be supported by consultants to be engaged on needs basis. The
safeguards specialists in the World Bank team will provide additional guidance as
required.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The borrower has prepared and publicly disclosed country-wide in Nigeria and on the
World Bank InfoShop, an Environmental and Social Management Framework,
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Integrated Pest Management Plan. The
preparation of the above safeguards instruments was accompanied by several stakeholder
consultations in the participating States of Bayelsa, Edo, Delta and Rivers State.
Participants in these consultations include: National EIA Department of the Federal
Ministry of Environment, Ministries of environment in the participating states, national
and local civil society groups and potential project beneficiaries and project affected
persons. One of the consensus reached during these consultations was the inclusion of
independent non-state actors such NGOs and CBOs in project monitoring. The
consultation with stakeholders which has already started during project preparation will
continue during project implementation.

 Safeguards Compliance Arrangement among SEEFOR, Fadama III and CSDP:
Component A.3 of the project, focusing on community driven development (CDD), will
be implemented through the existing Bank-assisted CDD projects (FADAMA and CDSP)
in each of the states involved. As such, the funding for this component will be channeled
through the existing institutional arrangements and managed by the already established
FADAMA and CDSP project implementation units in each state- these units will be
responsible for safeguards compliance. In Delta and Rivers states, where there is no
CSDP, the ministry responsible for community development will oversee the
implementation of social aspects of the CDD component and in these cases the SEEFOR
PIU will remain responsible for safeguards compliance and the SEEFOR safeguards
instruments will still apply

 The CDD component will run only for as long as the existing CDD projects are
operating. Given these institutional arrangements, all activities undertaken under CDD
component will be subject to the safeguards procedures and instruments developed under
these existing projects. Thus, the SEEFOR project has triggered the relevant World Bank
safeguard policies triggered by FADAMA III and CDSP triggered OP/BP 4.01
Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, as well as
additional safeguards policies including OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitat, OP/BP 4.09 Pest
Management, OP/BP 4.36 Forests that were triggered by FADAMA given the scope and
the potential environmental and social impacts of the activities under FADAMA which
could be close to or affect critical habitats, require pest management, and/or involve
forests (reforestation activities, for example). The only exception to this equivalency
approach in World Bank policies triggered by the project funding these activities-
SEEFOR- and the projects implementing the CDD activities is the policy on International
Waterways. In this case the policy has not been triggered because the geographical
locations of the different states involved in the project mean that no international
waterways will be affected and that any surface or groundwater extraction, in any, would
come from local sources.

 The current safeguards performance, the safeguards instruments prepared and the
institutional arrangement for their implementation for FADAMA III and CSDP are
presented below.

 Third National Fadama Development Project: To date, the safeguard compliance of
Fadama III has been satisfactory. Since the locations and potential negative localized
impacts of the future subprojects, the Borrower prepared an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), a Pest Management Plan (PMP), and a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) for the purpose of identifying and mitigating potential negative
environmental and social impacts at the subproject planning stage during the life of the
project. The RPF outlines the policies and procedures to be followed in the event that
subprojects require land acquisition. The PMP shows the procedures and steps to be
undertaken to address pest management concerns, including capacity building in
Integrated Pest Management (IPM). The ESMF outlines the environmental and social
screening process for subprojects and proposes capacity building measures, including
cost estimates. The ESMF includes: (i) an Environmental Management Plan; (ii)
Environmental Guidelines for Contractors; and (iii) an environmental and social checklist
for subprojects screening. The three instruments of ESMF, PMP and RPF were disclosed
in-country and at the Info shop on May 4, 2007. The State Fadama Coordination Office
(SFCO) is responsible for the implementation of the ESMF, PMP and RPF. Consultants
are engaged to prepare Resettlement Action Plans and Environmental Management Plans
or Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) as and when necessary. The SFCO has in
place an environmental officer. This specialist is responsible for implementing the
recommendations contained in these safeguards instruments, and he/she is complemented
with short-term national social/environmental safeguards consultants as and when the
need arises.

  Community Social Development Project: The safeguards rating of the Community
Social Development Project has been satisfactory to date. The potential environmental
and social impacts of sub-projects under the CSDP are small-scale and site-specific,
typical of Category B projects. An Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared for the project
and provide mechanisms to identify impacts for which standard mitigation measures to be
applied during the implementation phase. The objective of the ESMF is to establish a
mechanism to determine and estimate the future potential environmental and social
impacts of the activities undertaken under the project, and to define the measures of
mitigation, monitoring and the institutional measures to be undertaken during
implementation o f the project. It is anticipated that project activities are unlikely to relate
to land acquisition or restriction of access to sources of livelihood. However, in the event
that there are resettlement concerns, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
translated to Resettlement Action Plans (RAPsS) as and when the need arises during
project implementation. The CSDP State Agency is responsible for the implementation o
f the ESMF and RPF recommendations. The Agency#s environmental specialist (with
knowledge on social issues) is responsible for implementing the recommendations
contained in these safeguards instruments, and he/she is complemented with short-term
national social/environmental safeguards consultants as and when the need arises. In the
case of Delta and Rivers states, the SEEFOR safeguards officer will be responsible for
implementing the recommendations of the safeguards issues.

 The safeguards instruments for these projects- including detailed ESMF#s, PMP and
RPF#s- have already been prepared and to be publically disclosed as part of project due
diligence, remain valid and would apply to all SEEFOR funded activities that would be
implemented through FADAMA III and CSDP.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/16/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/04/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/04/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/16/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/04/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/05/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/16/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/04/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/07/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        N/A
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr George Addo Larbi                        05/23/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Amos Abu                                 07/19/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Caroline Mary Sage                       07/19/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Joseph Ese Akpokodje                     07/19/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                    08/12/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Anand Rajaram                            08/12/2011
  Comments:
