                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                   Report No.: 63772


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/03/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Nigeria                              Project ID: P095003
Project Name: NG-RURAL ACCESS & MOBILITY PROJECT-Phase 2
Task Team Leader: Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2012        Estimated Board Date: September 18, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTTR                          Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                              Loan
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Decentralization (25%);Administrative
and civil service reform (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           195.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
        FRANCE: French Agency for Development                        120.00
                                                                     120.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
1. The Project’s Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transport conditions and bring
sustained access to the rural population, through rehabilitating and maintaining key rural
transport infrastructure in selected Nigerian states.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
2. Based on the outcome of the identification missions, the proposed project would include the
following three components:

 Component 1 - Upgrading and Rehabilitation of Rural Transport Infrastructure (Total Cost:
US$275 million; IDA: US$175 million; AFD: US$100 million):
 This component will finance the upgrading and/or rehabilitation of state and rural roads as well
as possibly other transport infrastructure (bridges, culverts, fords, river-crossings) in the selected
participating states. The objective is to rehabilitate at least 500 km of roads in at least four states,
so that at least 25 percent of these states’ road network can be in good to fair condition by the end
of the program. This component includes the following two sub-components: Sub-component
1.1 will finance the rehabilitation of all the roads that have been identified at project’s appraisal
stage in the four selected initial states and for which design and safeguards studies have been
produced. This sub-component will also finance road design studies and supervision costs, social
and environmental studies as well as any activities related to ensuring the quality of the proposed
works (eg. technical and/or fiduciary audits). Design studies and supervision activities will be
outsourced to private consulting firms. Road standards will be determined during project
preparation, based on the levels of traffic measured and their projections. The projects aims at
disseminating cost-effective road upgrading solutions, particularly on rural roads which have the
lowest traffic levels (generally less than 50 vehicles per day) but which play a critical role in
accessing remote villages and connecting agricultural plots to markets. Transport infrastructure
will be selected based on the outcome of prioritization studies. Full prioritization studies have
been completed in the states of Enugu and Osun and simplified versions have been drafted in
each of the six geopolitical zones. Civil works will be contracted out to private construction
firms through competitive bidding, following Bank procurement procedures. Sub-component 1.2
will finance the program’s scaling up ie. the rehabilitation of additional roads in the same four
initial states and/or in other states that meet the governance and readiness criteria (eg. financing
of remaining road works and/or additional road works in Kaduna state where the RAMP-1
program is currently operating).

  Component 2 - Road maintenance and local development (Total Cost: US$30 million: IDA:
US$15 million; AFD: US$15 million):
  This component will finance the maintenance of the roads rehabilitated under component 1. The
exact scheme for road maintenance execution will be determined during project preparation, but
it is likely that an approach different from the OPRC contracts experimented under RAMP-1 will
be preferred. Options to be considered include: (i) community-based routine maintenance,
through partnering with one of Nigeria’s successful community development programs (eg.
FADAMA), possibly adapting the micro-enterprise model commonly used in several Latin
America countries (eg. Peru); (ii) 3-years maintenance contracts for a package of 100-200 km of
roads; or (iii) a combined approach, with a private contractor performing mechanized
maintenance and subcontracting labor-intensive maintenance to the communities. Maintenance
contracts will be performance-based with penalties in case of non-compliance with the agreed
standards (eg. number of potholes per km of roads). This component will also finance all related
activities, such as: technical assistance for the conformation of the community-based
organization, external supervision, monitoring of activities and road condition, and technical
audits. Special attention will be granted to the gender dimension, since routine maintenance
contracts could offer employment opportunities to poor women living in the communities aside
from the roads. Routine maintenance is generally highly labor-intensive (about one full-time,
permanent equivalent worker per km of road) and it does not require a qualified labor force. In
addition, in case a potential strategic partnership could be established with an existing
community development program, the possibility of establishing synergies with other rural
development initiatives will be explored. Such synergies could for example include the
construction of small productive infrastructure (markets, bus stations, storage facilities) to
complement the improvement of transport conditions in the areas where the proposed project
would intervene, and seek an increased impact on agricultural productivity and rural poverty.
Such mechanisms - named Local Development Window or Territorial Development Window
and based on Community Driven Development (CDD) principles, have been successfully used in
other rural transport programs. This option will be explored during project preparation with the
understanding the objective is not to create a new CDD mechanism in Nigeria but rather to build
a strategic partnership with an existing program.

  Component 3 - State and federal institutional strengthening, program’s scaling up and
promotion of rural transport policies (Total Cost US$10 million; IDA US$5 million, AFD: US$5
million):
  This component will provide a comprehensive institutional development package at the state
and federal levels to support the implementation of the project, the dissemination of best
practices and sound rural transport policies, as well as to prepare the scaling up of the project.
The component is split in two sub-components. Sub-component 3.1 will finance activities in the
participating states, including: (i) preparation or updating of prioritization studies and GIS-based
road inventories; (ii) operational costs, training and fiduciary support; (iii) road asset
management, including road condition monitoring; (iv) transport regulation; (v) state institutions’
reform; (vi) institutional support and training to local governments; and (vii) stakeholders and
civil society participation, transparency and social inclusion. Sub-component 3.2 will finance
activities at the federal level, including: (i) operational costs, training and fiduciary support,
including project audits; (ii) monitoring of non-participating states and preparatory activities for
program’s scaling up; (iii) dissemination of lessons learnt and best practices; (iv) baseline and
impact evaluation surveys; and (v) development of federal policies for the improvement of rural
transport and its articulation with federal transport policies.

D. Project location (if known)
3. The Program will focus on rural roads in Nigeria. The Program will be focusing on four
states, to be selected based on governance and readiness criteria. Within these initial pilot states,
intervention areas will be selected based on the outcome of prioritization studies. These studies
focus on state and rural roads that serve a critical function in linking agricultural production
areas to markets.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
4. The Program will be implemented by participating State Governments, and coordinated by the
Federal Government. At the Federal level, the Federal PMU in the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development will be responsible for coordinating the Program. It will screen new
participating states, provide technical backstopping during preparation and implementation, and
consolidated project monitoring reports to submit to the Bank. The Federal PMU will also be
responsible for providing targeted technical assistance to the states.

 5. The Federal PMU is currently responsible for coordination the First RAMP, and manages the
PPA resources. As such, it is familiar with Bank’s safeguard requirements and it should play a
key role in providing oversight and coordinating support to state governments.

 6. The State PIUs will implement their respective components. They will be responsible for the
procurement and management of all contracts assigned to them, including all civil works
components and consultancy services. The State PIUs will be new to Bank safeguard policies. As
such, there will be a need to properly assess their capacity and ensure they have the required
staffing before the starting of the proposed road works.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS)
   Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    Road rehabilitation works could trigger site-specific impacts. Potential impacts include noise
by machineries and dust during construction and rehabilitation works. As targeted sites or areas
are not yet defined, an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) will be
prepared as part of the due diligence. This ESMF will be disclosed in country and in the Infoshop
prior to appraisal. For those works that will be known before appraisal, a specific Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
    Nigeria has rich cultural heritage resources and some road works may be located in the area
of influence of some sites. To mitigate this risk, specific procedures (such as chance find
procedures) will be included in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    Interventions could lead to restriction of access to sources of livelihoods. There could be
encroachment to farmlands. To this end, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will have to be
prepared by the borrower. This RPF will be disclosed in country and in the Infoshop prior to
appraisal. For those works that will be known before appraisal, a specific Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) - or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP), as applicable, will be prepared
and disclosed prior to appraisal.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 04/05/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) studies - including an Environmental
   Management Plan (EMP), as well as, whenever needed, Resettlement Action Plans (RAP)
   will be prepared prior to appraisal for all the road works that will be identified during
   preparation. For those road works that will not be known at the time of appraisal but will
   instead be prioritized during implementation, an Environmental and Social Development
   Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared. All these
   safeguards instruments will be financed under the project’s PPA or by the French
   Development Agency’s (AFD) project preparation funds. These instruments will be disclosed
   in-country and in the Infoshop prior to appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge                                    08/01/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       08/02/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Emmanuel A. James                                           08/01/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
