                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/16/2011                                   Report No.: AC5655
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Pacific Islands                         Project ID: P113184
Project Name: Pacific Islands: Regional Connectivity
Task Team Leader: Natasha Beschorner
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 13, 2011           Estimated Board Date: August 23, 2011
Managing Unit: TWICT                             Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                                 Loan
Sector: General information and communications sector (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (25%);Regulation and competition policy (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              17.20
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               6.60
         Asian Development Bank                                           9.70
         Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund              0.50
                                                                         16.80
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Pacific Regional Connectivity Program is to reduce the cost and
increase the availability of international bandwidth for participating countries, and
thereby facilitate the development of a wide range of ICT applications to support social
and economic development in the Pacific region.

  The objectives of the proposed Project (Phase 1-Tonga-Fiji Connectivity Project) are to
improve the enabling environment for telecommunications and ICT in Tonga#including
greater competition and increased access to infrastructure and services by reducing the
costs of international connectivity and strengthening the telecommunications regulatory
framework. Access to the capacity on this new infrastructure will be available on an
open-access basis. Expected sector-specific outcomes are: (a) increased international
connectivity; (b) improved enabling environment; and (c) increased access to ICT
services.
3. Project Description
Phase 1.
 Component 1. Submarine Cable System (US$32.6 million). This will finance the
construction of an 827 km repeatered cable linking Nuku’alofa (Tonga) with Suva (Fiji)
plus a landing station in Tonga. The cost includes cable materials, marine survey and
laying costs, and cable equipment. In Fiji, the cable will be connected to the existing
SCCN landing station in Suva. The Southern Cross Cable connects Fiji with Australia
(Sydney) and the US (Hawaii).

  Component 2. Enabling environment, ($1.0 million) will finance technical assistance
for the Ministry of Information and Communications on (i) telecommunications policy,
legal and regulatory development, and on the legal and regulatory environment for
Internet and e-transactions, and (ii) regulatory capacity building.

 Component 3. Project administration ($0.4 million) will provide administrative support
to Tonga Cable Ltd and to the Ministry of Information and Communications in the areas
of project management, procurement, financial management, communications strategy
and audit.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will involve laying a submarine cable between Tonga and Fiji. At the Fiji
end, the cable will be connected to an already existing landing station. At the Tonga end,
the cable will be connected to a new landing station in Sopu, Nuku’alofa, Tonga. The
land identified as the site for the landing station is owned by the Government of Tonga,
who in 2009, prior to project preparation decided to lease these quarters, and informed
the individuals renting the properties of its intentions, and began auctioning the lease
rights to the lots. On August 4, 2010 the Cabinet approved the lease requested by TCL
(Decision 695). The marine environment between the two locations sustains many
sensitive ecosystems and is home to many fauna but there are no proposed or established
protected areas documented along the oceanic portions of the cable route. In Fiji, the
Suva end of the cable will terminate at an existing landing station # the Southern Cross
Fiji terminal. No new construction is required.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Anil H. Somani (EAPCO)
   Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASTS)
   Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS)
   Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 The project Environmental Impact Assessment is based on the likely/potential route the
marine cable will take between the two landing stations. However, the exact route will
only be chosen during project implementation following the results of the marine survey,
which will also confirm the topography of the sea bed and the locations and formations of
the marine geophysical structures. The current EIA is based on a review of well
researched and authoritative marine environment literature on the area. Following the
marine survey, the final route will be confirmed or revised. Notwithstanding the above,
the current EIA (i) provides guidance on the cable’s likely area of influence, which
extends 0.5km on either side of the cable along its entire length, (ii) confirms the
presence of aquatic habitats with rich and diverse species, hydro thermal vents and
seamounts, which lie in close proximity of the likely cable path and it#s area of potential
influence, (iii) confirms the presence / habitats of many aquatic species, such as turtles,
and the transmigration path of significant Cetacean Species, (iv) confirms that the
potential impacts on these bottom habitats will mostly likely result from the construction
activities involved in laying the cable and that the impacts on the aquatic species will be
mostly from the use of sonar during the marine survey and construction/laying phases.

 Hydro thermal vents and seamounts are high in biological richness, and support an
extremely high rate of endemism in and around them. The vent communities are known
to be fragile and are highly ephemeral in nature and depend on the short lifespan of the
vents themselves. The hostile environment that an active vent presents to a cable dictates
that the cable route would avoid the locations of active vent fields thus avoiding the
impacts on the biological communities. Seamount sites too are known for their rich
biodiversity in the open ocean and the ecological communities they support, attract a
great deal of fishing effort. The topography of such sites make cable laying difficult and
therefore such sites will be avoided by the cable route. Therefore, in compliance with
Natural Habitats OP4.04 the project route selection will not be allowed to impact these
areas. This will be done by confirming in the marine survey phase when the cable route is
being finalized, that the selection of the final cable route will be made in such a way that
the hydro thermal vents and seamounts fall outside the cable#s area of influence /
corridor (i.e. 0.5km radius). This will ensure that any critical natural habitat areas are not
impacted by the cable during construction and operation.

 The land based environmental impacts are local and are considered to be insignificant.

 Overall, the project is anticipated to have positive impacts on communities by
improving telecommunications capacity. The project does not trigger OP 4.10 as there are
no Indigenous Peoples in the project area. In Fiji, the population is dominated by ethnic
Fijians (Polynesians) and Indians. Indian-Fijians were brought by the British to Fiji work
as indentured servants or slaves in the late 19th century. The 2007 census listed Fijians at
approximately 56 percent of the population, Indians at approximately 37 percent, and the
remainder of the population as others (including Chinese and other Pacific Islanders).
Neither ethnic Fijians nor Indian-Fijians identify themselves as Indigenous Peoples.
Tongans are predominantly homogenous (Polynesian). The 2006 Census for the
Kingdom of Tonga showed that over 96 percent of the Tongan population is Tongan
(Polynesian).

  The project triggers OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement due to the following potential
impacts: a) minimal damage to fishing grounds of customary Fijian owners; b) fishermen
in Fiji and Tonga may be affected by the laying of the cable for a short time (in Laucala
Bay and Nukualofa, respectively) c) minimal impacts to inshore fishing in Tonga and Fiji
and d) impacts to oyster aquaculture, managed by the Ministry of Fisheries in Tonga. In
order to address these impacts a Resettlement and Compensation Framework (RCF) has
been prepared which outlines the mechanisms in place to address compensation payments
if needed. A grievance redressal system is being put in place to address any issues that
may arise. No resettlement needs are envisioned. Consultations took place with
potentially affected people in Fiji and Tonga on the RCF in March 2011.

 As described in an earlier section, land has been voluntarily acquired from Government
by TCL to construct a cable landing station in Nukualofa, Tonga. A review of the
acquisition of the land revealed that its acquisition will not result in adverse impacts on
previous users of the land and that there are no known disputes pertaining to this land.
The Suva end of the cable will terminate at an existing landing station of the Southern
Cross Fiji terminal. No new construction is required.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Provided that the final cable route is chosen in a such as way as to avoid these hydro
thermal vents and seamounts, the longer term environmental impacts of this project are
expected to be minimal. However, there is concern that rich sulfur and other mineral
deposits which can be found at sea floor area around these hydrothermal vents may be
targeted by commercial offshore mining to exploit these rich mineral deposits. The
implication for this project from potential future offshore commercial mining in close
proximity to the areas may pose a physical risk to the marine cable.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project will examine potential alternatives in the process of determining the final
cable route so as to avoid the environmental impacts on hydrothermal vents and
seamounts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project will be commissioned and operated by Tonga Cable Ltd (TCL), who will also
be the Implementing Agency. A Project Steering Committee, which includes
representatives of the Ministry of Information and Communications, Public Enterprises,
and prospective private participants has been established and will guide project
preparation until TCL is established and licensed to operate. None of these entities have
worked with the World Bank on safeguards issues before. While this remains a concern,
the Task Team and the Environment Assessment (EA) process have identified capacity
constraints and has designed appropriate measures to ensure satisfactory safeguards
performance by the steering committee and TCL.

 The Project Steering Committee has prepared a comprehensive Environmental Impact
Assessment, based on a set of detailed term of reference that were agreed with the Task
Team. The EIA also contains a detailed Environment Management Plan that proposes
sensible and tangible mitigation and monitoring measures for the Design/Marine Survey,
Laying/Construction and Maintenance phases of the project.

 In addition TCL has prepared a Resettlement and Compensation Framework (RCF)
which will form the basis of mitigation of any social impacts as a result of the project.
TCL will also act as the grievance resolution entity, ensuring that any concerns or claims
are handled expediently both in Fiji and in Tonga.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the people of Tonga who will benefit from improved
Telecommunications and the TCL who will be implementing the project. Other
stakeholders include fishers, and other users of marine resources, in Tonga and Fiji.

 Meaningful and participatory consultations were held in both Tonga and Fiji with
potentially affected people (PAPs) and broader stake holder groups such as NGOs and
civil society members in both countries, during the period between 23-29 July, 2010.
Additional consultations on the RCF took place in both Fiji and Tonga in March 2011.
The consultation process also informed the affected people about the grievance
procedures.
 Among the environmental NGOs communities which supported the project, concerns
were raised about potential impacts from Sonar use on Cetacean species. These concerns
have been specifically addressed by building in strict protocols on the use of sonar
equipment when the Cetacean communities are within the project area.

 The EA/EMP report was publicly disclosed in Fiji and Tonga on September 30,
2010.The updated RAP was disclosed on March 3, 2011 locally and at the Infoshop on
March 23, 2011.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/17/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/30/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/06/2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/16/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/03/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/23/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                   Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Natasha Beschorner                  03/24/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr James Orehmie Monday                03/25/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini   03/25/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan     06/15/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Philippe Dongier                    05/31/2011
  Comments:
