                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6318


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/08/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Pacific Islands                     Project ID: P126745
Project Name: Pacific Aviation Investment Project
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 6,       Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: EASNS                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Aviation (100%)
Theme: Regional integration (35%);Trade facilitation and market access
(35%);Administrative and civil service reform (20%);Infrastructure services for private
sector development (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           37.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
        Financing Gap                                                    4.00
                                                                         4.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed development objective is to (i) improve the safety, security, efficiency,
management and environmental sustainability of airports, and (ii) improve regional
harmonization of aviation safety standards.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Component A: Aviation Infrastructure Investments (US$ 33.2 m incl. cont.): This component
will invest in the aviation infrastructure so international airports are able to meet the ICAO
standards, while preserving and extending the service life of existing airport assets. The specific
activities will vary between participating airports and will include:
 # Rehabilitation of airport pavements: The project will rehabilitate the runways, taxiways and
aprons and TBU and VAV. The TRW and CXI pavement rehabilitations are being financed by
other donors as parallel investments (Bank safeguards apply);
 # Provision of renewable power: Implementation of discrete photovoltaic on-site power
generation that is carbon-neutral during operation at VAV, TRW and CXI;
 # Energy optimization of terminals: Improvements to terminals to reduce electrical
consumption through both passive and technological means;
 # Upgrading of runway lighting: Runway lighting using low power consumption LED fixtures,
reducing the energy demand by 90%, will be installed at TBU, VAV and CXI;
 # Security improvements: Improved access control, building management system, X-ray
equipment for hand baggage, etc. at TBU, VAV, TRW and CXI;
 # Rain water harvesting and improved efficiency: At all airports, facilities to collect and store
rain water from roof areas to reduce the potable water demand and preserve natural water
resources;
 # Navigation Aids: Provision of ADS-B for all airports; PAPI and NDB where needed;
 # Fire safety: Provision of a fire tenders, provision of fire equipment for firemen;
 # Weather monitoring: Automatic Weather Observation Stations for all airports;
 # Road resurfacing: Reseal the road CXI to London; and,
 # Consulting services: (i) Procurement of design and supervision consultant; and, (ii)
Specialists for preparation of technical specifications on aviation equipment.

  Component B: Aviation Sector Reform (US$ 3 m): This component will support sector reform
both regionally, through PASO , and within each participating country:
  # PASO: Assist in restructuring PASO to put it on a sustainable basis. This involves changing
its business model so that it provides more targeted services;
  # Kiribati: Finance technical assistance to the MCTTD including: (i) development of civil
aviation technical regulations and manuals; (ii) preparation and adoption of a Civil Aviation
Master Plan; and, (iii) a short term aviation regulatory specialist to facilitate the necessary
approvals and establishment of an independent KAL and to advise aviation staff in the MCTTD
on adopting and enforcing manuals, etc as they are prepared; and,
  # Tonga: Support to the Civil Aviation Department (CAD) to adopt and implement the new
Civil Aviation Regulations as well as the agreed ICAO corrective action plan.

 Component C: Strengthening Airport Operations and Management Capacity (US$ 2.6 m): An
independent public entity (KAL) will be created for the management and operation of TRW and
CXI airports. KAL will initially engage management expertise and on-site training capacity
through a three-year management contract. The contract will include local staff development and
preparation of a transition plan in the last year of the contract. The component will also finance a
small technical assistance contract to conduct an independent review and implementation support
for KAL#s transition plan.

 Component D: Project Support and Training (US$ 2.2 m): (i) Support to the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU); (ii) PASO support to implementing agencies; (iii) a Project Advisor
to assist governments; and, (iv) a training program for government staff to address needs to
carry-out regulatory oversight, and project support as necessary.

 In Kiribati NZAP and Taiwan, China financed runway rehabilitations will be undertaken at the
same time as the other project investments, and are required to meet the project’s development
objectives, these are considered to be linked projects. The Bank’s safeguard policies will
therefore apply.

D. Project location (if known)
Bonriki and Cassidy airports in Kiribati; Fua#amoto and Vava#u airports in Tonga.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
In Kiribati the borrower has limited capacity for the implementation of the World Bank’s
safeguard policies. The Ministry of Lands and the Environment has some regulatory capacity,
but this is very weak. Should there be compensation claims, the Borrower has exiting
institutional capacity for addressing the issues, with well established procedures. They are able to
identify affected people and pay compensation payments, particularly if done on a small scale.
The GOK has in place a grievance mechanism that allows people to file complaints at the
Magistrates Court and make appeals at the High Court in Tarawa. However, these systems can
be overburdened and slow. The project will work with the Magistrates Courts to ensure that they
can address any grievances related to the project expediently if needed. The GOK has hired an
international consultant who have prepared a draft EMP and RPF. Consultations on these
documents are expected to be completed in May 2011.

 In Tonga the borrower has sufficient capacity on the proposed new project to implement the
Bank’s safeguard policies, particularly from an environment perspective. This is evidenced by
their successful implementation of these policies on the existing Tonga Transport Sector
Consolidation Project (TSCP). An EMP was prepared by an international consultant and public
consultations were held. The EMP was disclosed in-country on February 28, 2011 and at the
Bank’s Infoshop on 3/21/2011.

 During implementation, international supervision consultants will be employed to ensure that
the project is implemented in accordance with the safeguard requirements. The EMPs will form
part of the bidding documents and therefore be binding on the contractor.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Anil H. Somani (EAPCO)
   Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The project will lead to civil works to repair the existing runways, navigation lights and
airport terminals. These works will have only very limited environmental impacts, related with
the specific construction activities themselves and are expected to be fully mitigated. For Tonga
the EMP has been prepared, reviewed by the Bank, and was disclosed. The draft EMP for
Kiribati has been reviewed and is currently under public consultations. The EMPs will be
included as part of the specifications and included in the contract documents.

     The project will also prepare an environmental management framework which will be
applied to future investements on the APL.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes         No           TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
    The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no natural habitats will be
affected.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
    The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no forests will be affected.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
    The project will have no impact on pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
    The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no physical or cultural
resources will be affected. However, the EMPs (which will be part of the bidding documents)
include ’Chance Find Procedures’ which will be triggered in the unlikely event that such
resources are encountered.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
    The people affected by the project in Kiribati and Tonga are from a single cultural group (in
each country). They are not considered by to be Indigenous People according to OP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
    The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no land acquisition is
expected.

     In Tonga, all lands affected by the projects are leased and the government has arrangements
with all land owners which will be effective before project appraisal.

     In Kiribati, the lands are lease at Bonriki, and under government ownership in Kiritimati.
Small vendors in Bonriki airport might be impacted by the project. The project has prepared an
RPF which will be applied in the event that land issues arise, and an abbreviated RAP if land
acquisition is required. Local residents in Bonriki have requested small scale community
developments as a means of compensating them for past concerns over the airport#s operations
and this will be considered under the project. There is an ongoing case in the Magistrates Court
between a landowner and the Government on ownership rights of land where the terminal is at.
Ownership will have to be resolved before financing can proceed in that project component (and
a RAP will be prepared if necessary).

    The project will prepare a resettlement framework document which will apply on future
APL investments.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
   The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so does not involve dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
   The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so does not involve international
waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X
   The project will be undertaken in Kiribati where there are no disputed areas


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/28/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The EMP is completed for Tonga and was disclosed in-country on February 28, 2011 and at
   the InfoShop on 3/21/11. The draft Kiribati EMP and RPF have been submitted to the task
   team for review and are currently under public consultation. The final Kiribati EMP and RPF
   are expected to be submitted to the Bank by the end of May, 2011.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                       Mr Christopher Bennett                                  05/11/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                      06/08/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                         Mr Charles M. Feinstein                                 05/17/2011
      Comments: In later phases of the APL, and as activities expand to new client countries and locations
      (e.g., Tuvalu, Timor-Leste), the applicability of the Safeguards policies will need to be re-assessed.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
