                        JNTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC5336


Date ISDS PreparedlUpdated: 11/04/2012

J. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Pacific Islands                     Project ID: P121878
Project Name: Grid Connected Solar PV Central Station Project
Task Team Leader: Kamlesh Khelawan
GEF Focal Area: Climate change               Global Supplemental ID:
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2012           Estimated Board Date: GEF MSP
Managing Unit: EASNS                         Lending Instrument: GEF MSP grant
Sector: Renewable energy (85%); Small and medium enterprise support (15%)
Theme: Climate change (67%); Small and medium enterprise support (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             1.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWERIRECIPIENT                                            0.00
        Free-standing Co financing Trust Fund                         2.92
        Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies                     0.00
        Sub-borrower(s)                                               0.00
        Financing GaR                                                 0.00
                                                                      3.92


B. Project Objectives
This ISDS is for the Kiribati Grid Connected Solar PV Central Station Project. The project goal
is to contribute to reducing Kiribati's dependence on imported petroleum for power generation in
order to improve energy security and to reduce the GHG emissions from diesel fuel use for grid
electricity supply in Kiribati. The specifie objective of the proposed MSP is to serve as a catalyst
for the substitution of the diesel based electricity generation for the South Tarawa grid by grid-
connected solar PV supply of electricity.
C. Project Description

Project Components:

Investment Component
About 500 kWp (kilowatt peak capacity) of grid solar PV without storage to kick-start a staged
implementation strategy for grid connected solar PV over the medium-term. The initial concept
is that the solar PV array will be installed and managed at a number of suitable locations with
associated inverters to enable gr id in-feed from the locations.

A feasibility study on grid connected solar PYs (the study) on the South Tarawa grid has
identified the potential for up to 900kW ofsolar PYs to be connected to the grid without
requiring enhancements to the grid. The study has identified 5 sites where installations are
technically feasible and where sites are not encumbered by ownership issues. The solar PV
installations will be on government facilities on sites that are owned over leased by the
govemment under long term lease arrangements. The project assets can be relocated without
substantive risk to project outcomes in the unlikely event that any access issues arise on expiry of
government land leases.

Technical assistance
The technical assistance component of the project includes the following:
   a. Detailed design and supervision of investment component - specifications, bid docs,
       supervision of installation, and operational integration & monitoring support; and
   b. Related technical assistance'such as capacity building for PUB, ifrequired for suceessful
       projeet implementation and preparation and supervision of an Environmental
       Management Plan.

D. Project location (if known)
The projeet's physical investments will be located in tive sites in South Tarawa, Kiribati. These
five sites have been chosen based on the fact that they minimize any environment and social
impacts, are on sites and based on their suitability to produce solar power, and are loeated on
faeilities owned and operated by the government; on land owned or leased by the government.

The sites are: (1) Tungaru Central Hospital in Nawerewere (roof-top installations on 9
buildings); (2) Kiribati Institute of Technology KIT in Betio (one roof-top installation); (3) Betio
Sports Complex in Betio (one rooMop installation); (4) Temaiku Primary Sehool in Temaiku
(one roof-top installation); (5) King George V Seeondary School in Bikenibeu (five roof-top
installations). AlI installations are to be on existing roofs, with sorne rooting to be replaced
where the roofs show signs of rust.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The project investments will be buitt, owned and operated by Tarawa Public Utilities Board
(PUB), who has not worked with the World Bank before on any investment projects. Therefore,
PUB has no experience with World Bank Safeguards Policies. However, the safeguards-related
risks of this project are very low and any required capaeity building needs neeessary for the PUB
to successfully manage the safeguards aspects will be done through the TA component of the
project.
In addition, the project will provide personnel to assist with PUB's supervision of the
implementation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), public consultation, and
management of potential grievances due to construction~related nuisances. It is worth mentioning
that there is already existing capacity in some ministries in Kiribati in dealing with World Bank
Safeguards - in particular the Project Management Units set up for the Kiribati Adaptation
Project III (KAP III) and the Kiribati Road Rehabilitation project. If necessary PUB ean work
together with these PMUs in order to increase their capacity to manage any safeguard concerns.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms. Xiaoxin Shi (EAPCO)
   Mrs. Ann MeLean (Consultant)

n. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
    The project if successfully implemented, operated and maintained will have significant
environment benefits mainly derived trom the switch of power generation from a fossil fuel
(diesel) source to a renewable source (solar energy). Also, since the chosen solar power
generation system will not involve storage of power generated, but will instead supply the grid
directly through an inverter, the environmental and public health risks associated with battery
storage and use do not arise. No decommissioning of existing diesel generation plants will be
involved either. The only type ofphysical work is installing solar power generation systems on
top of existing buildings.
    Potential adverse environmental impacts are only anticipated to be present du ring the
construction/installation of the solar power generation systems on the building roofs. However,
such impacts are expected to be minor and site-specifie. They can be easily avoided or
effectively managed thl'ough the use of readily available, simple and cost effective mitigation
measures. Therefore, in compliance with OP4.01, the team proposes to assign an EA Category of
"C" to the project. Furthermore, to ensure the construction-related environmental impacts are
effectively managed, the PUB has prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) as part
of an environmental assessment. The EMP will be included in the civil works contract for use
during construction. It ,contains tangible mitigation measures, institutional responsibilities 'for
their implementation and monitoring, during both construction and operation of the system, and
budget estimation to ensure adequate funding is available to implement the EMP. It also includes
management measures for ensuring the safety at these sites du ring the physical works, especially
at hospitals and schools. As required in the EMP, the implementing agency will also assign a
dedicated officer to address any public concerns or complaints during construction. The costs in
the EMP will be included in the overall cost of the project. The EMP will be cleared and publicly
disclosed, both locally in Tarawa and at the Info shop, before Bank aJmraisal of theproject.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
    The policy is not triggered because the project will not cause adverse impacts on any naturai
habitats at any time du ring construction or operation of the system. No land outside of the
 boundaries of the existing properties is required for the solar power generation systems to be
Safe2uard Policies Tri22ered                                         Yes          No         TBD
installed. No off-site impacts from obtaining materials (e.g., reef aggregates) for leveling or other
construction purpose are expected either.
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                               X
The policy is not triggered'because the project does not involve any activities that would affect
the health/quality of forests, or the rights/welfare of people, who depend on forests for
livelihoods, or the managementlprotection/utilization of natural forests or plantations.
Pest Manaeement (OP 4.09)                                                          X
The policy is not triggered because no use or procurement of pesticides is needed.
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                           X                "

No Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) are present at the potential sites where solar power
systems are to be installed.
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                    X
    Kiribati is a homogenous society - 99 percent of the population consists ofI-Kiribati people
and the remainder of the population consists of recent migrants such as Tuvaluans and
Europeans. The I-Kiribati are organized along family and kin Unes and they speak one language,
I-Kiribati. English is also considered a local language, particularly in government. The
communities living around the currently identified project area are likely to host people who.
have an ancestral attachment to the land (originallandowners) however, these communities will
not have a separate language, separate institutions, nor will they self-identify as indigenous
peoples. Therefore the Indigenous Peoples policy is not triggered bv this proiect.
Involuntafy Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                              X
    Ail selected locations are on Oovernment owned or reclaimed .land. Therefore, no conflicts
with landowners due to modified or additionalland use are expected. Land acquisition will not
be needed for the proiect.
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                        X
Pro.lects on International Waterwavs (OPIBP 7.50)                                  X
Pro.iects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: C

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the QualityEnhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: May 2012.
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: May 2012.
C. 'rime n'11mo lbl'Iuunohlng und (l(lmpluling the 8nfoguard..rolutoo studil311 tllll1lUOY he I1C0d'i~d,
The $pccltlo ~tudi(JS und tho.lr tllnill~1 8h'o~fcl b0 81)~ol11"d in th" PA n ..ldll&O ISOS.
IV. APPROVALS
  SIIl,'.iI~1 illI(l sll~lHllI«t bj1:
  TllSk '(IQ81a Lallder:
  ApJlrii.I!~ÙÜ'J'J                      .
  ~!OIlDt~fi:J:U8rd8 COQ'.'dlôntor:                                                                                                                   7/2012012
   .cO~lIn~i~=
  8octOr.,Mailagei'\
     êtimmôitt&: .




1R~!nJII~l)r: 'l'ho Urulk's nlloOlO$uro PuUoy r«\illr~ 1II,ut.&ulÙ'yullfii.fI1Jllloo dnD\itIl/lnl~ bc di~lJl~ bcfutl' UJ1JlruIHaI (1) /lt t1~ Inlb·
SltofllTlld.(f1) In·couJJ!t.)',1lI JlubJlul)' UIlCCSHlblo·Ioo"'foll~ und itl'idCI1U \U1d IruIHIlUlIO IltIIl. ara QC~lbla 10 Po/MUaIlJ' otrÇClrcd
.~~cm.;.
