                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/04/2012                                   Report No.: AC6623
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P103160                  Original Project Name: Pakistan: Social
                                              Safety Net Technical Assistance Project
Country: Pakistan                             Project ID: P125793
Project Name: Pakistan: Social Safety Net Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Andrea Vermehren
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30,        Estimated Board Date: February 7, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: SASSP                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            150
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                         2,000.00
         UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 95.00
                                                                    2,095.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The original Development Objective (DO) of the SSN TA Project is to ‘enhance the
operation and management of a nationwide, effective and transparent safety net system
for the poor in Pakistan’. To support BISP in these efforts, the SSN TA Project needs to
be restructured to reflect the following modified DO: 'To support the expansion and
strengthen the administration and performance of the country’s safety net with particular
focus on the BISP program as the national safety net platform'.

3. Project Description
The original credit amount for SSN TA is US$60 million. The project was approved on
May 8, 2009 and became effective on August 4, 2009. The project has four main
components that contribute towards the achievement of the DO: 1) Establishment of a
national targeting system (US$34.6 million), 2) Strengthening safety net operations
(US$12.9 million), 3) Enhancing safety program management, accountability and
evaluation (US$10.8 million), and 4) Developing social protection policy and strategy
monitoring (US$1.7 million).

 The proposed AF and restructuring entail the following changes: (i) a change in the
Project name to reflect the expanded and restructured scope of the project; (ii) changes in
the Project Development Objective and the Results Framework; (iii) changes in the
project components, including a revision of the original SSN TA component costs; (iv) a
change of lending instrument from a Technical Assistance Loan (TAL) to a Specific
Investment Loan (SIL) to reflect the expanded scope of the project under the AF,
including the introduction of a results-based financing mechanism (Disbursement Linked
Indicators - DLIs); and (v) an extension of the Closing Date until June 30, 2016 in order
to implement the proposed additional and restructured activities.

 Component 1: Establishment of a National Targeting System and Expanding Coverage
of Basic Safety Net System (Original US$34.6 million + additional IDA Credit of US$46
million and DFID co-financing of US$30 million): This component is renamed from
“Establishment of a National Targeting System? to the above suggested title. The original
Component 1 supported the finalization targeting design and national roll out of the
targeting system. To date, the targeting system has been largely completed. The
component will be restructured to add support for the expanded coverage of BISP’s basic
income support program in accordance with the program’s operational manual. The
additional TA provided for this component will cover additional costs for data processing
an analysis.

  Component 2: Strengthening Safety Net Operations (Original US$12.9 million +
additional IDA Credit of US$81 million and DFID co-financing of US$53 million): The
original Component 2 provided support for BISP to operate the program smoothly and
transparently at the central, provincial and local levels. This supported the development
and the implementation of a communications strategy and grievance redressal for cash
transfers, strengthening of mechanisms for payment and reconciliation, the establishment
of field offices as well as the implementation of monitoring and social accountability
mechanisms. Under the AF, this component will be expanded to build on progress made
to date, and to expand the focus of safety net operations towards the introduction of a
CCT component. BISP intends to provide all beneficiary families with primary school
children ages 6-12 years, a benefit with two components: a base transfer of PRs 1000
(US$12) in continuation of the present income support, and a co-responsibility transfer of
RPs 200 (US$1.80) per month for each child attending primary school, up to a maximum
of PRs 600 for three children in the specified age range. The co-responsibility to receive
the additional transfer is that the primary school aged children of the family must be
enrolled in school and attend regularly.

 Component 3: Enhance Safety Net Program Management, Accountability, and
Evaluation (Original US$10.8 million + additional IDA Credit of US$23 million and
DFID co-financing of US$12 million): This component covered costs associated with
technical support required for the development of the MIS requirements and designing of
MIS module. The component also covered contracting of the services for third party Spot
Checks and Process Evaluation for the targeting, data processing, payment, and case
management systems. It also included analytical and pilot work on program graduation
strategies linked to human development services (now to be taken to scale by Component
2). Most of human resource costs covered under the TA have been financed through this
component. The proposed AF will enhance management and governance of BISP by
ensuring a fully functional MIS down to the local office level that will facilitate local
information sharing with the public. The MIS needs to be significantly expanded to
reflect the CCT cycle including the additional modules and applications for enrollment,
compliance monitoring, payments and grievances. The AF will also support BISP in
taking the pilots of technology based payments to scale for enhanced transparency and
accountability. It will also support the additional surveys needed to measure the impact of
the CCT and the expanded period of CTs, and help to make public the results of the BISP
evaluation for both future policy making and public information on results.

 Component 4: Developing the Social Protection Policy and Strategy Monitoring
(US$1.7 million): No changes envisaged.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Pakistan

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
   Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. As the original project, the proposed AF operation is classified as a category ‘C’
project. The AF does not include any civil works since the BISP program is an income
support program through cash transfers. Hence, the project is not expected to have any
negative environmental effects.
  The potential positive social effects of the project are expected to be significant. This
project design relies heavily on international experience as well as on analytic work
undertaken as part of the impact evaluation of a conditional cash transfer program pilot
implemented by Pakistan Bait-ul-Mal (PBM) (the Child Support Program) as well as
findings from various analytic background papers prepared for the draft social safety net
report under preparation by the World Bank and results of the impact evaluation of a
CCT pilot (the Child Support Program) implemented by Pakistan Bait-ul-Mal (PBM)
under the Ministry of Social Welfare.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The proposed introduction of co-responsibility conditional cash transfers (CCT) for the
BISP beneficiaries is expected to incentivize poor families to send their children to
primary school. Based on the experience of the PBM implemented pilot CCT program,
the female enrollment rates can be expected to increase more than males, although gender
effects of the program would need to be monitored and based on the findings appropriate
design adjustments (such as providing larger cash transfers for the school attendance of
female children) can be considered.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                  Name                              Date
Task Team Leader:                     Ms Andrea Vermehren                                12/02/2011
Environmental Specialist:             Mr Javaid Afzal                                    12/08/2011
Social Development Specialist         Mr Chaohua Zhang                                   12/02/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Mr Sanjay Srivastava                              10/27/2011
  Comments: Cleared with understanding that project will not finance any construction
  activities,continuing ativities under original project that have minimal or no adverse environment
  and social impacts.
Sector Manager:                          Mr Pablo Gottret                                  12/14/2011
  Comments: Cleared.
