                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/24/2012                                    Report No.: AC6422
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                            Project ID: P115893
Project Name: Tarbela Fourth Extension Hydropower Project
Task Team Leader: Masood Ahmad
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 22,       Estimated Board Date: March 8, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: SASDE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (90%);General water, sanitation and flood protection
sector (10%)
Theme: Other economic management (67%);Water resource management (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           440
IDA Amount (US$m.):            400
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                          74.00
         Financing Gap                                                0.00
                                                                     74.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The overall project development objective is to facilitate a sustainable expansion in
Pakistans electricity generation capacity. This would be achieved by installing a 1,410
MW hydropower plant on an existing dam with an already constructed tunnel thus
reducing the high cost and exposure to the many social and environmental challenges
often associated with large dam projects. The Project is a low-risk- high reward
operation aimed at providing about 4,000 GWh annually of least-cost low-carbon
renewable energy.

3. Project Description
Component A: Construction of Power House and Modification to the Tunnel (US$309.6
million). This component will include construction of a power house to house the power
plant, a penstock connecting Tunnel 4 to the power units and construction of raised
intakes.
 Component B: Power Units and Ancillary Equipment (US$431.5 million). This will
include installation of turbines, generators, transformers, ancillary electro-mechanical
equipment and a short transmission line to connect to the grid. Three turbines and
generators, 470 MW each, would be installed.

 Component C: Environmental and Social Action Plan, Dams Monitoring and
Surveillance (US$29 million). This will support implementation of environmental and
social action plans, dam safety monitoring surveillance program, and monitoring and
research on the glaciers in the Upper Indus Basin.

 Component D: Construction Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project
Impact and Social and Environmental Management Plans (US$26.4 million). This will
provide technical assistance to carry out the construction supervision, monitoring and
evaluation of the project progress, quality, impact as well as independent supervision of
the Social and Environmental Management Plans.

 Component E: Project Management Support, Capacity Building of WAPDA, Technical
Assistance and Training (US$34.0 million). This will support WAPDA#s efforts in
project management, and strengthen its capacity to plan, develop and manage the
hydropower infrastructure in the long run.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located at Tarbela dam on the Indus river, and is about 60 kms north-west
of Islamabad. Tarbela dam is also located approximately 7 kms upstream of Ghazi
Barotha run-of-the river hydropower project (GBHPP). Tarbela is the dam with the
largest embankment-volume in the world with original storage capacity at 7.5 MAF.
Tarbela dam was commissioned in 1976 and is the lifeline for Pakistans agriculture and
economy. Tarbela dam has five (5) tunnels and two (2) spillways and the hydropower
units are installed on Tunnels 1 to 3. The proposed project would support installation of
hydropower units on Tunnel number 4. Given that the dam and a large portion of the
infrastructure have already been developed, the proposed project would be adding over
4,000 GWh/year of low-carbon energy generation.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
   Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project would provide significant environmental benefits in the long run by
providing renewable energy without significant and adverse environmental and social
effects/costs normally associated with hydro schemes. However, the project involves
large scale construction both within and outside Tarbela Dam area. The Environmental
Assessment of the project shows that environmental impacts are primarily limited to
design and construction stage, are likely to be temporary and reversible in nature and
would be managed locally.

 From environmental and social perspective, the project area of influence is quite limited.
For the analysis of environmental and social impacts, it has been demarcated as 5 km
upstream, 10 km downstream and 2 km on either side of the river. Borrow areas for
aggregate and sand, and some disposal sites for the construction waste are the only
exception which will be out of the area of influence.

  The environmental assessment of the Project considers environmental issues likely to
arise during the pre-construction, construction and operation phases of the project. Land
acquisition, change in land-use and provision of contractors facilities are some of the
planning and pre-construction stage potential issues. Construction of the original Tarbela
dam project provided all necessary infrastructure required for construction; so no new
land acquisition or permanent change in land-use is expected as these are available in
abundance within the WAPDA-owned compounds at the project site. Possible
interruption in water release and operation of the existing power units, risk of landslides
and collapsing of slopes, loss of some natural vegetation, temporary closure of some of
the roads, and social impacts arising out of non-local labor are some of the significant
potential environmental issues during construction stage. Other potential environmental
issues are, for example: (a) acquiring borrow areas and transporting of construction
material; (b) maintaining permissible noise levels during construction; (c) appropriate air
quality particularly at the batching plants and asphalt plants location; (d) maintenance of
construction machinery and workshops to avoid contamination of air, water and soils.
 Operation of the dam during construction period has been given careful consideration in
the project design and with detailed planning it is ensured that water releases downstream
of the dam can be managed as required without any interruption, flood management can
be carried out, and there would not be any interruption in power generation from existing
plant. Tunnels 1-3 and 5 have sufficient release capacities to meet any water demand
downstream. Floods are managed by releases through the spillways. Both service and
auxiliary spillways are located on the left side of the dam while the construction area is
located on the right side. The connection to the Tunnel 4 and intakes would be planned
and constructed in a manner to avoid interruption in normal operation of the power units.

 HSE aspects during construction including preparation of an emergency plan, and traffic
management plan have been guided by providing environmental code of practices in the
ESA report, while its detailing has been left to the contractors.

  The project will utilize an existing tunnel from Tarbela reservoir. The power plant
construction works will be carried out entirely within a zone owned by the Tarbela Dam
Project, cordoned off from the public with fence and security arrangements. A Social
Impact Assessment has also been carried out. It shows that potential negative impacts are
related mostly to public health and safety issues and disturbances to local communities
during project construction operations, mainly associated with construction-related
traffic. Involuntary resettlement and land acquisition are not expected to be required.
However, as the contractors are to be recruited, and its construction operation plan to be
developed, there might be changes in the design that might require additional land areas
outside the existing fenced-off zone.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The country currently has around 30 days equivalent storage capacity and about one-tenth
of the hydropower generation potential installed at the Indus system. This indicates the
potential for adding more storages in the Indus Basin system and Diamir Basha and Dasu
are amongst the top priority projects on the river Indus. Analysis of cumulative impacts
clearly shows enhanced benefits in terms of reduced sediment load thereby prolonging
the useful life of Tarbela and other dams below, increased storage capacity resulting in
more sustained water supply for agriculture, the back bone of countrys economy, better
flood management, increased low-carbon, environment friendly hydropower generation
and increased climate change resilience. Increased storage upstream on Indus would
result in more regulated flows in the system downstream thereby cultivation in the river
bed based on residual moisture during the dry season may get affected. Furthermore, sea
intrusion and salt contamination of groundwater in the coastal zone may also result in
some small areas, however, these impacts are insignificant in magnitude and are
outweighed by the cumulative benefits resulting from Indus basin development works
upstream.

 Cumulative Impact of Investments in the Indus Basin Water System.
 In the second half of the twentieth century, Pakistan successfully overcame major water
resources challenges and made great achievements, tackling the issues resulting from the
1947 partition of the sub-continent and division of the Indus waters, as well as from
extensive waterlogging and salinity. Today Pakistan has the largest contiguous irrigation
system in the world. However, Pakistan once again faces numerous water-related
challenges. These challenges are increasing water stress, with limited additional water
resources that can be mobilized, coupled with the looming threat of climate change.

  To meet increasing food production demands, Pakistan has been expanding the surface
water supplies to the Indus Basin Irrigation system over time by capturing more water
from the rivers. Post Tarbela canal diversions reached as high as 105 MAF. However
they have declined now due to reduced storage because of sedimentation and several
other factors such as state of the infrastructure and a sequence of dry years. The 2001-
2010 average canal diversions have now been reduced to 94.5 MAF, and the reduction is
primarily in the Rabi(winter October-March) season by about 8.6 MAF. This is because
the diversions are close to full potential supplies of the rivers and declining water storage
capacity in the reservoirs due to siltation directly affected the flows during Rabi for
irrigation. Further increase is only possible with heavy investment in storage dams on the
Indus River, many of which are very controversial. Also, some believe that, apart from a
few years of extraordinary floods, the rivers do not have surplus water to store after
meeting the ecological requirements of the delta region and coastal zone.

 The other source of water Pakistan has tapped is groundwater, which is recharged by the
surface water system. Since the 1980s, the groundwater aquifers have supplied
increasing amount of water for irrigation in areas underlain by the fresh groundwater. In
Punjab, about equal amount of irrigation water comes from the groundwater wells. This
resource is now reaching its limit and further withdrawals are not possible without
serious mining and extraordinary cost of pumping.

  Role of Project in Cumulative Impact. The project would have no impact on the water
releases from Tarbela Dam. As indicated in the sections above the Dam would be
operated in irrigation priority under overall instructions of Indus River System Authority
(IRSA). The water which is currently spilled through the spillway (loses its energy in the
structures downstream) would be diverted to the Tunnel 4 where it would pass through
the three 470 MW turbines and generate electricity which would be transmitted to the
unified common grid. The energy of this water, which is otherwise wasted in the
spillway structure, would now be used for generating clean electricity (about 4,000
Gwhs) without any greenhouse emissions for pollution. So the project helps make better
use of the waters of the Indus Rivers. Any thermal plant, coal, oil or gas if installed
instead of this plant would generate substantial greenhouse gases and pollution. If
upstream dams materialize, the life of the Tarbela would be extended even more.
Downstream, the future is making water use more efficient and timely delivery of water
to maximize crop production. The Tarbela would continue to perform that role in future
by storing water and releasing when it is needed.
  Possible Induced Impact. Analysis of the induced impacts resulting from the project
clearly shows minimal impacts due mainly to the nature and scope of works. Even during
the construction stage, flow regime through Tarbela remains unaffected therefore there
will be no change in the river hydrology and morphology. Some localized impacts, which
will be more of social disturbance nature, arising out of congested roads, localized social
unrest or increased conflicts due to the migrated labor force, spread of congenial diseases
including HIV and AIDS and wide spread shortage of construction material including
steel and cement in the country if the other two projects also get started during the same
time period.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Following project alternatives were carefully considered and reviewed in the project
environmental assessment.

 Without-project Alternative

 The without-project scenario is not acceptable since this will seriously deteriorate the
shortage in power production in the country. With the production of an additional 1,350
MW the T4HP project will substantially contribute in closing the gap between demand
and supply of power in the country.

 Site Selection and Layout of Powerhouse

  Five different sites for a powerhouse have been compared, three upstream of the
irrigation outlet and two downstream. Two options were discarded first: one because of
the long distance from tunnel to powerhouse, that would require a long penstock, which
is expensive and leads to a considerable loss of head; the second one was abandoned
because the penstock would run through very unstable sedimentary rock. After detailed
geological studies from the remaining options the site nearest to the end of the tunnel was
selected (with the shortest penstock) as the most cost effective solution, which also
increases the power generation from the powerhouse.

 Intake Options

 The first option studied was to construct a raised intake above the tunnel with a shaft
connection into the upstream part of the tunnel. The second option was to construct a
raised intake in front of the existing intake. The first option would require a construction
period of four years; the second one of five years. The first option was selected because
the raised intake and shaft could be constructed independently from the continued use of
the lower intake. Power generation during the entire construction period can thus
continue with the exception of a relatively short period when the shaft has to be
connected with the tunnel. Even then both intakes could individually be operated
depending of the water level in the reservoir, making the system much more reliable.
Also the cost of the first option is much lower, since part of the work could be done under
dry conditions and in a shorter time. The study also revealed that it is technically and
economically beneficial to provide Tunnel 3 with a raised intake at the same time.
Constructing a drop shaft in Tunnel 4 could give complications to Tunnel 3 and moreover
the economies of scale apply when modifying both intakes simultaneously. The selected
option with the raised intake cannot be applied in Tunnels 1 and 2.

 Tunnel Connection

  A number of alternatives for the bifurcation have been considered and tested by making
simulations to determine flow dynamics and head losses. Different options studied were:
(i) a 90º T-branch downstream of the control structure; (ii) an asymmetric Wye branch;
(iii) a S-bend and branch arrangement; (iv) an asymmetric Wye branch upstream in the
tunnel; and (v) straight connection to the power house and reconstructing the outlet and
flip bucket on the right side of the power house with capacity to discharge water at the
current capacity of the tunnel. Considering the location, geology and minimizing
excavation of rock outcrop and stabilization measures, head losses for various
arrangements and constructability, the straight connection to the powerhouse (option v
above) is selected is the most suitable for the project. This is least cost and provides
about 4 percent more energy than S-bend arrangements and much more than other
options.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has completed an extensive Environmental and Social Assessment of the
project. The ESA includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The
ESMP includes appropriate mitigation and control measures to address the potentially
negative environmental and social impacts of the project. The ESMP also describes the
institutional arrangements for the implementation of project, and also for environmental
mitigation and monitoring program. The overall responsibility for the implementation of
the project rests with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). Within the PIU there will be
an Environment and Social Unit (ESU) responsible for implementing the ESMP. The
ESU is proposed to consist of a qualified head/environmentalist, an environmental
engineer specializing in HSE aspects, a sociologist and an information/public relations
officer with some support staff. The head of the ESU unit will report directly to the
Project Director PIU.

 Environmental and Social Unit: The task of the ESU will be to support and supervise
the Engineering Consultants responsible for daily supervision of the Construction
operations in environmental management and quality control.

 Construction Supervision Consultants: The Construction Supervision Consultants will
appoint dedicated Environment and Social Supervisor(s) (ESS), to ensure the ESMP
implementation during the project. ESS will supervise the contractor for the ESMP
implementation, particularly the mitigation measures. S/he will also be responsible for
implementing the effects monitoring plan.
 Contractor: The contractor will be required to appoint an adequate number of dedicated
Environment/Social Officers at the site for the implementation of ESMP in the field,
particularly the mitigation measures. The contractor will also be responsible for
communicating with and training of its staff in the environmental/social aspects. The
contractor will develop the Health, Safety, Environment and Social (HSES) Plan, an
Emergency Plan and get it approved by the Supervision Consultants before the
commencement of the physical works on site. The construction contract will have
appropriate clauses to bind the contractor for the above obligations.

 Besides, and beyond the project, WAPDA has an Environment Cell (WAPDA
Environmental Cell - WEC) based in Lahore, which helps it in developing and
supervising the implementation of environmental management Plan. WEC is currently
under-staffed in relation to its assigned responsibilities and would need strengthening to
provide adequate preparation and implementation support on future hydropower
development projects. Resources have also been included in component C of the Project
to adequately strengthen the existing capacities at WEC in Lahore so that technical
support on environmental and social issues could be ensured for Tarbela IV Extension
and future projects.

 For the unlikely possibility of land acquisition or leasing during construction, a Social
Impact Management Framework (SIMF) has been developed to guide future planning
efforts to address such potential adverse impacts and deliver the recommended
community assistance schemes. The SIMF also lays out the requirements for planning
and implementing measures to mitigate such impacts in case such possibilities
materialize. The SIMF describes the consultation efforts and approach, grievance
redressal mechanisms and institutional arrangements for implementing the above.
WAPDA Environmental Social Cell (WEC) will be responsible for implementation of
and compliance with this SIMF under the leadership of the Project Manager. WEC will
be stationed on site and they will recruit necessary social experts for this task.

 The government has committed under this project to address the outstanding
resettlement claims pending at courts from the early Tarbela Dam Project (TDP) and
Ghazi Barotha Hydropower Projects (GBHP). WAPDA has developed a social action
plan (SAP) based on a detailed assessment to facilitate a faster mechanism to reach an
agreement on these claims. The government will establish a commission with two
commissioners assisted by a social mobilization team to prepare the paper work to
withdraw the cases from the concerned courts, with mutual consent of the aggrieved
parties, review and decide on each case in a single hearing. WAPDA will assume the
overall responsibility for the establishment and smooth operation of the commission. The
commissions assignment is expected to be completed within eight months of its
appointment.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
WAPDA held extensive consultations with the project stakeholders during the
development of project ESA and SIMF. These consultations had two rounds, one during
the scoping phase and the second round after the finalization of the recommendations for
ESMP. These consultations were held during August and November 2010, and January
through March 2011 at Ghazi, Topi, Peshawar and Islamabad. On top of it, both the
project and the KP Environmental Protection Agency jointly held a public hearing on 23
June 2011 at the project site where more than 80 people representing general public,
communities living in the immediate vicinity of the project, journalists, NGO
representatives also participated and commented on the proposed project.

 The majority of the stakeholders have appreciated the program of Tarbela 4th Extension
Project and have regarded it as a beneficial project to help in solving the present energy
crises in Pakistan. Local leaders and community members were of the opinion that
WAPDA should address pending issues of Tarbela and Ghazi Barotha projects before the
start of new project. Some of the consulted persons also requested resolution of some of
the problems with the operation of the existing dam, such as access and seepage issues.
The majority of the local people demanded that WAPDA should fix a quota for local
people in employment at Tarbela and Ghazi Barotha projects. Views and many of the
grievances expressed by the stakeholders have been passed on to WAPDA and taken into
consideration in the design of the final EA report, the SIMF and the SAP.

 The Project will build on the fully satisfactory dam safety management system being
operated by WAPDA and provide resources for modernizing the system. A study on
glacier mass balance in the catchment area will contribute to further mitigate the
hydrological risk associated with GLOFs (glacial lake outburst floods).



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    06/24/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                06/23/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 06/28/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    01/24/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                01/24/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 01/24/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      Yes
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        Yes
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Masood Ahmad                              01/18/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Javaid Afzal                              12/27/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Chaohua Zhang                             01/18/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                         01/18/2012
  Comments: cleared.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ming Zhang                                01/18/2012
  Comments: cleared on behalf of Jyoti Shukla.
