                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/06/2011                                   Report No.: AC6350
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                            Project ID: P125584
Project Name: MDTF KP Emergency Roads Recovery Project
Task Team Leader: Zafar Iqbal Raja
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDT                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/Balochistan        8.00
                                                                       8.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable the population along the Project
corridor to benefit from year round improved access and mobility through reconstruction
of priority damaged roads and bridges in the conflict hit areas. The expected outcome is
improved traffic flow resulting in reduced vehicle operating costs and travel time for
beneficiaries using the road. For measurement of the output, length of roads reconstructed
(km) and number of bridges reconstructed/repaired has been identified as the key
indicators.

3. Project Description
The Project is on a Provincial Highway S-3B which is on the right bank of the Swat
River, which is the area of significant war damage caused by the militants. This
Emergency Roads Recovery Project (ERRP) is financing about 10.5 kms from Sharif
Abad to Kanju. The Project aims to rehabilitate priority damaged roads and bridges in the
conflict hit areas of the Swat District of Khyber-Pakhtoonkhwa (KP) province to fully
operational conditions that guarantee 24 hours and 7 days (24/7) access. The project will
be implemented by the Frontier Highways Authority (FHA).

 The Project has the following two components:
 Component 1: Infrastructure Rebuilding (US$ 6.417 million)

  Civil Works (US$ 5.142 million): This sub-component will finance widening and
reconstruction of about 10.5 km of the provincial highway S-3B (including structures)
from Sharif Abad (Km 30+424) to Kanju (Km 40+924) located along the right bank of
River Swat. The civil works involve reconstruction of a 7.3 meter wide asphalt concrete
2-lane single carriageway with 1.0 meter wide paved shoulders. The road section in urban
areas varies from 10 to 12 meters and includes 1.22 meter wide covered drains which will
be 0.50 meter elevated above the finished road level to be used as footpaths. The
pavement comprises of up to 20 cm Sub Base Course, 15 cm Aggregate Base Course, 7
cm Asphaltic Concrete Base Course, and 5 cm Asphaltic Concrete Wearing Course. The
Right of Way (ROW) shall be 15 meter (49.2 feet) from the centre of the road (7.5 meters
or 24.6 feet on each side). The contract spans a construction period of 24-months, and a
post construction defect liability period of 12-months. These works have been be bid as
ad-measured, item rate contracts with provisions for price escalation, on the basis of
designs and bid documents prepared by FHA through consultants. The contract is being
procured under National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procedures.

  Relocation of Utilities, Land Acquisition and Resettlement (US$ 1.275 million): This
sub-component will finance relocation of 220 high tension electricity poles and 130
telephone poles with cables, land acquisition # about 30 kanals and resettlement costs
associated with compensation for removal of 158 permanent structures of small
businesses/shops, 46 houses, 38 boundary walls of commercial buildings, loss of about
1,000 trees and crops on about 55 kanals, transitional period allowance and shifting
charges for 358 vendors and squatters.

 Component 2: Project Management (US$ 0.613 million)

 Contract Administration & Construction Supervision Consultant Services (US$ 0.188
million): This sub-component will finance a professional firm engaged as the #Engineer#
responsible for Contract Administration and Construction Supervision. The firm would
be fully empowered as the #Engineer# in accordance with International Federation of
Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) stipulations.

 Environmental & Social Safeguards Consultant Services (US$ 0.053 million): This sub-
component will also finance costs associated with independent monitoring of
environmental parameters and 3rd Party Validation of implementation of the EMP/RP
activities.

 Incremental Operating Costs (US$ 0.373 million): This sub-component provides support
to cover incremental staff salaries, allowances, per diem, operation and maintenance cost
of office buildings, office equipment, bank charges, advertising expenses, temporary
lodgings and vehicles for the purposes of the Project.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will be implemented in the crisis-affected District Swat of Khyber-
Pakhtoonkhwa Province. Highway S-3B runs parallel to Swat River on its right Bank.
The Project is located in a valley with high mountains, green meadows, and clear lakes.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
   Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
   Ms Samina Mussarat Islam (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Issues

 Restoration of the key road link in the area and the associated increase in long-term
economic activity and the improvement in the standard of life of the people are visualized
as the major positive impacts of the proposed Project. The potentially negative impacts
are mostly related to the construction stage and include soil erosion, air quality
deterioration, improper disposal of spoil, contamination of soil and water, loss of natural
vegetation, damage to wild- and aquatic life, displacement of population, disturbance to
people, disruption of traffic, impacts on the health and safety of general public and
workers, issues related with longitudinal and cross-drainage, and slope stabilization. The
potential impacts during the operation phase of the road include an increase in green
house gasses emissions due mainly to the increased volume of traffic. However, most of
these impacts are not likely to be irreversible, wide-spread, or unprecedented, and can be
addressed with the help of appropriately designed and effectively implemented mitigation
plan. Therefore the proposed project has been classified as Environment Category B, in
accordance with the WB Operational Policy 4.01. No other environmental operational
policy is triggered.
 Social Issues

  A screening study conducted by FHA has revealed that a total of 498 persons will be
directly affected and about 4,900 persons shall be indirectly affected by the Project.
Major potential adverse impacts of the Project are expected from acquisition of about 30
kanals of (mostly productive) land in rural areas to improve road curves, loss of about
1,000 trees and crops on 40 kanals associated with land (30 kanals of land to be acquired
and 10 kanals encroached by the farmers). In urban areas the project will remain within
its existing right of way but structures constructed within the right of way will be
affected. It includes 158 permanent structures of small businesses/shops (123 structures
will be affected partially and 35 significantly). It will also temporarily disrupt businesses
of 358 vendors and squatters. 46 houses will be affected (37 partially and 9 significantly),
38 boundary walls of commercial buildings will be affected (21 partially, 13 significantly
and 4 fully). The due diligence confirmed that any community in the project area does not
fall under the World Bank definition of indigenous people as in OP 4.10.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Since the proposed project seeks to restore an existing road, no significantly negative
indirect and/or long term impacts are anticipated, other than an increased traffic volume
along the road and the associated impacts such as air quality deterioration, and safety
hazards for the nearby population.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Project alternatives such as alternative route, alignment, and cross-section have been
considered and assessed during the Environmental Assessment(EA). The selected route,
alignment, and the cross-section minimize the environmental and social impacts
associated with the project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project is being processed as an Emergency operation under OP 8.0. The task team
has therefore prepared an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment
Framework (ESSAF), which defines the environmental assessment requirements, the
planning approach and requirements for assessing and mitigating adverse social impacts.
The implementing agency will be responsible for compliance with requirements as set out
in the ESSAF. The ESSAF has been shared with the FHA. It has been disclosed locally
by the FHA on May 17, 2011 and also at the InfoShop.

 In pursuance of the ESSAF requirements, a project-specific EA has been undertaken for
the civil works to be carried out under the Project. The EA details the potential positive
and adverse impacts on physical, biological and social resources within the project area
for the planning, design, construction and operation phases. The EA study also looks into
the issues related with longitudinal and cross-drainage, slope stabilization, and traffic
management. Recommendations to offset these effects include sound waste disposal
arrangements, traffic management during road construction, planting trees along the road
to work as carbon sinks, adaptation of phased Euro vehicular exhaust emission standards,
reducing sulphur contents in the petroleum products, and facilitating the Government of
Pakistan (GOP) to implement Pakistan Clean Air Program (PCAP).

 EMP Implementation and Monitoring: EMP shall be made integral part of the civil
works bidding and contract documents and the civil works Contractor will be responsible
for its implementation. The Construction Supervision Consultants will provide a Senior
Environmental Specialist who will: (i) assure that the Contractors comply with all
necessary requirements contained in the EMP; (ii) ensure that the day-to-day construction
activities are carried out in an environmentally sound and sustainable manner; (iii)
develop good practices construction guidelines to assist the Contractors in implementing
the EMP; and (iv) prepare and submit regular environmental progress reports, inter alia
including a breakdown of non-compliances and rectification by the contractors and the
monitoring results. In addition, FHA will engage an Independent Environmental
Monitoring Consultants to monitor the following environmental quality parameters at
locations identified in the EMP: (i) ambient air quality; (ii) ground and surface water
quality; and (iii) noise levels. FHA will also engage an independent agency (an academic
institute or an individual consultant) to conduct 3rd party validation of implementation of
the EMP activities.

  A Social Assessment (SA) is being undertaken. SA will provide a detailed inventory
survey of project impacts and a census survey of the project affected household and a
social economic survey of affected population. During the SA, extensive consultations
will also be carried out with affected persons/communities and other stakeholders to take
their views over the Project impacts, discuss resettlement options and formulate
compensation entitlement, relocation and rehabilitation policy for the project, and
integrate their concerns and recommendations in the highway construction. A
Resettlement Plan (RP) shall be developed for the Project following the Pakistan Land
Acquisition Act (1894) and the World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, in the
light of broader principles laid down in ESSAF. However, no land acquisition under the
Project shall be carried out pursuant to the emergency provisions (Section 17) of the Land
Acquisition Act. The RP shall take into account feedback from the consultations with the
affected communities and other stakeholders. It will provide inventory of affected assets
and their ownership status, project entitlement policy, the resettlement and rehabilitation
program, mechanisms for timely disclosure of information to the affected person and
other stakeholders, regular and meaningful consultations with affected persons and
general public, their effective participation, and grievance redress. It shall also provide
detail of institutional arrangements, cost estimates, implementation schedule, and internal
and external monitoring mechanisms.

 RP Implementation and Monitoring: The Deputy Director (North), FHA will be overall
responsible for the implementation of all RP development tasks and cross-agency
coordination, and shall be tasked with day-to-day RP related activities. The Deputy
Director (North), FHA shall be assisted by an Assistant Director (Resettlement), FHA. A
Land Acquisition Collector (LAC) shall acquire land. The Project Director (ERRP) shall
ensure that all relevant agencies involved in the implementation of RAP are fully
informed of RP and the World Bank Policy requirements. A Grievance Redressal
Mechanism will be followed and a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) will be created
and established at contract site, which will look into all the grievance cases. The GRC
will comprise: (a) Deputy Director (North), FHA; (b) Assistant Director (Resettlement),
FHA; (c) Resident Engineer of Construction Supervision Consultant; (d) LAC; and (e)
two representatives of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The main objective of the
grievance redressal mechanism shall be to investigate charges of irregularities and
complaints received from the affectees and provide an early, transparent and fair
resolution. The Assistant Director (Resettlement) will maintain a community complaints-
management register to record grievances brought forward by affected communities, and
ensure that these are appropriately addressed. The complaint register will provide for: the
date and particulars of the complaint; description of the grievance; follow-up action
required; name of person responsible for implementing the action; and a target date for
redressal. The Project Director (ERRP) and the Deputy Director (North), FHA will
periodically monitor the system and ensure its efficacy. In addition, to further strengthen
the RP implementation and monitoring arrangements, the Contract Administration and
Construction Supervision Consultants will provide a Senior Social Safeguards Specialist
to review the status of the RP implementation in the light of the targets, budget and
duration that has been laid down in the RP. The key tasks during monitoring will include:
(i) review and verify internal monitoring reports prepared by FHA field office; (ii)
identification and selection of impact indicators; (iii) impact assessment through formal
and informal surveys with the PAPs; (iv) consultation with PAPs and Officials of FHA
for preparing review report; and (v) assess the resettlement efficiency, effectiveness,
impact and sustainability, drawing lessons for future resettlement policy formulation and
planning. Monitoring will also pay close attention to the status of project affected
vulnerable groups such as female-headed households, disabled affected persons and
economically backwards families (i.e. below poverty line). The following will be the
basis for indicators in monitoring and evaluation of the Project: (i) mechanism used for
disclosure of information, consultation and participation of Project Affected Persons; (ii)
socioeconomic conditions of the PAPs in the post-resettlement/ rehabilitation period; (iii)
communications and reactions from PAPs on entitlements, compensation; (iv) changes in
housing/business restoration and income levels; (v) grievance procedures; its recording,
reporting and processing time and its redressal; (vi) disbursement of compensation; and
(vii) mechanisms for internal and external monitoring; (viii) institutional arrangements;
and (ix) level of satisfaction of PAPs in the post resettlement period. The consultants will
carry out a final evaluation report at the end of the Project. Lastly, FHA will engage an
independent agency (an NGO, an academic institute or an individual consultant) to
conduct 3rd party validation of implementation of the RP activities.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the EA, extensive consultations have been carried out with local communities
over the Project impacts, compensation entitlement policies as well as their concerns and
recommendations for the highway construction. The feedback from the consultations has
been taken into consideration in the development of the entitlement policy and the
resettlement planning. During the SIA, extensive consultations will be carried out with
local communities to take their views over the Project impacts, discuss resettlement
options and relocation and rehabilitation policy for the project and resettlement planning,
as well as their concerns and recommendations for the highway construction. Public
consultations will continue through the detailed planning and implementation process. A
Grievance Redressal Committee (GRC) will be created and established at the Project site,
which will look into all the grievance cases. The main objective of the grievance
redressal mechanism shall be to investigate charges of irregularities and complaints
received from the affectees and provide an early, transparent and fair resolution. The
Project will maintain a community complaint-management register to record grievances
brought forward by affected communities and record the resolution process to ensure that
these are appropriately and timely addressed.

 In addition to the Bank’s internal procedures of safeguard documents disclosure, the
draft EA/EP and SA/RP will be disclosed by the FHA on its website. It will be shared
with the stakeholders including the Revenue Department, local Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs), Community Support Organizations (CSOs) and Project Affected
Persons (PAPs) through their representatives and location specific meetings. After the
approval of EA/EMP and SA/RP by the Bank, the FHA shall again disclose these
documents on its website, translate into Urdu/Pashto and share a copy of it with Affected
Persons Committees. A summary of RP will be shared with each affected Household
(HH) through registered mail in the form of a pamphlet in local language. Final RP will
also be shared with other government agencies involved in the resettlement especially the
Revenue Department and local NGOs/CSOs. Following the Land Acquisition Act, FHA
will ensure that the Revenue Department will carry out a step-by-step procedure of
information disclosure and consultation with the affected persons losing land, as per
provisions in the law.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12/31/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/17/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  01/10/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12/31/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/17/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  01/10/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Zafar Iqbal Raja       05/24/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Javaid Afzal           05/24/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Chaohua Zhang          05/24/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava      05/24/2011
  Comments: Cleared.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Michel Audige          05/24/2011
  Comments: Cleared.
