                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/10/2011                                    Report No.: AC6281
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                            Project ID: P126426
Project Name: Pakistan: Revitalizing Health Services in KP
Task Team Leader: Tayyeb Masud
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2011      Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2011
Managing Unit: SASHN                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (70%);Population and reproductive health
(20%);Nutrition and food security (10%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    54.00
         MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/Balochistan 16.00
                                                                     70.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the availability, accessibility
and delivery of primary and secondary healthcare services at the district level.

3. Project Description
The project will be implemented in six crises (militancy & floods) affected districts of KP
for a period of three years. The Project has three major components:

 Component 1: (US$ 11.0m) Revitalizing health care services. The Primary Health Care
Centers will be reorganized into hubs and support will be provided to enable delivery of a
comprehensive package of health care services. From the first year management of all the
facilities in the hubs will be outsourced to a private firm/non government organization,
through a competitive process. The selected firm/organization will be responsible for a
comprehensive package of care to the communities through application of the hub
approach. The secondary (District Head Quarter) hospitals in the project districts will be
improved to enable optimal functioning as referral level hospitals. Support to the DHQ
Hospital in District will also be part of the management contract. In the first year
management of DHQ Hospital Buner will be contracted out and based on evaluation
other DHQ may follow.

  Component 2: (US$1.0m) Rehabilitation of Health Infrastructure in the Districts. The
health facilities damaged during the crisis will be rehabilitated to enable service delivery;
The total number of health facilities damaged in these districts is 34, only existing
infrastructure will be rehabilitated, no new construction will be undertaken. The list of
facilities will be finalized based on the resources available in the Annual Development
Plan, which will take up some of the reconstruction and leftover facilities shall be
financed through this grant.

 Component 3: (US$ 4.0m) Establish and operationalise a robust monitoring and
evaluation system at district and provincial level. The component will support
operationalizing monitoring and evaluation system to guide project implementation at
district level and disseminate results. It will also support operationalization of District
Health Information System (DHIS) and periodic third party evaluation of the project in
the selected districts including, baseline and endline surveys to assess achievement of
results.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented in six crises affected districts of KP for a period of three
years. The project area consists mainly of rugged terrain, barren mountains and sparsely
populated urban areas. Some localized forestlands and pastures are the main
environmental assets in the project area. However, the health facilities to be rehabilitated
as part of the project are located within the developed urban areas and rural communities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
   Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
a)      The construction/repair activities for rehabilitation of the health infrastructure
proposed under the component 2 of the project may potentially cause negative
environmental impacts, such as soil erosion, water and soil contamination, air quality
deterioration, and safety hazards for workers and surrounding population. However,
none of these impacts are likely to be irreversible, wide-spread, or unprecedented, and
can be addressed with the help of appropriately designed and effectively implemented
mitigation plan.
 b)     There will be no negative impact of this project in terms of land acquisition,
involuntary resettlement or indigenous people. Therefore, social safeguard policies will
not trigger.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
a)       No indirect or long term negative impacts are expected associated with the
proposed interventions, other than those related to the disposal of medical wastes from
the health facilities.
 b)      Majority of the future development activities in the project area will result in
enhancement of environmental assets in the project area. Since majority of such
initiatives are led by the Government and Development Partners donor-driven therefore
adequate environmental safeguards are ought to be built into them to minimize
environmental damages.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
a)      The only other alternative is #no-project# option , which could have detrimental
effects by denying basic health facilities to the local population. In addition the
revitalization of services is linked with enhancing confidence of the local populace in the
State and will contribute towards peace building efforts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
a)      The project is being processed as an Emergency operation under OP 8.0. The task
team has therefore prepared an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment
Framework (ESSAF), which defines the environmental assessment requirements, the
planning approach and requirements for assessing and mitigating adverse social impacts.
The implementing agency will be responsible for compliance with requirements as set out
in the ESSAF.

 b)      In pursuance of the ESSAF requirements, the GoKP plans to prepare a project-
specific Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will include
appropriate mitigation measures to address the potentially negative impacts of the project
activities. The GoKP will appoint/designate an environmental focal person within its
Department of Health, who will be responsible to ensure effective implementation of the
ESMP, as well as effective implementation of the Government-prepared standard
operating procedures (SOPs) for safe handling and disposal of medical waste. In
addition, the project will commission third party validation on an annual basis to evaluate
the performance of ESMP, as well as the effective implementation of environmental
aspects particularly SOPs for safe medical waste disposal under Components 1 and 3.
  c)    Currently, the institutional capacity with the DoH to handle environmental aspects
is weak, therefore, the ESMP will include capacity building measures to address this
deficiency.

 d)    The project will also ensure compliance with the Government-prepared Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) on disposal of medical wastes. The provincial governments
have already issued SOPs for the disposal of medical waste though there are
implementation issues with them. The effective implementation of and adherence to
these SOPs will be monitored through the project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
a)      Users of the health services facilities, workers/officials of the health department,
civil society organizations in the area particularly those working in the health sector are
some of the key stakeholders. The Bank has prepared an ESSAF to advise and guide the
various projects entities on environmental and social impact assessment requirements to
be prepared under MDTF as emergency operations and copies have already been
provided to the borrowers/clients. ESSAF has been disclosed both locally as well as at
the InfoShop.

 b)     The project-specific ESMP will also be disclosed locally and copies will also be
sent to Infoshop for its disclosure. Despite the fact that the project is a low-risk category
B project, the client intends to undertake public consultations to assess the perceived
environmental and social risks associated with the project and to suggest and recommend
grievance redressal mechanism.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  No
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/30/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/28/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/31/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The Bank prepared ESSAF has already been disclosed locally as well as at InfoShop. The
client is preparing ESMP, and will send it to the Bank for its review, clearance and
implementation before the project goes into implementation stage as a condition for
disbursment


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name               Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Tayyeb Masud                     06/20/2011
Environmental Specialist:            Mr Javaid Afzal                     06/20/2011
Social Development Specialist        Mr Chaohua Zhang                    06/21/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                 08/09/2011
  Comments: cleared. Please see email of 07/18/2011 for details.
Sector Manager:                     Ms Julie McLaughlin                  07/08/2011
  Comments: Cleared
