                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/12/2013                               Report No.:     80666
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                             Project ID: P143661
Project Name: Competitive Industries Project for Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Task Team Leader: Gabi George Afram
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 24,         Estimated Board Date: August 9, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: SASFP                          Lending Instrument:
Sector: Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (40%);Other Mining and Extractive
Industries (40%);Public administration- Industry and trade (10%);General finance sector
(10%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (65%);Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprise support (25%);Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction
(10%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/Balochistan         9.00
                                                                        9.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed development objective of this project is to improve the competitiveness of
the marble and food processing sectors in KP by providing shared infrastructure and
relevant skills along the marble sector value chain and by addressing knowledge and
coordination gaps along the food processing sector value chain.

3. Project Description
This intervention aims to increase the competitiveness of the marble and food processing
sectors' value chains through : i) investment in shared infrastructure for the marble sector;
(ii) addressing the information gaps and enhancing coordination in the food processing
sector; and; iii) strengthening the capacity of the relevant line departments and
implementing agencies.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be located in conflict affected areas of KP province of Pakistan. Forestry,
mining and agriculture are the primary occupations in the province. The project
infrastructure will be located in urban areas or demarcated industrial zones. The terrain in
the province is mountainous with large swaths of pristine land. This may require careful
consideration of safety aspects during construction phase as well as ensuring avoidance
of any unnecessary disturbance to flora and fauna in project vicinity.
 Stakeholder engagement, communication and grievance reporting regimes would have
to be additionally sensitive to the social profile of the area and effort would be needed to
bring the stakeholders on board in terms of compliance with the environmental mitigation
measures. Extensive capacity building may be needed both with the project proponent
and among the stakeholders in order to ensure compliance with safeguard requirements.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Salma Omar (SASDS)
   Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
   Ms Samina Mussarat Islam (SASDS)
   Mr Fouad Muhammad Khan (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental: The project activities with potential environmental impacts could be (i)
siting of common facility center and machinery pool (ii) construction and operation of
Common Facility and Training Center (CFCT) and machinery pool and (iii) marble
mining activities. Brief account of the key environmental and social issues from each
component activity is given below.

 (i)Siting Related Impacts Assessment:
 The proposed sites for construction of CFTC and machinery pool is located in the
designated area of marble city in Risalpur. PASDEC provided the piece of land for
establishment of CFTC and machinery pool to be upgraded under the CIPK project. An
MoU would be signed between Government of KP and PASDEC for this purpose.
Original land title deeds confirmed that land is owned by PASDEC and pictures of the
sites showed that the site is clear from any potential resettlement impacts. Hence no
resettlement or compensation issues are envisaged.
 The main site related environmental issues identified in the impacts assessment are
encroachment into industrial area, increase pressure on utilities and slight additions to the
dust and water pollution in the area due to siting.

 (ii) Construction and Operation of CFTC and Machinery Pool:
 Environmental and social impacts likely to result from the construction and operational
stage of CFTC and machinery pool are soil and water contamination, air and dust
emissions, removal of vegetation, unpleasant noise and health and safety problems.

  (iii) Marble Mining (Quarry and Processing) Activities
  Key environmental and social issues associated with marble mining are; changes in
existing land use pattern, soil and water contamination, air and dust emission, noise
pollution, chemical hazards from explosives, damage to flora and fauna, impact on
landscape, health and safety issues and increase in use of child labor.

  The project impacts however are not expected to be severe or irreversible, and will be
limited in temporal and spatial scope. The impacts have been addressed at the planning
stage through incorporation of appropriate mitigation measures in the project design
through development of an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and
Health and Safety Management Plan (HSMP).

 Social: The project does not involve land acquisition of private land for any
components. Hence OP 4.12 is not triggered. There are also no indigenous people in the
project area. Hence OP 4.10 on Indigenous People is also not triggered.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The environmental and natural resources of KP have been severely stressed due to large
scale migration of Internally Displaced Persons in 2010. However, since their return the
urban, industrial and natural resources of the province are gradually recuperating.
Increased economic activity and revitalization of industry is expected in the province
going forward.

  As far as the project is concerned, potential long term environmental impacts may
include additional greenhouse emissions from the use of modern machinery for mining
and processing marble, solid waste and effluent from marble processing. However, given
the scale of the project, these impacts are expected to be minimal and dissipative and can
largely be mitigated through careful planning.

 The long-term social impacts of the project are likely to be largely beneficial. The
machinery will improve the competitiveness of the marble industry and thus improve
incomes. Training will improve skills and employability. Local communities in the
vicinity of the CFTC and Machinery Pool will benefit from providing related
maintenance needs.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project components have been identified in response to specific community
livelihood recuperation needs following the militancy crisis of 2008 and 2010 floods. The
proposed solutions are rudimentary and the only less intrusive options are the 'no-action'
alternatives. Since potential environmental impacts are largely reversible and moderate
and can be reduced or eliminated through appropriate mitigation measures, and the no
action alternative leaves the community with significant and worsening livelihood
impediments, the no-action option should not be considered a comparable alternative.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental:
 The project is being processed as an Emergency operation under OP 8.0. The task team
has therefore prepared an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment
Framework (ESSAF), which defines the environmental and social assessment
requirements, the planning approach and requirements for assessing and mitigating
adverse social impacts. The implementing agency will be responsible for compliance
with requirements as set out in the ESSAF, where applicable.
 In pursuance of the ESSAF requirements, a project-specific ESMP has been prepared
for the activities to be carried out under the Project. The ESMP includes sections on
project background and impact identification and assessment. Further, the ESMP includes
a Health and Safety Management Plan (HSMP) in accordance with the guidelines on
Environmental Health and Safety developed by the International Finance Corporation for
the mining sector. The ESMP would be approved by the Bank and disclosed according to
Bank disclosure requirements prior to the start of project implementation.

 A brief summary of the key mitigation measures proposed in the ESMP is given below:
 1. Proper treatment of wastewater discharges, provision of septic tanks for sewerage
disposal, control of spills and leakages of oil, reduction in water consumption are some of
the key mitigation options for control of surface and ground water pollution. Depending
on the type of project activity different mitigation measures have been proposed in the
ESMP including, sedimentation tank, filtration method, aeration and coagulation methods
for the treatment of wastewater discharges. Water recycling for cutting, polishing and
washing operation are recommended options for reducing wastewater discharges.
 2. Air pollution control measures include tuning and emission testing of vehicles
exhausts moving to and out of project sites, use of carbon absorption method to control
Volatile Organic hydrocarbon (VOH) emissions, isolation and air tight window storage of
chemicals, use of suction pumps for dust control, mist spray and sprinkling of water and
installation of dusts containment enclosures. Mitigation options proposed for noise
pollution include proper lubrication and maintenance of vehicles and machinery, ban on
use of pressure horns, provision of buffer strip for noise suppression and regular
maintenance of machinery and equipment used in the project construction and operation
phases.
 3. In order to control soil contamination mitigation actions proposed in the ESMP
include segregation of wastes, land-filling for municipal wastes, incineration for
hazardous and contaminated wastes. Besides proper storage of hazardous chemicals,
careful handling and storage of explosive materials are also prescribed in the ESMP to
control contamination of soil. Compensatory tree plantation and vegetative measures
have been recommended to avoid damage to flora and fauna during project
implementation.
 Social:
 4. Health and safety of worker is a major issue of concern in all components activities of
the project, however, this problem is more serious in marble mining activities. Therefore,
a comprehensive health and safety management plan has been proposed which includes
mitigation actions such as provision of personal safety equipment, installation of fire
protection equipment, provision of first aid boxes for minimizing health and safety risk
for workers during project activities.
 5. Appropriate institutional arrangement has been proposed for implementing the
ESMP. The Project Manager, CIPK will be overall responsible for implementation of
mitigation measures and monitoring at the project level. The safeguard officer will ensure
coordination with all stakeholders, removal of bottlenecks, and maintaining a
consolidated database of ESMP progress. Bi-annual progress reports will be prepared and
submitted to the Bank for review.

 The client has previous experience of working with the Bank and its staff, and therefore
has an understanding of the safeguards requirements. It is understood that the client will
hire a safeguards specialist to ensure compliance with the ESSAF and the ESMP.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are marble industries, trainees who will benefit from the CTFC and
local communities residing in the vicinity of CFTC. The local communities have been
consulted during the ESMP formulation. A plan for community outreach, as part of
ESMP, will ensure that local communities are consulted during project implementation.

 A Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) will also be established and housed at the
Project Management Unit (PMU) of Government of KP, to address any complaints by the
general public due to project activities. It will be accessible by all stakeholders and will
allow to address any disagreeable decision, practice or activity arising from the project.

 The safeguards documents will be translated into local language and disclosed locally
and through the infoshop. ESMP will be disclosed to the public through websites of
implementing entities (SMEDA, PASDEC and Government of KP) and the English and
Urdu versions of the executive summary will be distributed to all stakeholders. Hard
copies of the ESMP will be placed in the project offices of all implementing partners and
would be available to public, in line with the World Bank Policy on Access to
Information 2010.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  12/13/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              12/15/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/21/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Note: The above mentioned dates of disclosure are for MDTF ESSAF


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's    Yes
Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Gabi George Afram                         03/28/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Fouad Muhammad Khan                       03/28/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Salma Omar                                03/28/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Zia Al Jalaly                             04/04/2013
  Comments: Cleared. Please follow disclosure procedures
Sector Manager:                     Mr Henry K Bagazonzya                        04/04/2013
  Comments:
