                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/28/2012                                    Report No.: AC6759
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                            Project ID: P128966
Project Name: MDTF FATA Emergency Rural Roads Project
Task Team Leader: Zafar Iqbal Raja
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: October 8, 2012
Managing Unit: SASDT                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (73%);Other social services
(18%);Public administration- Transportation (9%)
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/Balochistan 16.00
                                                                     16.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]       No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
TThe Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase year round access for rural
population in the conflict hit areas covered by the Project. The project aims to improve
connectivity in the Bajaur and Orakzai Agencies of FATA through construction of all
weather rural roads on existing non-motorable earthen tracks. The expected outcome is
an increase in the share of population with all season access and increase in number of
motorized trips taken by beneficiaries living along the rural roads. For measurement of
the output, length of roads constructed (km) has been identified as the key indicator.

3. Project Description
The proposed US$ 16.0 million FATA Emergency Rural Roads Project (FATA ERRP) is
part of overall FATA Sustainable Development Plan 2006–15, which includes a rural
roads program costing US$ 140.0 million. The proposed Project is financing the
construction of priority rural roads infrastructure in the Bajaur and Orakzai Agencies of
FATA. The population in both the agencies is scattered in small villages. Majority of the
villages are connected through fair weather non-motorable earthen tracks, which are 0.5
to 1.5 meter (1.5 to 5.0 feet) wide, with most journeys being on-foot, and entailing
frequent load carriage on the head or back. Poor transport infrastructure and lack of rural

                                                                                           1
access leads to physical isolation that inhibits access to basic services and markets, which
in turn directly contributes to poverty. A community survey in Pakistan shows a strong
correlation between social indicators and access :(a) Education (literacy rate and the
primary net enrolment rate) is very much sensitive to motorable access. Paved access
results in some further improvements in education indicators; (b) Health, in terms of
immunization coverage, infant mortality rate and contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR), is
greatly affected by motorable access – immunization and CPR coverage is nonexistent in
communities without motorable access. The Project will connect about 20 to 25 villages
with each other through all-weather motorable paved rural roads and would increase year
round access to economic opportunities and social services for poor rural population in
Bajaur and Orakzai Agencies. The anticipated results will support Governmental efforts
to help maintain minimal economic activity and improve social and political stability in
FATA.

 Component 1: Infrastructure Building – this consists of civil works comprising:

 a.    Construction of about 50 to 60 km of rural roads, including related structures.
 b.    Associated relocation of utilities, land acquisition and resettlement.

 Component 2: Project Management – this includes support for:

 a.     Detailed engineering design, environmental and social impact assessments and
plans, bid documents, Planning Commission Proforma I (PC-1) consultant services.
 b.     Contract administration and construction supervision consultant services.
 c.     Independent monitoring of environmental parameters and 3rd party validation of
implementation of environmental & social safeguards consultant services.
 d.     Incremental operating costs.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Bajaur and Orakzai agencies in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) are
located in the north-west of Khyber-Pakhtunkhawa province along the Pakistan-
Afghanistan border. These agencies are in the region that presents the challenges of
arduous mountainous terrain with equally difficult access. Majority of people depend on
subsistence agriculture and livestock. According to the 2008-09 population estimates,
over 97% of the population resides in rural areas with 2.7 million hectares under
agricultural use. Rainfall is scanty and limited irrigation infrastructure provides support to
agriculture. In terms of road connectivity, in Bajaur agency, the road network consists of
463 km of black topped roads, 299 km of shingle roads while in Orakzai agency, the road
network consists of 404 km of black topped roads and 353 km of shingle roads.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
   Ms Samina Mussarat Islam (SASDS)




                                                                                            2
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1.      Provision of the key road links in the area and the associated increase in long-term
economic activity resulting in the improvement in the standard of life of the people are
visualized as the major positive impacts of the proposed Project. The project will have
environmental issues related with the road alignment, siting of x-drainage and ultimate
disposal of water collected from side drains besides number of construction related
environmental issues. The project has commissioned an EIA study to identify the
potential impacts and propose their mitigation plan. At this stage, it is however, noted
that none of the potential impacts will be large scale or irreversible in nature.

  2.   An initial screening study, conducted by W&SD, revealed that about 172 acres of
land will be acquired for the improvement of one existing road and for the totally new
alignments of 14 roads. This land belongs to the local tribes of FATA. Potential adverse
impacts of the Project are expected from acquisition of land which is mostly non-
productive. A Social Assessment study has been initiated to comprehensively identify
the adverse potential socio-economic impacts of these roads.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The only other alternative is no project option, which is not even considered as benefits
arising out of the implantation of project outweigh the no-project option. But during the
Social Assessment, all possible options will be explored to minimize the negative impacts
of these roads, it may include changes in the road alignments. Extensive consultations
will be conducted with potential affected persons, communities and other key
stakeholders to discuss different options to minimize adverse social and economic
impacts and maximize benefits of the project roads.

                                                                                          3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Works and Services Department of FATA will be the implementing agency for the
project.

 The Social Assessment will provide a detailed inventory survey of project impacts, a
census of the project affected households and a socio-economic survey of affected
population with a comprehensive analysis of social organization of tribes. During the SA,
extensive consultations are being carried out with affected persons/communities and
other stakeholders to take their views over the Project impacts, discuss alternate road
alignments and resettlement options and formulate compensation entitlement framework,
relocation and rehabilitation policy for the project. The Project requires land acquisition
and the works under civil works contracts will not be initiated unless RAPs and ESMP
are cleared with the Bank. However, there is no custom of 'yaksala' (market price) in
FATA since real estate business is very rare in the tribal belt. The traditional custom is
that land compensation is paid in the shape of a Tribal Commission to the Political
Agents (PAs), which is assessed at 6.25% of the civil works contract cost. SIA will also
provide mechanisms for timely disclosure of information to the affected person and other
stakeholders, regular and meaningful consultations with affected persons and general
public, their effective participation, and grievance redress. The feedback to be given by
the stakeholders will also be integrated in the project road designs and civil works. SIA
shall also provide detail of institutional arrangements, cost estimates, implementation
schedule, and internal and external monitoring mechanisms. A Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP) shall be developed for the Project following the World Bank OP 4.12 on
Involuntary Resettlement, in the light of broader principles laid down in ESSAF and the
local customs. The Pakistan Land Acquisition Act (1894) has not yet been extended to
FATA, therefore, land shall be acquired through the local administrative set up – W&SD
will share the road alignments and right-of-way requirements with the Political Agents of
Bajaur and Orakzai Agencies who will identify the ownership rights. The PAs will
disburse the land compensation to the entitled persons/tribes.

 A Project Management Unit (PMU) has been established at W&SD Headquarters in
Peshawar, headed by the Project Director (FATA ERRP) and supported by a Deputy
Project Director (FATA ERRP) and Finance Manager/Accounts Officer (FATA ERRP).
The PMU will liaise with the representatives of Political Agents of Bajaur and Orakzai
Agencies and shall be responsible for internal/external processing of all approvals
including PC-I, procurement and implementation of civil works, procurement and
management of consultant services. The PMU will be supported by the Field
Implementation Unit (FIU) at W&SD Divisional Offices in Bajaur and Orakzai Agencies.
The FIU shall be headed by the Executive Engineer (XEN) and supported by Sub
Divisional Officer (SDO) and Divisional Accounts Officer (DAO) of Bajaur and Orakzai
Agencies. It shall be responsible for general administration, land acquisition through
Political Agent/Additional Political Agent and/or their representatives, coordination with
other authorities to ensure timely relocation of various utility services, handing over of



                                                                                          4
sites to contractors, field-level oversight of environmental safeguards, management of
social safeguards, and performance monitoring of civil works implementation.

 The Project includes arrangements for: (a) Independent EMP/RP monitoring, (b) 3rd
party validation, and (c) EMP and RP compliance is included in the Supervision
Consultant and Civil Works contracts. In addition, the Bank shall carry out training and
capacity building of all relevant agencies and project staff.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The W&SD of FATA, KP Environmental Protection Agency, indigenous community
organizations, civil society organizations in the project area, other donors operating in
these agencies, the communities and the project affected people as well as project
beneficiaries are some of the key stakeholders.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/21/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/17/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               09/17/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/21/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/17/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               09/17/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:


                                                                                            5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        No
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?




                                                                                       6
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Zafar Iqbal Raja        08/28/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Javaid Afzal            08/28/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Samina Mussarat Islam   08/28/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava       08/30/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Simon David Ellis       08/28/2012
  Comments:




                                                                        7
