                                                                                   81648

                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                  CONCEPT STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/26/2013                                                     Report No.:

 .
1 B aSIC       . tD a t a
        . P ro.1ec
Country: Pakistan                               I ProjectiD: Pl47713
Project Name: MDTF KP Emergency Roads Recovery Project
Task Team Leader: Zafar Iqbal Raja
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 14, 2013      I Estimated Board Date: October 28, 20 13
Managing Unit: SASDT                            J Lending Instrument: MDTF Grant
Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (1 00%)
SPF Amount (US$m):                  0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):                 0.00
PCF Amount (US$ m.):                0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
          Borrower                                                            0.00
          MDTF for Crisis Affected Areas ofKP/FATA/Baluchistan                9.10
                                                                              9.10
Environmental Category: B -Partial Assessment
Repeater[)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP
10.00 (Para 11: Projects in Situations ofUrgentNeed of Assistance or    Yes [X]        No[]
Capacity Constraints)

2. Project Objectives

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable the population along the Project corridor
to benefit from year round improved access and mobility through reconstruction of priority
damaged roads and bridges in the conflict hit areas.

3. Project Description

The Project is on a Provincial Highway S-3B which is on the right bank of the Swat River, which
is the area of significant war damage caused by the militants. This Additional Financing for the
Emergency Roads Recovery Project (ERRP) is financing about 14.1 kms from Shamozai to
Dadahara. The Project aims to rehabilitate priority damaged roads and bridges in the conflict hit
areas of the Swat District of Khyber-Pakhtoonkhwa (KP) province to fully operational conditions
that guarantee 24 hours and 7 days (24/7) access. The expected outcome is improved traffic flow
resulting in reduced vehicle operating costs and travel time for beneficiaries using the road. For
measurement of the output, length of roads reconstructed (km) and number of bridges
reconstructed/repaired has been identified as the key indicators. The project will be implemented
by the Paktunkhwa Highways Authority (PHA).
The Project has the following two components:

Component 1: Infrastructure Rebuilding (US$ 8.60 miJlion)

    a.   Civil Works (US$ 7.67 million) : This sub-component will finance widening and
         reconstruction of about 14.1 km of the provincial highway S-38 (including structures)
         from Shamozai (Km 10+700) to Dadahara (Km 25+424) located along the right bank of
         River Swat. The civil works involve reconstruction of a 7.3 meter wide asphalt concrete
         2-lane singt"e carriageway with 1.0 meter wide paved shoulders. The road section in urban
         areas varies from 10 to 12 meters and includes 1.22 meter wide covered drains which will
         be 0.50 meter elevated above the finished road level to be used as footpaths. The
         pavement comprises of up to 20 em Sub Base Course, 15 em Aggregate Base Course, 7
         em Asphaltic Concrete Base Course, and 5 em Asphaltic Concrete Wearing Course. The
         Right of Way (ROW) shaH be 15 meter (49.2 feet) from the center of the road (7.5 meters
         or 24.6 feet on each side). The contract spans a construction period of 18-months, and a
         post construction defect liability period of 12-months.

    b. Relocation of Uti/iJies, Land Acquisition and Resettlement (US$ 0.63 million): This
       sub-component will finance relocation of high tension electricity and telephone poles
       with cables, land acquisition and resettlement costs associated with compensation for
       removal of permanent structures of small businesses/shops, houses, boundary walls of
       commercial buildings, loss of trees and crops, transitional period allowance and shjfting
       charges for vendors and squatters.

Component 2: P r oject Management (US$ 0.80 million)

    a    Contract Administration & Construction Supervision Consultant Services (US$ 0.20
         million): This sub-component will finance a professional fmn engaged as the Engineer
         responsible for Contract Administration and Construction Supervision. The fmn would
         be fully empowered as the "Engineer" in accordance with International Federation of
         Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) stipulations.

    b. Environmental & Social Safeguards Consultant Services (US$ 0.10 million): This sub-
       component will finance costs associated with independent monitoring of environmental
       parameters and J rd Party Validation of implementation ofthe EMP/RP activities.

    c. Incremental Operating Costs (US$ 0.50 million): Tills sub-component provides support
       to cover costs incurred by the Recipient and the Project Implementing Entity for purposes
       of the implementation, management, and monitoring and evaluation of the Project, on
       account of office supplies and consumables, utilities, bank charges, communications,
       mass media and printing services, vehicle rental, operation, maintenance, and insurance,
       office space rental, building and equipment maintenance, domestic travel, lodging, and
       subsistence allowances, and salaries of contractual and temporary staff, but excluding
       salaries, fees, honoraria, and bonuses of members of the Recipient's civi I service.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics r elevant to the safeg uard a nalysis

The Project will be implemented in the crisis-affected District Swat of Khyber-Pakhtoonkhwa
Province. Highway S-3B runs parallel to Swat River on its right Bank. The Project is located in a
valley with high mountains, green meadows, and clear lakes.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

     Mr. Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
     Mr. Mohammad Omar Khalid (SASDI)
     Ms. Sam ina Mussarat Islam (SASDS)
     Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Trie:e:ered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                             X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                    X
P ro.iects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                        X

6.       Implementation       of      safeguards       during      the      original      project

Environmental Safeguards: The project's institutional setup was in place to ensure compliance
with the EMP and environment focal person was nominated in the PMU as well as with the
contractors. The project implemented the EMP, more specifically, mitigation measures were
generally implemented in the field and environmental monitoring was carried out. Environmental
training was also conducted accord ing to the requirements set forth in the EMP. Further, soil and
water testing was carried out in the project impact zone to monitoring any potential impacts. The
project conducted a biannual third party audit to assess EMP implementation effectiveness and
was found compliant on most parameters. The project also prepared EMP progress reports on a
quarterly        basis        and         sharing        them         with       the        Bank.


Social Safeguards: The Deputy Director (North) was overall responsible for the implementation
of all RP developme nt tasks and cross-agency coordination, and was tasked with day-to-day RP
related activities. The Deputy Director (North) was assisted by an Assistant Director
(Resettlement). A Land Acquisition Collector (LAC) acquired the land. The Project Director
(ERRP) ensured that aU relevant agencies involved in the implementation of RP are fully
informed of RP and the World Bank Policy's requirements. A Grievance Redressal Mechanism
was followed and a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) was created and established.at contract
site, which look into the grievance cases. The GRC was headed by Deputy Director (North) and
comprised of: (a) Assistant Director (Resettlement), (b) Resident Engineer, (c) LAC, and (d) two
representatives of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The main objective of the grievance
redressal mechanism was to investigate charges of irregularities and complaints received from the
affectees and provide an early, transparent and fair resolution. The Assistant Director
(Resettlement) maintained a community complaints-management register to record grievances
brought forward by affected communities. Only one complaint was received which was
adequately addressed.

7.      Lesson learned: The Bank's safeguard team could not visit the site because of the
security concerns and as a result project reports were the sole source of compliance information.
The Bank's safeguard team shall seek to find ways to overcome tills weakness and shall try to
make field visits if the security situation allows.

Il. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Environmental Issues

Restoration of the key road link in the area and the associated increase in long-term economic
activity and the improvement in tbe standard of life of the people are visualized as the major
positive impacts of the proposed Project. The potentially negative impacts are mostly related to
the construction stage and include soi l erosion, air quality deterioration, improper disposal of
spoil, contamination of soil and water, loss of natural vegetation, damage to wild- and aquatic
life, displacement of population, disturbance to people, disruption of traffic, impacts on the health
and safety of general public and workers, issues related with longitudinal and cross-drainage, and
slope stabilization. The potential impacts during the operation phase of the road include an
increase in green house gasses emissions due mainly to the increased volume of traffic. However,
most of these impacts are not likely to be irreversible, wide-spread, or unprecedented, and can be
addressed with the help of appropriately designed and effectively implemented mitigation plan.
Therefore the proposed project bas been classified as Environment Category B, in accordance
with the WB Operational Policy 4.01. No other environmental operational policy is triggered.

Social Issues

A screening study conducted by PHA has revealed that an estimated number of 180 persons will
be directly affected by the Project. Major potential adverse impacts of the Project are expected
from acquisition of about 15 kanals of (mostly productive) land in rural areas to improve road
curves, and loss of about 2,883 wood trees. In urban areas the project will remain within its
existing right of way but structures constructed within the right of way will be affected. It
includes partial damage to 10 houses, 16 permanent structures of small businesses/shops (12 will
be affected partially and 4 significantly). In addition to this, 31 high tension electricity poles with
cables, 37 low tension electricity poles with cables, 16 telephone poles with cables and OFC
cable will need relocation.

The due diligence confirmed that none of the communities in the project area fall under the World
Bank definition of indigenous people as per OP 4.1 0. Estimated duration of land acquisition is 6
months.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

Since the proposed project seeks to restore an existing road, no significant negative indirect
and/or long term impacts are anticipated, other than an increased traffic volume along the road
and the associated impacts such as air quality deterioration, and safety hazards for the nearby
population.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Project involves reconstruction of an existing highway. The route, alignment, and the cross-
section minimize the environmental and social impacts associated with the project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The project is being processed as an Emergency operation. The task team has therefore prepared
an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF), which defines the
environmental assessment requirements, the planning approach and requirements for assessing
and mitigating adverse social impacts. The implementing agency will be responsible for
compliance with requirements as set out in the ESSAF. The ESSAF has been shared with the
PHA. It has been disclosed locally by the PHA on May 17, 2011 and also at the Info Shop.

In pursuance of the ESSAF requirements, a project-specific EA is being undertaken for the civil
works to be carried out under the Project. The EA shall detail the potential positive and adverse
impacts on physical, biological and social resources within the project area for the planning,
design, construction and operation phases. The EA study shall also look into the issues related
with longitudinal and cross-drainage, slope stabilization, and traffic management.
Recommendations to offset these effects shall include sound waste disposal arrangements, traffic
management during road construction, planting trees along the road to work as carbon sinks,
adaptation of phased Euro vehicular exhaust emission standards, reducing sulphur contents in the
petroleum products, and facilitating the Government of Pakistan (GOP) to implement Pakistan
Clean Air Program (PCAP). A similar EA was carried out for the original project and
implemented during the construction phase.

EMP Implementation and Monitoring: Much like the original project, EMP shall be made integral
part of the civil works bidding and contract documents and the civil works Contractor will be
responsible for its implementation . The Construction Supervision Consultants will provide a
Senior Environmental Specialist who will: (i) assure that the Contractors comply with all
necessary requirements contained in the EMP; (ii) ensure that the day-to-day construction
activities are carried out in an environmentally sound and sustainable manner; (iii) develop good
practices constructi.on guidelines to assist the Contractors in implementing the EMP; and (iv)
prepare and submit regular environmental progress reports, inter alia including a breakdown of
non-compliances and rectification by the contractors and the monitoring results. In addition, PHA
will engage an Independent Environmental Monitoring Consultants to monitor the following
environmental qual:ity parameters at locations identified in the EMP: (i) ambient air quality; (ii)
ground and surface water quality; and (iii) noise levels. PHA will also engage an independent
agency (an academic institute or an individual consultant) to conduct 3rd party validation of
implementation of the EMP activities.           Similar arrangements were made during the
implementation of the original project as well.

A Social Impact Assessment (SA) is being undertaken. SA will provide a detailed inventory
survey of project impacts, a census survey of the project affected household and a social
economic survey of a sample affe.cted population. During the SA, extensive consultations will be
carried out with affected persons/communities and other stakeholders to take their views over the
Project impacts, discuss resettlement options and formulate compensation entitlement, relocation
and rehabilitation policy for the project, and integrate their concerns and recommendations in the
highway construction. A Resettlement Plan (RP) shall be developed for the Project following the
Pakistan Land Acquisition Act (1894) and the World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement,
in the light of broader principles laid down in ESSAF. The RP shall take into account feedback
from the consultations with the affected communities and other stakeholders. It will provide
inventory of affected assets and their ownership status, project entitlement policy, the
resettlement and rehabilitation program, mechanisms for timely disclosure of information to the
affected person and other stakeholders, regular and meaningful consultations with affected
persons and general public, their effective participation, and grievance redressal mechanism. It
shall also provide detail of institutional arrangements, cost estimates, implementation schedule,
and internal and external monitoring mechanisms including progress reporting requirements.

RP Implementation and Monitoring: The Deputy Director (North), PHA will be overall
responsible for the RP development and implementation tasks and cross-agency coordination, and
shall be tasked with day-to-day RP related activities. The Deputy Director (North), PHA shaH be
assisted by an Assistant Director (Resettlement), PHA. A Land Acquisition Collector (LAC) shall
acquire land. The Project Director (ERRP) shall ensure that all relevant agencies involved in the
implementation of RP are fully informed of RP and the World Bank Policy requirements. A
Grievance Redressal Mechanism will be followed and a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC)
will be created and established at contract site, which will look into all the grievance cases. The
GRC will comprise: (a) Deputy Director (North), PHA; (b) Assistant Director (Resettlement),
PHA; (c) Resident Engineer of Construction Supervision Consultant; (d) LAC; and (e) two
representatives of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The main objective of the grievance
redressal mechanism shall be to investigate charges of irregularities and complaints received from
the affectees and provide an early, transparent and fair resolution. The Assistant Director
(Resettlement) will maintain a community complaint management register to record grievances
brought forward by affected communities, and ensure that these are appropriately addressed. The
complaint register will provide for: the date and particulars of the complaint; description of the
grievance; follow-up action required; name of person responsible for implementing the action;
and a target date for redressal. The Project Director (ERRP) and the Deputy Director (North),
PHA will periodically monitor the system and ensure its efficacy. In addition, to further
strengthen the RP implementation and monitoring arrangements, the Contract Administration and
Construction Supervision Consultants will provide a Social Safeguards Specialist to review the
status of the RP implementation in the light of the targets, budget and duration that has been laid
down in the RP. The key tasks during monitoring will include: (i) review and verify internal
monitoring reports prepared by PHA field office; (ii) identification and selection of impact
indicators; (iii) impact assessment through formal and infonnal surveys with the PAPs; (iv)
consultation with PAPs and Officials of PHA for preparing review report; and (v) assess the
resettlement efficiency, effectiveness, impact and sustainability, drawing lessons for future
resettlement policy formulation and planning. Monitoring will also pay close attention to the
status of project affected vulnerable groups such as female-headed households, disabled affected
persons and economically deprived families (i.e. below poverty line). The following will be the
basis for indicators in monitoring and evaluation of the Project: (i) mechanism used for disclosure
of information, consultation and participation of Project Affected Persons; (ii) socioeconomic
conditions of the PAPs in the post-resettlement/ rehabilitation period; (iii) communications and
reactions from PAPs on entitlements, compensation; (iv) changes in housing/business restoration
and income levels; (v) grievance procedures; its recording, reporting and processing time and its
redressal; (vi) disbursement of compensation; and (vii) mechanisms for internal and external
monitoring; (viii) institutional arrangements; and (ix) level of satisfaction of PAPs in the post
resettlement period. The consultants will carry out a final evaluation report at the end of the
Project. Lastly, PHA will engage an independent agency (an NGO, an academic institute or an
individual consultant) to conduct 3rd party validation of implementation of the RP activities.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Detailed consultations were carried out while conducting the EA of the original project. During
the EA of the Additional Financing, extensive consultations shall again be carried out with local
communities over the Project impacts, compensation entitlement policies as well as their
concerns and recommendations for the highway constmction. The feedback from the
consultations shall be taken into consideration in the development of the entitlement policy and
the resettlement planning. During the SA, extensive consultations w ill also be carried out with
local communities to take their views over the Project impacts, discuss resettlement options and
relocation and rehabilitation policy for the project and resettlement planning, as well as their
concerns and recommendations for the highway construction. Public consultations will continue
through the detailed planning and implementation process. A Grievance Redressal Committee
(GRC) will be created and established at the Project site, which will look into all the grievance
cases. The main objective of the grievance redressal mechanism shall be to investigate charges of
irregularities and complaints received from the affectees and provide an early, transparent and fair
resolution. The Project will maintain a community complaint-management register to record
grievances brought forward by affected communities and record the resolution process to ensure
that these are appropriately and timely addressed. Similar mechanisms were in place during the
implementation of original project as well.

In addition to the Banks internal procedures of safeguard documents disclosure, the draft
EA/EMP and SA/RP will be disclosed by the PHA on its website. It w ill be shared with the
stakeholders including the Revenue Department, local Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs),
Community Support Organizations (CSOs) and Project Affected Persons (PAPs) through their
representatives and location specific meetings. After the approval of EA/EMP and SA/RP by the
Bank, the PHA shaH again disclose these documents on its website, translate into Urdu/Pashto
and share a copy of it with Affected Persons Committees. A summary of RP will be shared with
each affected Household (HH) through registered mail in the form of a pamphlet in local
language. Final RP will also be shared with other government agencies involved in the
resettlement especially the Revenue Department and local NGOs/CSOs. Following the Land
Acquisition Act, PHA will ensure that the Revenue Department will carry out a step-by-step
procedure of information disclosure and consultation with the affected persons losing land, as per
provisions in the law.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                             No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of"in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                            NA
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                             No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of subm ission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                             No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                               NA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           NA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                        NA
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal'!                       No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                           NA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                       NA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                        NA
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when -the ISDS is
finalized by tlze project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                      Yes
rf yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and       No
approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?     Yes
OP/BP 4.12 -Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as        Yes
appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager        Yes
review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's               No
lnfoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and      No
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been       Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?     Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the monitoring       Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and        Yes
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                   Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Zafar Iqbal Raja                    09/26/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Javaid Afzal                        09/26/2013
Lead Social Development             Mr. Chaohua Zhang                      09/26/2013
Sp~cial ist
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr. Omar Khalid, Ms. Samina Mussarat   09/26/2013
Social Development Specialist(s):   Islam


                                                                           09/27/2013

                                                                           09/27/2013
