                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/14/2011                                    Report No.: 63383
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                            Project ID: P124268
Project Name: MDTF-Economic Revitalization of KP and FATA
Task Team Leader: Gabi George Afram
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: August 15, 2011
Managing Unit: SASFP                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: General industry and trade sector (73%);Sub-national government administration
(17%);General information and communications sector (5%);General finance sector (5%)
Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (45%);Rural non-farm income
generation (35%);Other Private Sector Development (20%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     0.00
         MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/Balochistan 20.00
                                                                     20.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To support the Government of Pakistan in the economic recovery and revitalization of
the crisis affected areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province and Federally
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), by creating sustainable employment opportunities
through rehabilitation of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), investment
mobilization, and institutional capacity building.

3. Project Description
Component 1: SME Development (US$ 14 million). This component includes a matching
grants program with technical assistance to support SMEs that have been adversely
affected by the ongoing crisis in order to enhance their productive capacity and restore
lost employment. This component will also promote economic empowerment of women
by assigning priority to eligible enterprises owned and managed by women. Three types
of support will be provided under this component:
 (i)    SME Rehabilitation: Matching grants to SMEs whose businesses have been
affected due to direct damage to their buildings, machinery, equipment and stocks;
  (ii) SME Up-gradation: Matching grants to SMEs to improve their productive
capacity; and
  (iii) Business Development Services (BDS): to SMEs in areas such as accounting,
financial and legal services, market development, project management etc.

 Component 2: Attracting Investments from the Diaspora (US$ 2 million). The main
objective of this component is to mobilize private investment to jumpstart the
rehabilitation of businesses and reconstruction of infrastructure, thereby creating
employment. There are two main activities under this component:

 (i)    Pre Feasibility for a Private/Public Sector Diaspora Bond for SMEs,; and
 (ii)   Outreach Program for Mobilizing Diaspora Investment

 Component 3: Institutional Building to Foster Investment and Implement Regulatory
Reforms (US$ 4 million). This component will support capacity building of both KP and
FATA governments to improve the business climate and attract investment to the region.
This will be accomplished through:
 (i)   Capacity building of governments of KP and FATA;,
 (ii) Development of a Public-Private Dialogue mechanism to promote reforms;,
 (iii) Institutionalizing investment promotion;, and
 (iv) Implementation Support

 The SME Development component will be implemented by the KP office of Small and
Medium Enterprise Development Authority (SMEDA), and the implementation of the
second and third components will be done by the dedicated cells of KP and FATA
authorities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will be implemented in the crisis-affected areas of KP and FATA. The SMEs
to be supported through the Project will mostly be located in the built-up areas, except the
ones involved in mining activities, which may be located in the hilly areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
   Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
   Ms Samina Mussarat Islam (SASDS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The rehabilitation and reconstruction activities will be carried out on the land already
owned by the SMEs within the existing premises. No land will be acquired under the
project therefore social safeguards policies will not be triggered. The construction
activities at, and operation of, the SMEs to be supported by the Project under its
Component 1 may potentially cause negative environmental and/or social impacts. The
nature and significance of these negative impacts is not known at this stage and will
depend primarily upon the type, size, and location of these SMEs. Although, this triggers
the Environmental Assessment Policy BP 4.01, these impacts are unlikely to be large-
scale, unprecedented, and/or irreversible, owing to the generally small size of the SMEs.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The indirect and/or long term impacts could be associated with the expansion of the
existing and/or proliferation of similar SMEs in the area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
No alternatives have been considered.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project is being processed as an Emergency operation under OP 8.0. The task team
has therefore prepared an umbrella document for MDTF, of which this project is being
funded, Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF),
which defines the environmental assessment requirements, the planning approach and
requirements for assessing and mitigating adverse social impacts. The implementing
agencies both in KP and FATA will be responsible compliance with requirements as set
out in the ESSAF. To assess the nature and significance of the potentially negative
environmental and social impacts, and to develop appropriate mitigation measures for
these impacts, the Project will carry out environmental and social impact assessment and
develop detailed mitigation measures for each subproject (e.g., rehabilitation of an SME
or clusters of SMEs of similar type) during the Project implementation.

 Both Project Coordination Units (in KP and FATA) have designated a senior officer
each as their respective Environmental and Social Focal Points (ESFPs), to ensure the
effective implementation of ESSAF during the Project implementation, and to coordinate
with the Bank and other stakeholders, such as EPAs, on matters relevant to
environmental management. Capacity building of these ESFPs and other related project
personnel (such as the field officers), as well as awareness raising of the remaining
Project and SMEDA staff will however be needed for better management of
environmental aspects of the Project, particularly the effective implementation of ESSAF.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
SMEs, Department of Industries (KP), FATA Secretariat, Small and Medium Enterprise
Development Authority (SMEDA), women owners of SMEs, KP EPA and local NGOs
are some of the key stakeholders of this project. The ESSAF has been disclosed locally
by the implementing agencies on the respective websites on December 15, 2010, and has
also been placed in the InfoShop on January 10, 2011. The ESSAF defines the
consultation and disclosure requirements the Project will need to fulfill for each
individual environmental assessment during the Project implementation.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/13/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/15/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/10/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   No
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                            Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Gabi George Afram                             07/13/2011
Environmental Specialist:            Mr Javaid Afzal                                  07/13/2011
Social Development Specialist        Mr Chaohua Zhang                                 07/13/2011
Additional Environmental and/or      Ms Samina Mussarat Islam                         07/13/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                               07/14/2011
  Comments: cleared on understanding that there will be no involuntary land taking and an
  independent performance audit of ESSAF shall be undertaken annually.
Sector Manager:                     Mr John F. Speakman                                07/14/2011
  Comments:
