                                                                                                  80701

                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: June 27, 2013

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Papua New Guinea                        Project ID: P126157
Project Name: Rural Service Delivery and Local Governance Preparation and Pilot (P126157)
Task Team Leader: Erik Johnson
Estimated Appraisal Date: 28-June-2013           Estimated Board Date: n/a
Managing Unit: EASNS                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan
Sector: forestry sector (10%), General education sector (10%), General water, sanitation and
flood protection sector (10%)
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (34%), Other rural development (33%), Other social
development (33%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Borrower Amount (US$m.):                                                             0.30
PNGSDP Trust Fund (US$m.):                                                           3.50
State and Peace Building Fund (US$m.):                                               1.80
Financing Gap:                                                                       0.00
Total:                                                                               5.60
Environmental Category                           B – Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project?                      No

2. Project Objectives:

The Project Development Objective is to develop a community-driven development model to improve
access to, and the quality of, basic services in rural communities, which is scaled-up by government. As
such, the project will help to address the low levels of access and desired outcomes of a number of basic
services (health, education, water, access, etc.) as identified by local communities.

3. Project Description:

The project has three main components: (i) systems and financing of community service-delivery grants,
(ii) capacity building of national and sub-national government (or non-government) entities, and (iii)
project management (including monitoring, evaluation and knowledge sharing).

Component 1: Systems and Financing of Ward Development Grants
The first component would provide grants to LLGs to finance community-identified sub-projects.
Communities will be responsible for the identification and prioritization of community needs. The sub-
projects will be developed through a participatory planning process that will be integrated into the
preparation of Ward and LLG development plans. Typical sub-project grants are expected to include
small-scale community infrastructure, technical assistance and capacity building, and enhancement of
sustainable service delivery systems. However, at this stage it is impossible to say which specific areas of
support (e.g., education, health, water and sanitation, roads/bridges/wharves, etc.) would be prioritized.
The subprojects will be developed based on agreed-upon procedures and criteria that would be outlined in
an operations manual that the Government would develop and the World Bank would approve. Among
other issues, these procedures would draw on recent research on exclusion and benefits sharing (around
the Ok Tedi Community Mine Continuation Agreements) to help ensure equity in project identification
and development.

Component 2: Capacity Building of National and Sub-national entities
The second component would support the strengthening of capacities of national and sub-national
government (and non-government) entities – including the Department for Provincial and Local
Government Affairs (DPLGA), Provincial, LLG and Ward personnel to manage and implement the
project, and to improve local governance as it relates to basic service delivery. As appropriate, this
component would also support the involvement of non-governmental agencies (NGOs, churches or civil
society groups) that have traditionally provided basic services in certain areas of PNG. The decision to
involve such entities to either facilitate planning or support the provision of services would depend on the
presence and strength of local level government authorities and service providers in a given area, and on
the demand from communities. Given the wide range of capacities and coverage throughout PNG, the
testing of such a public-private partnership under this pilot scheme is seen as being valuable to
Government’s understanding of what works best under what circumstances.

Component 3: Project Management
The third component would support a project coordinating team at the national level and small project
management teams in the targeted provincial administrations to lead and work with other sub-national
partners in setting up and executing the project. A robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, a
project information system, and a grievance redress mechanism will be developed as part of the overall
project management system. Disaggregated gender data would be collected, and a detailed evaluation of
the project processes (versus impact) would be undertaken. An independent monitor of project
implementation will be contracted locally to ensure timely information on project progress and issues.
This component will also include a strong information, communications and knowledge sharing element
to address the problems of fragmentation and disconnectedness, as well as a general deficit of information
and development knowledge at the local level and between the local and national levels. Learning events
would include exchange visits across provinces, local governance forums, study tours, and development
of various learning and knowledge products.

The project will be implemented over a period of three years, and if proven successful, is expected to be
scaled up with IDA, other development partner, and Government of PNG funding.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The project will operate in Western Province and Central Province, and involve approximately 4 LLGs in
each province. Western Province is the largest and least densely populated province in PNG. It comprises
more than half of the country’s border with Indonesia. There are several large rivers that run through the
province including the Fly River and its tributaries including the Strickland and Ok Tedi rivers, the largest
lake in Papua New Guinea Lake Murray is also in Western Province. The Tonda Wildlife Management
Area in the south-western corner of the province is a wetland of international importance and the largest
protected area in Papua New Guinea.

Central Province is located on the southern coast of the country, right next to the National Capital District
that houses the capital, Port Moresby. Only within 50 km from Moresby, the Sogeri Plateau is above 600
meters from the sea level and is the starting point for the well-known Kokoda Trek. Near the Plateau there
is the Varirata National Park which covers an area of 1,000 hectares and is home to various birdlife and
animals. In the province there is Moitaka Wildlife Farm, a crocodile research farm which also has a
collection of native animals and birds. There are some island resorts that attract a lot of Moresby residents
and other transit visitors. There is a good network of poorly-maintained roads across the province, which
makes service delivery in the Central province much easier than other provinces in PNG.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Mark Woodward (EASER)
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASPS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                   Yes                          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                    X
Projects on International Waterways                                                            X
(OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                        X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The subprojects supported under the project will be very small in both scale and scope with the
average amount expected to be between US$20,000 and $30,000. It is unlikely that there would
be large scale, significant safeguards risks associated with the proposed project.

A range of demand-driven small scale sub-projects will likely include infrastructure activities
such as: rehabilitation or upgrading of physical structures such as buildings (health facilities,
markets, teacher housing, etc.); very small-scale transport infrastructure rehabilitation/repair
(tracks, small feeder roads, bridges, docks, etc.); small-scale water catchment and supply
systems; and construction of new facilities.

Potential environmental issues and impacts include temporary disturbance of drains or streams,
noise and dust during construction, small-scale vegetation loss, and pollution from inappropriate
construction materials waste disposal. However, such risks are expected to be temporary, site-
specific, and limited to the construction phase.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The community-based subprojects are very small in scale and widely dispersed, hence there are
no long-term impacts anticipated. Mitigation measures as well as environmental and social
guidelines and an Environmental Code of Practice will be applied for all the project activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

The Operations Manual will include a negative list of sub-projects that will not be funded by the
projects. Sub-projects will NOT 1) be located in critical natural habitats or lead to the conversion
or destruction thereof, 2) lead to the destruction or permanent removal of physical cultural
properties; chance finds procedures will be followed according to the ESMF, 3) involve the
massive cutting of trees or quarrying of aggregates or minerals for commercial purposes 4)
involve the purchase of chemical fertilizers, pesticides and similar substances that are
internationally banned or declared hazardous, 5) construct water impounding structures that will
substantially impede or obstruct the natural flow of surface waters.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

Borrower Capacity: Overall capacity of the DPLGA to fully meet the guidelines and carry out
mitigation measures remains weak. Given the limited capacity of the implementing agency to
comply with the Bank and the country's safeguards policies due to their limited experience, it is
necessary to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Department of Provincial and Local
Government Affairs (DPLGA), the LLG, wards and communities to ensure that the mitigating
measures to address the potential environmental impacts are implemented, monitored and
reported in a timely manner. The environmental and social risks that the project needs to deal
with can be sufficiently addressed by training and enabling them to build up their skills to
conduct adequate screening using appropriate safeguards instruments such as environmental and
social checklists to identify appropriate mitigating and measures and compensation packages.

Under component 2, capacity building, the project will provide modules of training to the
counterpart at the National, Provincial, LLG and ward levels, in order to ensure the
environmental and social guidelines for the subproject preparation and implementation are fully
followed and implemented. The capacity building activities will include improving their
capability the implement, monitor and report their environmental performance according to a
simple Environmental Management Plan.

Environmental Assessment: In order to address environmental risks, mitigation measures would
be put in place through a combination of a negative list of inappropriate types or locations of
sub-projects and technical guidance on appropriate construction designs and practices. The
subproject screening process and the use of standard construction practices will ensure adequate
mitigation of those risks. An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
developed to assist in the identification and mitigation of potential environment and social issues,
and to help address any environmental risks associated with the proposed sub-project activities.
The ESMF also outlines subproject procedures customized to the proposed sub-project, and
simple forms to screen sub-projects prepare environmental and social management plans where
required. It also includes an Environmental Code of Practice (ECoPs). The project operations
manual outlines a Grievance Redress Mechanism that would be accessible to communities to
directly raise issues or concerns on project implementation (including those related to
environmental and/or social issues).

Indigenous Peoples: OP/BP 4.10 will be applied. Papua New Guinea is one of the most
culturally diverse countries in the world, with over 850 indigenous languages and at least as
many traditional societies, out of a population of just under seven million. It is also one of the
most rural, as only 18% of its people live in urban centers. Most people outside the towns live in
a subsistence-based economy with strong attachments to the land and a family-based social
structure. Customary land notionally covers most of the usable land in the country, some 97% of
total land area. The vast majority of communities are indigenous, as defined in the policy. The
vulnerability of indigenous groups is based less on their belonging to an ethnic group and more
from living in remote locations. Since all beneficiaries of the project and all communities
affected by the project are indigenous, no stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is required,
but the summary of how the project complies with OP 4.10 will be presented as part of the PAD.
The Social Assessment, including recommendations for applying OP 4.10 to the project, will be
publicly disclosed. The elements of an IPP, including frameworks to ensure free prior and
informed consultations and a grievance mechanism, are included in the project design and will
be applied in the implementation of the project.

Involuntary Resettlement: The project will not finance any activity that requires involuntary
resettlement, and any “new? land acquisition (assumed to be in very few cases, if at all) would be
done on a voluntary basis and apply a “clan land use agreement? process. The rural nature of the
project guarantees that any such lands would be under communal ownership and the community
nature of the sub-projects suggest that voluntary donation is a realistic expectation. Siting of new
infrastructure would also be voluntary so that existing assets that might be affected by such
acquisition would also be governed by the voluntary land use agreement and the project would
not pay compensation.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Key stakeholders in the project will be rural PNG residents of the villages in the participating
wards that are under the pre-identified Local Level Governments (LLGs). The project will ensure
the targeted communities are fully informed about the project and the environment and social
guidelines through training and other information campaigns. Stakeholder participation and
information disclosure will be assured at every stage of the project implementation. Any
subproject under the project will be required to follow planning process that includes the social
and environmental information, training and screening process described in detail in the ESMF.

The project staff at all levels - ward recorders (community facilitators), LLG managers, district
and provincial-level personnel and the DPLGA officers- will be provided with trainings
dedicated to the environment and social aspects of the project. It is to ensure that the ESMF and
guidelines will be fully followed and implemented throughout the subproject cycle.
Prior to becoming effective, the project will make all safeguards procedures of the project
available to concerned stakeholders through DPLGA in Port Moresby, the provincial
administration in Western and Central provinces, and the World Bank Public Information Center
in Port Moresby (as well as in the World Banks’ Infoshop in Washington, DC). The ESMF and
Social Assessment will been disclosed locally in English, with Executive Summaries provided in
Tok Pisin and Motu.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                             June 23, 2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                         June 27, 2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                          June 27, 2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                               N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                             June 23, 2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                         June 27, 2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                          June 30, 2013
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes [ ]    No [ X ]      N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector   N/a
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning            Yes [ ]     No [x ]      N/A [ ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         N/A
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the    Yes
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [x ]   No [ ]       N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [x ]   No [ ]        N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                               Name                         Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Erik Caldwell Johnson                       June 25, 2013
 Environmental Specialist:           Maya Villaluz                               June 24, 2013
 Social Development Specialist       Mark Woodward                               June 25, 2013
 Additional Environmental and/or     n/a
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    n/a
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                     Michel Kerf                                 June 26, 2013
   Comments:
