                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA244 7
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        25-Jan-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed:      25-Jan-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Papua New Guinea Project ID:                   P101578
 Project Name:                PNG Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)
 Task Team Leader:            Wendy E. Hughes
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 17-Feb-2011             Estimated Board Date: 21-Feb-2013
 Managing Unit:               EASNS                Lending Instrument:       Specific Investment
                                                                             Loan
 Sector:                      Other Renewable Energy (I 00%)
 Theme:                       Infrastructure services for private sector development (70%), Rural
                              services and infrastructure (30%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       9.25                     Total Bank Financing:     7.30
 Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:            0.90
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             1.05
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                    7.30
    Global Environment Facility                                                                     0.90
     Total                                                                                          9.25
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred       No
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 Project Development objective:

 The proposed Project development objectives (PDO) are to (i) strengthen policy development and
strategic framework for renewable energy and rural electrification; and (ii) to attract investors for
sustainable development of new hydropower generation to supply to the Port Moresby electricity grid.

3. Project Description
The project would consist of two components:

•        Component 1: Institutional and Policy Development for Renewable Energy and Rural
Electrification would be implemented by the Department of Petroleum and Energy, the Energy
Division. This would focus on policy development (Renewable Energy and Rural Electrification),
institutional and strategy development (Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment and Rural
Electrification Strategy), and capacity strengthening for the GoPNG's role in development of the
Naoro Brown hydropower project and other hydropower projects that may be considered in the
medium term. .Strong emphasis would be placed on an inclusive, gender-sensitive consultation
process as an integral part of the policy and strategy development. Component 1 includes an allocation
for operating costs which could contribute to the initial establishment of these three Energy Division
regional offices. Key activities would include:

Energy Policy Development
o      Renewable Energy policy.
o      Rural Electrification Policy.

Institutional and Strategy Development
o        Rural Electrification Strategy.
o        Strategic Environment and Social Assessment.

Capacity Strengthening for GoPNG role in hydropower
o      Specialist support for targeted activities related to GoPNG role in hydropower development.

Project Management Support
o       Assistant PMU manager.
o       Procurement specialist.
o       Financial management specialist.


•        Component 2: Technical Assistance for Preparation and Planning for Port Moresby
Hydropower Supply will be implemented by PNG Power Ltd., with two sub-components. The first
focuses on activities required to prepare the Naoro Brown hydropower project (approximately 80MW)
to supply the Port Moresby grid. The concept proposed for development of the Naoro Brown
hydropower project is a private sector-led approach. This is in line with the Electricity Industry Policy,
and reflects the fact that PNG Power does not have the resources to develop this as a public sector
project. The second sub-component focuses on activities to improve PNG Power's planning with
respect to hydropower:

o       Preparation of the Naoro Brown hydropower project for Port Moresby.

o       Improved project management and planning related to hydropower supply for Port Moresby.


Component 1: Institutional and Policy Development for Renewable Energy and Rural Electrification.
Implementing Agency: Department of Petroleum and Energy (Energy Division).
Energy Policy Development

o        Renewable Energy Policy. The GoPNG is preparing a plan for Climate-Compatible
Development. An Office of Climate Change and Development (OCCD) has been created. An
Interim Action Plan for Climate Compatible Development was prepared in June 2010 and has been
circulated for public consultation. It prioritizes readiness activities for a future Reduction in
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDO) while seeking economic growth
opportunities that minimize future emissions. The Renewable Energy Policy will be developed
within the framework of the overall Climate-Compatible Development plan. This activity would
support consultations and consensus-building among stakeholders including the OCCD's technical
working group on Low Carbon Growth, and drafting of the policy document.

o        Rural Electrification Policy. A draft policy was prepared in 2004 but never finalized. This
activity would include review and updating of the draft policy, taking into account the many
developments in the sector since the draft was prepared. It includes support for consultations and
consensus-building among stakeholders.

Institutional and Strategy Development

•       A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) would be prepared as an input to
downstream implementation of both the Renewable Energy Policy and the Rural Electrification
Policy. The SESA would assess the implications of these policies and make recommendations
regarding (i) the establishment of the requisite institutional, regulatory and decentralization
framework, (ii) integration of the management of any environmental and social issues into subsequent
planning decisions for the location and scale of energy investments, alternatives, mitigation
measuresand monitoring activities.

 o        Preparation of a Rural Electrification Strategy. In the GoPNG planning documents and the
 Electricity Industry Policy (EIP), increasing access to affordable reliable electricity supply is
 highlighted as a priority to achieve broad-based economic development and improved standards of
 living. While there is room for improvement in the urban centers, the supply of electricity in rural
'areas is very limite4. The rural electrification strategy will consider the full range of options for
 increasing access, including grid extension, mini-grid and off-grid approaches, and the roles of public
 sector, private sector and NGO and community organizations. One aspect of the strategy- in line with
 the EIP -would likely include efforts to attract private sector to supply non-commercially viable areas
 through a competitive process based on the lowest level of subsidy required. Important elements to
 be included in the rural electrification strategy include (i) a reasonable definition of the projects I
 opportunities to be offered and (ii) an assessment of the different cost structures and levels of service
 provision characteristic of the range of resources and supply models that might be appropriate across
 PNG, as an input to the tariff-setting process; (iii) a process for screening social and environmental
 aspects of rural electrification projects.

A number of entities are already involved in implementing electrification projects in areas outside the
main grids. Incorporating the experience from on-going initiatives would be an important element in
developing the strategy. Input from potential participants and beneficiaries would be critical.
Elements of the strategy preparation would include:

o      GIS Stocktaking and Development of a Stage I "Potential Rural Electrification Projects"
Database. This would involve preparation of Geographic Information System (GIS) database overlays
of population, infrastructure (e.g., roads, energy infrastructure, telecoms) and possible renewable
energy resources (e.g., for small scale hydropower).
o        Analysis of alternative models of community and rural electrification projects including cost
structure, as an input to the ICCC (Independent Consumer and Competition Commission) process of
developing tariffs for electricity supply in areas outside the PNG Power exclusive supply areas.
o       Environmental and Social Screening methodology for rural electrification projects.


Strong emphasis would be placed on an inclusive, gender-sensitive consultation process as an integral
part of the policy and strategy development. DPE intends to open regional offices in Kokopo, Mt.
Hagen and Lae as part of fulfilling DPE's mandate under the Electricity Industry Policy. These
regional offices will provide a full-time presence for the Energy Division of DPE in the regions and,
among other functions, will serve as the regional centers for coordinating consultations on the policy
and strategy development supported under the proposed Project. Component 1 includes an allocation
for operating costs which could contribute to the initial establishment of these three Energy Division
regional offices.

Capacity Strengthening.

•       Preparing for DPE I GoPNG role in new hydropower power generation developments. In the
future, GoPNG as the custodian of the national water resources will likely play a pivotal role in several
aspects of the development of new hydropower, including the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project,
which could require specialist expertise. This activity would provide initial specialist support for
targeted activities related to GoPNG's role in hydropower development. Additional specific activities
including training would be defined as and when new projects move forward.

•        Project Management Support, including, hiring an Assistant PMU manager, Procurement
specialist, and Financial Management specialist as needed. ·


Component 2: Technical Assistance for Preparation and Planning for Port Moresby Hydropower
Supply. Implementing Agency: PNG Power.

Past studies have established the potential for hydropower development on both the Brown River and
the adjacent Vanapa River. As demand for electricity in Port Moresby grows, it is anticipated that a
series of hydropower plants may be developed. Taking into account the long lead times in developing
hydropower projects, initial activities to prepare the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project and assess the
potential for and optimal sequencing of subsequent projects are included in the proposed project.
Two sub-components are proposed.

Preparation of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project for Port Moresby.

Generation from new hydropower will be significantly less expensive than the cost of generating
electricity from diesel, the only feasible alternative currently available (as there is currently no
provision for domestic natural gas supply in Port Moresby). The GoPNG and PNG Power are
interested to develop lower cost hydropower generation as soon as possible. Moreover, hydropower
is a clean and renewable energy resource. PNG Power has hired international consultants to
undertake the feasibility study of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project to supply the Port Moresby
grid with about 80 MW. The feasibility study was largely completed in late 2011, although some
further work, including drilling to test grouting solutions to address seepage identified in phase 2 of.
the feasibility study, is still required. The concept proposed for development of the Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project is a private sector-led approach. This is in ·line with the Electricity Industry Policy
approved in December 2011, and reflects the fact that PNG Power does not have the resources to
develop this as a public sector project. A properly structured IPP (Independent Power producer)/PPP
would additionally enable shifting of commercial risks to the private sector and benefit from
construction and operational expertise of the private sector.

Given the imperative to move forward with development of new hydropower to supply Port Moresby
as soon as possible, the proposed approach is as (ollows:
•       PNG Power, the key state entity currently with skilled manpower and power sector-related
expertise, would manage the process for developing the IPP/PPP.

•       The Electricity Management Committee (EMC}, chaired by the Secretary for Petroleum and
Energy, will be the key supervising and decision-making body. The other permanent members of the
EMC include the Secretaries for Treasury and Planning and the Managing Director for the
Independent Public Business Corporation (IPBC) and a representative from the PNG Chamber of
Commerce and Industry. Other members (for example, from the Department of Environment and
Conservation or the ICCC) may be co-opted to the Committee as required. The EMC will be
supported by a secretariat housed in the Energy Division (Department of Petroleum and Energy). A
working-level committee has also been established that will report to the EMC and so it is likely that
recommendations on the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project will first be reviewed by this working
group before being submitted to the EMC for a fmal decision. As and when the PPP Center in
Treasury is established, designated staff may be invited to join the EMC itself or its working group.
PNG Power would report to the EMC or its working group on a regular basis so that the Committee is
well-informed regarding the progress and issues as decision points are reached.

•      Consultants hired by PNG Power largely completed the feasibility study in late 2011, although
some further work to assess options to address seepage is required.

•       PNG Power would implement a Naoro Brown Communication and Consultation Plan for
potential Project-affected People (PAPs) and other stakeholders. With advice from the WB and input
from the Electricity Management Committee and stakeholder consultation, PNG Power would prepare
TOR for the safeguards-related aspects of the project, to be undertaken by the selected Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project Developer.

•       PNG Power would hire financial, technical and legal advisors ("Transaction Advisors").

•      PNG Power would hire Panels of Experts (dam safety and social/ environmental). Once the
Naoro Brown Hydropower Project Developer is in place, maintaining these Expert panels will become
the Developer's responsibility (and will be included in the bidding and legal agreements).

•     With the assistance of the advisors and under the oversight of the Electricity Management
Committee, PNG Power would undertake a transparent process to select a private sector Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project Developer.

•       The Developer would be responsible for the social and environmental impact studies, as per
the prepared TOR, in coordination with the detailed design work.

•       Day-to-day supervision of the Developer regarding the technical, social and environmental
aspects would be the responsibility ofPNG Power (with specialist support). The Electricity
Management Committee would provide overall guidance as appropriate. With regard to the
environmental aspects, Department of Environment and Conservation would exercise their
responsibility for reviewing and approving the EIA and EMP. As per the EIP, the technical regulator
(under the EIP this role is intended to be transferred from PNG Power to DPE) would enforce
environmental and safety regulation in the electricity industry as an added component to its technical
regulatory functions. This function would be carried out in close consultation with DEC. As economic
regulator, ICCC would be provided with current information to help ensure that ICCC remains abreast
of the preparation and is able to draw attention early on to any issues which may need to be addressed
with respect to the regulatory process.

•        Once the required GoPNG approvals are in place, the Developer would mobilize financing for
the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project. It is expected that the financing would be limited recourse on
the basis of a long-term power purchase agreement (PPA) which would commit PNG Power to buy the
electricity generated and/or capacity made available by the project. Based on the advice from PNG
Power's transaction advisors and the decision of the GoPNG, through the Electricity Management
Committee, the financing for the project could include some public equity. It.could also include some
concessional borrowing and I or guarantees to supplement commercial lending and improve the terms
and extend the tenor of the commercial fmancing to achieve a sustainable tariff. ICCC, responsible
for economic regulation, would have a role in approving the pass-through of PNG Power's costs under
the PPA to consumers.

•       Following financial close the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project would be constructed and
operated by the Developer and begin commercial operation supplying electricity to the Port Moresby
grid.

•        One option to be considered is a "Build Own Operate Transfer" (BOOT) approach, in which
ownership of the project would be transferred to GoPNG at the end of a specified concession period,
e.g., 25 years. The lifetime of the asset would be significantly longer than that if properly maintained,
thus providing the government with an operating asset with considerable residual lifetime. PNG
Power, as power purchaser, would also have a key role in reviewing the Operation Strategy and would
dispatch the power and energy from the Project. In a BOOT arrangement PNG Power would also
carefully review maintenance arrangements since the project would eventually pass to GoPNG.

Activities to be financed under the proposed Project related to the preparation of the Naoro Brown
project to supply Port Moresby would include:

o       Naoro Brown Transaction Advisors (legal, technical and fmancial). As part of the advisory
work, financial advisors would assist PNG Power in determining the tariff implications of the Power
Purchase Agreement;

o       Additional feasibility study work (i.e. Preparation of Geological Baseline Survey including
additional drilling to assess options for limiting seepage from the reservoir and, subject to further
review, possibly some drilling along the tunnel route, and information dissemination with affected
communities);

o      Preliminary social assessment, including information sharing and consultation strategy, land
owner identification, land use mapping and consultations;

o       Resettlement Policy Framework;
o       Project Economic Analysis;

o       Dam Safety Expert panel. (Once the Developer is in place, this would become the
responsibility of the Developer);

o       Social and Environmental Expert Panel. (Once the Developer is in place, this would become
the responsibility of the Developer);

o       Social and Environmental specialists;

o       Communications consultant;

o       Environmental baseline survey work;

o      Other preparation activities and specialist support identified during implementation, for
example additional preparation work following the completion of the feasibility study and as might be
recommended once the transaction advisors are in place;

o       Project Management support.

Improved Planning Related to Hydropower Supply for Port Moresby

Proposed activities related to the improved planning and identification of subsequent hydropower
projects for supply to Port Moresby would include:

o       Three-basin inventory study of the Brown, Vanapa and Angabanga basins;

o       Training, institutional strengthening and capacity building in areas critical for implementation
of improved performance and implementation of the next hydropower project. This could include
planning capacity, project evaluation and preparation and negotiation of power purchase agreements.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Component I of the proposed PNG Energy Sector Development Project will address national policies
which will be applied throughout Papua New Guinea. Component 2 of the proposed PNG Energy
Sector Development Project focuses specifically on preparation of the Naoro Brown Hydropower
Project and subsequent planning to supply the Port ·Moresby grid. This component would focus on
the preparation of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project, and help identify optimal sequencing of
future hydropower options for Port Moresby through a three-basin inventory study of the Brown,
Vanapa and Angabanga basins.

The Naoro Brown project is located in the upper reaches of the Naoro Brown catchment area
comprising approximately 274 square km. within the Kairuku-Hiri District of the Central Province.
Within this District, the Naoro Brown project area comprises five Wards of the Koiari Rural
Local-Level Government. The Naoro Brown project area is characterized by a very low population
density of around 5 persons per sq. km. and dispersed small settlements. There are 14 villages of
which 13 are inhabited by Mountain Koiari, while a cluster of settlements at Edebu at the lower end of
the project area also include some Mountain Koiari, who have settled from locations outside the Naoro
Brown catchment area. According to the 2000 Census, the resident population in the project area is
.1,415, and another 8,737 persons have migrated from the area to Port Moresby and other locations.
Livelihoods in the Naoro Brown catchment area are based on subsistence shifting cultivation
supplemented by use of natural resources (e.g., fishing in the rivers). The outmigration from the area
is due to lack of income opportunities together with lack of education and health services. The
migrants retain links to their villages of origin including land rights.

The Naoro Brown Hydropower Project is expected to include the physical components described
below. The exact dimensions of these components would be determined by the engineering design by
the selected Naoro Brown Project Developer.

1.       A gravity concrete dam with a height of about 19 meters, which will create a reservoir of
around 14 million cubic meters inundating an estimated 150 hectares upstream of the Madilogo
village.
2.       A tunnel with an estimated length of 10 km between the dam site on the Naoro river and the
power station on the Brown river.
3.       A 2 km power tunnel at the power station site.
4.       A surface power station on the left bank of the Brown River. No settlements appear to be
located at or near the proposed power station site.
5.       An access road of an estimated 50 km from Edebu to the sites of the dam and power station
(the alignment is still to be decided, but will likely mostly follow old logging roads) and possibly to
intermediate points on the tunnel route. .
6.       Electricity transmission lines to the Port Moresby grid.
7.       Construction related impacts comprising the construction camp(s), material excavation sites,
and sites for dumping of spoils.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Mark C. Woodward (BASER)
James Orehmie Monday ( BASTS )

6. Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes             The proposed WB-financed PNG Energy
                                                           Sector Development Project requires an
                                                           Environmental and Social Management
                                                           Framework. This has been completed and
                                                           disclosed. Development of the Naoro
                                                           Brown hydropower project (for which
                                                           preparation support is included in the
                                                           proposed PNG Energy Sector Development
                                                           Project), requires a full Environment and
                                                           Social Impact Assessment. The ESIA for
                                                           the Naoro Brown Hydropower
                                                           Development Project will be carried out
                                                           during implementation of the proposed
                                                           PNG Energy Sector Development Project.
                                                           The Strategic Environmental and Social
                                                           Assessment which will inform the
                                                           Renewable Electrification Policy and the
                                                           Rural Electrification Policy will provide
                                                           recommendations on consultations with
                                            local communities to establish their broad
                                            support for management of potential
                                            environmental impacts related to energy
                                            investments.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No    However, this policy could potentiaily be
                                            triggered by the development of the Naoro
                                            Brown Hydropower Project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No    However, this policy could potentially be
                                            triggered by the development of the Naoro
                                            Brown Hydropower Project.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No    The proposed WB-financed PNG Energy
                                            Sector Development Project does not ·
                                            require an Indigenous Peoples Plan.
                                            Development of the Naoro Brown
                                            Hydropower Project (for which
                                            preparation support is included in the
                                            proposed Project), would require an
                                            Indigenous Peoples Plan. The Indigenous
                                            Peoples' Plan for the Naoro Brown
                                            Hydropower Project will be carried out
                                            during implementation of the proposed ~
                                            PNG Energy Sector Development Project.
                                            The Strategic Environmental and Social
                                            Assessment which will inform the
                                            Renewable Electrification Policy and Rural
                                            Electrification Policy will provide
                                            recommendations on consultations with
                                            local communities to establish their broad
                                            support for management of impacts, and
                                            compensation and benefit sharing related to
                                            energy investments.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   No    The proposed WB-financed PNG Energy
                                            Sector Development Project does not
                                            require a RPF I RAP. Development of the
                                            Naoro Brown hydropower project (for
                                            which preparation support is included in the
                                            proposed Project), would require both a
                                            RPF and RAP. These will be developed
                                            during implementation of the proposed
                                            PNG Energy Sector Development Project.
                                            The Strategic Environmental and Social
                                            Assessment which will inform the
                                            Renewable Electrification Policy and the
                                            Rural Electrification Policy will provide
                                            recommendations on consultations with
                                                            local communities to establish their broad
                                                            support for management of impacts related
                                                            to access to land for energy investments.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No              The proposed WB-financed PNG Energy
                                                            Sector Development Project does not
                                                            require a Dam Safety Plan. Development
                                                            of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project
                                                            (for which preparation support is included
                                                            in the proposed Project), would require a
                                                            Dam Safety Plan. The Naoro Brown Dam
                                                            Safety Plan will be developed during
                                                            implementation of the proposed PNG
                                                            Energy Sector Development Project.
Projects on Int~mational Waterways          No
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
         The proposed Project would finance technical assistance, not investments. However, part of
the technical assistance related to additional feasibility study activities would involve drilling a series
of holes on the right abutment of the proposed dam site for grouting trials, to determine the feasibility
of a grouting solution to the seepage identified during phase 2 of the feasibility study. Consultations
would be undertaken before mobilizing the drilling services, and appropriate measures put in place in
accordance with the· process set out in the Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF). Consideration will be given to transporting the drilling equipment to the site by helicopter.
If this is not technically or financially feasible, PPL would upgrade the existing road to the site.
Procedures to be followed in this instance - including consultations - are set out in the ESMF.

         Activities supported under Component 2 of the Project are aimed at catalyzing the
development of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project. Development of the Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project would have social and environmental impacts. The technical assistance includes
providing technical advice and guidance to GoPNG, PNG Power and the selected Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project Developer on assessing, addressing and mitigating potential social and
environmental impacts. Safeguards documents and studies financed under the proposed PNG Energy
Sector Development Project would be prepared in compliance with WB standards and safeguards
policies, as well as meeting PNG requirements. Any civil works related to the Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project undertaken while this proposed PNG Energy Sector Development Project is
under implementation would .be undertaken in compliance with WB policies, even if ~ is not
financing the civil works. During the period of implementation of the proposed PNG Energy Sector
Development Project, WB would provide review of all safeguard documents related to the Naoro
Brown Hydropower Project. The selected Naoro Brown Hydropower Project Developer would be
legally obligated to develop the hydropower project in accordance with the approach set out during
preparation.
Also, the p~oposed PNG Energy Sector Development Project would finance other TA activities that
will inter alia support preparation of a Renewable Energy Policy, Rural Electrification Policy, Rural
Electrification Strategy, and a three-basin inventory study of hydropower potential.

1.1      Key safeguards issues for consideration in preparation of the Naoro Brown Hydropower
Project:

The Environment and Social Management Framework is the safeguards instrument for the proposed
Project. The ESMF sets out the approach to addressing safeguards aspects for the overall PNG Energy
Sector Development Project. It covers both Component 1, which focuses on policy and strategy
development, and Component 2 which provides technical assistance for the preparation of the Naoro
Brown Hydropower Project and improved project management and planning related to hydropower to
supply Port Moresby. The ESMF sets out the approach to identifying and addressing-potential social
and environmental aspects, including -inter alia- the public consultation and communication strategy,
and the institutional arrangements.

The environmental safeguard policy that is triggered by the proposed PNG Energy Sector
Development Project is OP 4.01: Environmental Assessment and has been assigned an EA Category
B. The Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is the safeguards instrument for
the proposed Project.

The environmental safeguard policies that would be triggered by development of the Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project, if the WB were to be involved in financing the development, are OP 4.01:
Environmental Assessment; OP 4.04: Natural Habitats; Safety of Dams OP4.37; and potentially OP
4.36: Forests (whether or not this policy would be triggered would be determined during further
preparation of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project). Environmental Safeguards Documents required
to be developed once the Naoro Brown Hydropower project Developer is in place are the Environment
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Environmental Management Plan (EMP); and Dam Safety
Plan. Terms of Reference for these activities, developed to be in compliance with WB safeguard
guidelines, will be included in the bidding documents for the selection of the Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project Developer, and in the legal agreement with the selected Developer.

The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) sets out the list and broad scope of
studies and safeguards instruments to be prepared during implementation of the proposed Project;
institutional arrangements defining the roles and responsibilities for safeguards compliance, and the
approach to public consultation.

The social safeguard policies that would be triggered by development of the Naoro Brown
Hydropower project - if the WB were to be involved in financing the development of the Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project- are OP4.1 0: Indigenous Peoples; and OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement; and
potentially OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The social safeguards documents required to be
developed once the Naoro Brown Hydropower project Developer is in place are: the Environment and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) including an Information and Consultation Strategy; Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF); and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Terms of Reference for these
activities, developed to be in compliance with WB safeguard guidelines, will be included in the
bidding documents for the selection of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project Developer and in the
legal agreement with the selected Developer.
Key environmental issues: With respect to the future development of the Naoro Brown Hydropower
Project, environmental impacts would occur in the construction, operations and maintenance phases of
the Naoro Brown project and would occur in locations including the upstream catchment area and the
reservoir, the dam site, tunnel corridor and power plant location, a section of the Naoro River
immediately downstream of the dam that will experience significantly reduced flows, and the corridors
of the transmission line and access roads. Impacted areas would also include the construction areas
where workers would be camped, quany areas, spoil disposal areas and construction equipment
service areas. In-migration could increase the prevalence of 1-llV and workers could destroy vegetation
for frrewood and eat the local wildlife. Given the mountainous nature of the terrain, erosion and
sedimentation issues would need to be evaluated and managed in all areas during project construction,
operation and maintenance, including ensuring slope areas are well protected and drained. Managing
water quality in the reservoir and ensuring adequate environmentaVriparian flows are also issues to be
evaluated and managed carefully.

Initial, preliminary baseline surveys were conducted as part of the Naoro Brown feasibility study.
The terrestrial flora survey indicated mostly secondary forest in the project area, although the tunnel
route, penstocks and power station areas have primary forest. There is a high plant diversity, all
relatively common in PNG. There is a rich biodiversity in terrestrial fauna incl_uding a number of
International Union for Conservation ofNarure (IUCN)-listed species (endangered, threatened,
vulnerable) that were either sighted or for which anecdotal reports were provided. In terms of aquatic
environment, Upper Brown and Naoro Rivers typically have poorly developed aquatic flora. Five
species of fish were identified, of which one was identified as important as it is the only mullet species
that lives in rapid-flowing streams and rivers in hilly terrain. No species 'alerts' from the IUCN
status list were indicated.

It was reported from the local inhabitants interviewed during t~e Naoro Brown field survey that the
Naoro Brown project sites do not possess any particularly important species or communities that are
stringently .site-restricted.

Physical cultural resource issues: There is currently no information available on archaeological or
other physical cultural resource sites within the proposed Naoro Brown project area. A survey of the
existing literature found that "archaeological research within the [Kokoda Track] project area has been
sporadic and restricted almost entirely to surveys of rock art sites and occasional test excavations of
rock shelters, with little result". The known sites are all located on the Sogeri Plateau and in the
Laloki valley outside the Naoro Brown project area. However, the presence of these sites close to the
Naoro Brown project area together with the very sporadic archaeological exploration suggests that
similar sites may exist within the Naoro Brown catchment area. In addition, the contemporary culture
of the population in the project area - the Mountain Koiari -will include structures and/or places of
spiritual and religious importance. Impacts, if any, on archaeological or contemporary sites of
cultural importance are still to be determined (this will be covered as part of the ESIA, and if
necessary, the EMP). In any case, procedures will be specified in case chance finds of any
artifacts/sites of archeological significance occur dUring construction.

Key social issues: Direct physical impact by development of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project
on the population and landscape is expected to be fairly modest if properly managed. The Naoro
Brown project would have land acquisition impacts deriving from the civil works comprising the dam,
reservoir, access roads, and the transmission line. In addition, there would be construction related
impacts from the construction labor camp(s), material excavation sites, and sites for dumping of spoils,
which all will require land either temporarily or permanently. Displacement and resettlement is not
anticipated, but a fmal determination can only be made when the technical design of the Naoro Brown
Hydropower installations including construction labor camp(s), road(s), and transmission line is more
advanced. The Madilogo village (2000 Census: population 54) is located near the proposed Naoro
Brown dam site, and the villages of Ebologo (pop. 89) and Naoro (pop. 40) are located near the
reservoir area. Since the land, water, and other natural resources in the Naoro Brown project area are
all held under customary tenure arrangements by the local communities, both the land required for
specific civil works components and the access to use the area and its water resources for the Naoro
Brown project will require agreements on entitlements to customary land owners and settlers with
permissive rights granted in the past.

The population in the project area - the Mountain Koiari - shares the four characteristics that identify
indigenous peoples. The basis for reaching agreement on entitlements for land acquisition and for
long-term use of the area for hydropower will be the establishment of arrangements which enable a
process of free, prior, and informed consultation that starts early in the preparation phase and that
results in broad community support for the project. The parties to this consultation process will on
the one hand be PNG Power and later the selected Naoro Brown Project Developer, and on the other
hand the pop~lation in the project area comprising communities in the upper Naoro Brown catchment
area that o~ or have interests in the land, water, and pther natural resources.

Since little is documented about socio-economic and cultural conditions in the Naoro Brown project
area, a social impact assessment is required to furnish the information that will inform (a) the design of
an information and consultation strategy applicable to the preparation, implementation, and operation
of the project, (b) the determination of the full range of social impacts and the people impacted by the
project, (c) the development of a Naoro Brown Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework
that lays out the principles for management of land acquisition impacts and a~cess to use land and
water in the project area, and (d) the development of a Naoro Brown Resettlement Action Plan (or
Abbreviated Resettlement Plan) to manage the actual land acquisition and any resettlement that might
be required. This will be included as part of the ESIA to be prepared by the developer.

1.2     Key safeguards issues for the three-basin inventory

The three-basin inventory study will take into account technical, environmental and social issues in
scoping potential hydropower projects.

1.3     Key safeguards issues for the Renewable Energy and Rural Electrification policies:

Implementation of both the Renewable Energy Policy and the Rural Electrification Policy has
potential environmental and social implications. A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA) will be conducted to assess these implications and make recommendations regarding (i) the
establishment of the requisite institutional, regulatory and decentralization framework, (ii) integration
of the management of any environmental and social issues into subsequent planning decisions for the
location and scale of energy investments, alternatives, mitigation measures and monitoring activities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Potential indirect and I or long term impacts would be associated with future development of the
Naoro Brown Hydropower Project.

If the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project is developed, no negative significant long-term social
impacts are anticipated presently from future activities in the Naoro Brown project area. Instead, it is
expected that the information and consultation strategy would lead to agreements between the local
population and the Naoro Brown Project developer which would include leases and benefit sharing
arrangements that would have a positive impact on development and living standards in the Naoro
Brown project area. .

However, long term environmental impacts fr.om development of the Naoro Brown hydropower
project are possible and may include effects from the morphology of the channel of the Naoro River
immediately downstream of the dam site, and from impacts associated with erosion and sedimentation
in the catchment area and along the corridors of the access roads if these are left unmitigated. While
the access road to the Naoro Brown project site will likely follow the alignment of an old and
abandoned logging road, longer term induced impacts associated with the Naoro Brown Project could
involve the access roads potentially opening up access to forest areas in the Naoro and Brown river
watersheds that were previously difficult to access.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
With respect to the technical assistance under the proposed PNG Energy Sector Development Project,
Component 2 to support the preparation of th~ Naoro Brown Hydropower Project, in terms of
alternative sources of energy, the only alternative in the time-frame of the proposed Naoro Brown
project is diesel-fired generation. This is significantly more expensive than the anticipated cost of
new hydropower. Other potential hydropower projects have been considered in past studies. For
reasons including the matching of new supply to demand, and because the Naoro Brown project is
located closer to Port Moresby, these earlier studies concluded that development of hydropower on the
Brown River would be the best choice for commencing hydropower development. This conclusion is
still considered valid. In addition, because the feasibility study of the Naoro Brown project is
advanced it would be expected to provide supply to the Port Moresby grid well ahead of any other
hydro project.

One possible option for the configuration of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project would involve a
relatively large storage area. This option was discarded early on because of the flooding of the
Kokoda Trail (a trail of historic and cultural significance largely due to the part it played in WWII)
that would result. It has been agreed that development of the Naoro Brown project would not flood
any part of the Kokoda Trail and this constraint is built into the feasibility study.

Three possible arrangements for the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project, regarding the location of the
dam, tunnel and power plant were considered in the preliminary feasibility report:
o       Upstream Option: Dam site upstream of an identified water loss area (i.e., just upstream of
Madilogo Village);
o       Downstream Option: Dam site downstream of Madilogo village;
o       Vabuiagi Option: Dam site downstream of the confluence of the Naoro River with the
Vabuiagi (also called Fagume) River .

Based on considerations of dam height and storage, gross head, energy output, tunnel length and
access the recommended arrangement is the Upstream Option. Compared to the Upstream Option,
the Downstream option has similar tunnel and access road lengths, but poor storage and about 12%
less energy output than the Upstream Option. The Vabuiagi option would require a much higher dam
(64m compared to 19m), would flood a larger area, would require an extra 20km of access road and
would produce about 30% less energy.

The preferred arrangement is essentially run-of-river, providing only weekly storage which would
result in advantages (compared to no storage) including an increase in the electricity output from the
available head and flow and improvements to the overall system operation of the Port Moresby grid.

Further detail in provided in Annex 6 of the PNG Energy Sector Development Project Appraisal
Document.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
There will be two implementing agencies, namely the Energy Division of the Department of
Petroleum and Energy (DPE) and PNG Power. The Department of Environment and Conservation
(DEC) will also be involved as the line agency responsible for approving the EA process and for
issuing the environment license for new generation projects. DPE and PNG Power have no recent
experience in implementing World Bank-supported projects and have little or no internal
environmental or social management capacity. The proposed PNG Energy Sector Development
Project would provide support to address capacity issues at two levels: (i) at the sector level, the
environmental and social constraints and risks will be identified through the Strategic Environmental
and Social Assessment, and (ii) at the project level, tailor-made specific measures will be identified
and financed under the PNG Energy Sector Development Project to support PNG Power and DPE (and
DEC through DPE) consistent with their roles in the PNG Energy Sector Development Project and,
specifically, in the preparation of the environmental and social aspects of the Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project.

In the proposed PNG Energy Sector Development Project, assistance will be provided to ensure that
policies and strategies comply with World Bank safeguard requirements and that preparation of the
Naoro Brown Hydropower project incorporates these requirements (e.g., ToRs for ESIA, EMP,
Information and Consultation Strategy, RPF, and RAP; reflection of these requirements in the bidding
documents for the Naoro Brown Project Developer; and World Bank review of the ESIA, EMP, and
RAP undertaken by the Developer).

The role of the World Bank in supervision of the social and environmental aspects of the Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project under the PNG Energy Sector Development Project would end when the PNG
Energy Sector Development Project closes soon after financial close for the Naoro Brown
Hydropower Project is reached. Unless the World Bank were to become involved in the financing of
the Development of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project (i.e. under a subsequent project), ensuring
compliance with World Bank standards and policies for documents fmanced by the developer and I or
for those undertaken after the closing of the WB-financed PNG Energy Sector Development Project
would be the responsibility of GoPNG.

This may pose a risk that agreed social and environmental measures may not be implemented fully,
which could lead to negative social and I or environmental impacts. However, GoPNG and PNG
Power have specifically sought WB technical assistance support in order to benefit from WB
experience on hydropower development. Both GoPNG and WB view this as a first step in a longer
term engagement in the energy sector so it is unlikely that GoPNG would reverse the agreed
safeguards approach. Ensuring that the Naoro Brown Developer has clear responsibilities and TOR
for the agreed work, and supporting a strong information-sharing and consultation process throughout
the project, will also mitigate this risk.

Any civil works related to the Naoro Brown project undertaken while the proposed WB-financed PNG
Energy Sector Development Project is under implementation would be undertaken in compliance with
World Bank policies, even if World Bank is not financing the civil works.
Under the proposed PNG Energy Sector Development Project, the following support has been or will
be provided to address safeguards issues for the Naoro-Brown project:

         The feasibility study for the Naoro-Brown project was largely completed in 2011. In early
December 20 I 0, the feasibility consultants presented the initial findings to PNG Power providing an
indication of the likely size and location of the Naoro Brown project, which in turn provides an
indication of the location and types of environmental and social impacts which might be expected. In
January 2011, PNG Power held consultations at Madilogo Village. People from other villages that
may potentially be affected by the civil works and I or reservoir (including Naoro and Ebologa) also
participated. PNG Power provided an update to the villagers on the potential physical developments
proposed and the scope of potential environmental and social impacts as per the initial feasibility study
report. The meeting provided the villagers an early opportunity to understand the proposed Naoro
Brown Hydropower project and have an opportunity to voice their questions and concerns. The
feasibility study consultants and PNG Power undertook further consultation and information
dissemination during continued preparation of the feasibility study in 201 I. Most recently, in April
2012, PNG Power conducted another consultation at Madilogo Village.
•        In continuation of this early information sharing and consultation, a consultant will be
engaged (based on ToRs approved by the Bank) by PNG Power soon after the'proposed PNG Energy
Sector Development Project is approved to (i) deepen information sharing and consultation in the
project area, (ii) develop a strategy for information sharing and consultation, (iii) collect data to
analyze and describe the relevant socio-economic and cultural features including landowner
identification in potential core impact villages, (iv) undertake a preliminary determination of the
impacts of civil works on villages in the area, and (v) develop a Land Acquisition and Resettlement
Policy Framework that lays out the principles for management of land acquisition impacts and access
to use land and water in the project area. The outputs of this consultancy will be made available to
the developer.
         A Social and Environmental Panel of Experts and a separate Dam Safety Panel would be
engaged to provide oversight and advice on the ESIA, EMP and Dam Safety Issues. Until the Naoro
Brown Developer is in place, these panels would be financed under the proposed PNG Energy Sector
Development Project. Once the Naoro Brown Developer is in place, the Expert Panels would become
the responsibility of the Naoro Brown Developer. A communications consultant financed under the
proposed PNG Energy Sector Development project would support the information and consultation
activities over the same period .
•        The Naoro Brown Project Developer will be responsible for follow-up on the activities started
by the consultant for PNG Power. Activities from selection of the Naoro Brown Developer through
to financial close for the Naoro Brown Project are planned to:
o        Complete the genealogical census mapping of rights and interests in land.
o        Complete the identification based on the detailed engineering design of all people in the
project area affected by project activities related to civil works.
o        Reach agreement with men and women in the project area on entitlements regarding
compensation for losses, and entitlements involving leases and/or ongoing benefit sharing, and on
arrangements that ensure the timely, transparent, and equitable provision of agreed entitlements.
o        Establish the institutional arrangements required to ensure implementation and monitoring of
(i) agreements regarding compensation for losses, and entitlements concerning lease or benefit sharing
for use of the project area, and (ii) complaints and grievance resolution arrangements.
o        Continue information dissemination on the project along with consultation through the project
implementation phase.
o        Develop a Naoro Brown Resettlement Action Plan informed by the socio-economic and
cultural analysis, the genealogical census mapping, the determination of project impacts, the
consultation regarding entitlements, and the principles outlined in the Naoro Brown Land Acquisition
 and Resettlement Policy Framework.
 o       Finalize the Naoro Brown Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), the
 corresponding Naoro Brown Environmental Management Plans (EMP' s) and Naoro Brown Dam
 Safety Plans, all based on the terms of reference approved by the World Bank.

. ToRs approved by the World Bank for the preparation of these safeguards documents have been
  completed and are to be included in the bidding documents to select the Naoro Brown Developer in
  order to ensure that the selected Naoro Brown Developer is fully informed of the environmental and
  social requirements they will be held accountable for managing.

 Finally, these measures are all described in the GoPNG's Naoro Brown Environmental and Social
 Management Framework (ESMF), which constitutes the safeguards instrument for the PNG Energy
 Sector Development Project and has been prepared, approved by DEC, cleared by the World Bank and
 disclosed locally in PNG and in the Infoshop.
 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
 safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 With respect to the support under the proposed PNG Energy Sector Development aimed at preparation
 for the Naoro Brown project:

 Key stakeholders include people (women and men) with customary or permissive land rights in the
 project area (the Naoro Brown catchment area), the PNG Government (PNG Power, DEC, OPE), PNG
 civil society organizations engaged environmental and/or social development issues, and the Naoro
 Brown Project Developer and financiers when selected.

 Consultations with civil society organizations on the proposed PNG Energy Sector Development
 Project started in December 2010 and continue on an ongoing basis. Consultations on the draft
 Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) with civil society representatives took
 place in Port Moresby in February 2011 and on the updated draft in April2012. The ESMF was
 officially endorsed by the Department of Environment and Conservation in April 20 12

Consultations with communities in the Naoro Brown project area were also held in January 2011,
April 20 12 and will be continued and strengthened when the Information Sharing and Consultation
Strategy is developed. This strategy, which will be developed as part of the preliminary social
assessment and subsequently revised as part of the ESIA, is an important element of the proposed
WB-supported PNG Energy Sector Development Project design, to help ensure that the people in the
Naoro Brown project area receive culturally appropriate economic and social benefits, and that
adverse impacts are minimized, mitigated, and compensated. The strategy will include the following
elements:

 o        An approach to information dissemination and consultation on the project across the affected
 area that ensures (i) that both men and women receive timely and adequate information to make
 informed decisions, (ii) that the consultations are undertaken at locations and with groups of people
 that are meaningful in terms of the rights and interests in the project area, (iii) that the approach itself
 is accepted by the involved social groups and their representatives, and (iv) that it results in dec~sions
 that respond to the interests and concerns of both women and men in the project area, and advance the
 objectives of the project.
 o        Institutional arrangements and staffing (including identifying and addressing capacity building
 needs) to enable ongoing consultation during project preparation, implementation, and operation;
 o        Institutional arrangements that ensure that agreements are honored by both (i) the project (e.g.,
timely, transparent, and equitable provision ofagreed entitlements involving compensation for losses,
and lease or benefit sharing entitlements), and (ii) the involved communities (e.g., access to land for
civil works or restrictions on logging to ensure catchment area sustainability).
o        Institutional arrangements for handling of complaints and grievances that are accepted by the
involved communities and that provide for timely resolution.
o        Arrangements that ensure documentation comprising: (i) records on consultations, (ii)
monitoring of the implementation of agreements on entitlements and benefits, and (iii) records on the
management and resolution of complaints.

Information sharing: Draft Terms of Reference for the Naoro Brown Environmental Impact
Assessment (ESIA), Naoro Brown Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Naoro Brown
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Naoro Brown Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were
completed in 2012, and summaries will be translated into Tok Pisin and disclosed in Port Moresby and
at a local information center(s) in the 'project area. When completed, the Naoro Brown Resettlement
Policy Framework, Naoro Brown Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Naoro Brown
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) would also be disclosed in Port Moresby and at a local information
center in the project area, including summaries translated into Tok Pisin. A local information center
and meeting venue will be established in the Naoro Brown project area, and information materials will
be developed, to convey understanding of the project to people who may be illiterate and/or may not
understand maps and engineering drawings.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessmenf/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   23-Feb-2011
Date of submission to Info Shop                                               23-Feb-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country'' Disclosure
Papua New Guinea                                                              25-Feb-2011
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does th~ project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]         No [X]      NA [ ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X]         No[     1 NA [ 1
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public         Yes [X]     No[     ]   NA [ 1
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [X]    No [ 1 NA [ 1
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in      Yes [X 1   No[ 1 NA [ 1
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include      Yes [X 1   No[ ]   NA [ 1
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with        Yes [X 1   No[ 1 NA [ 1
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Wendy E. Hughes
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards
Coordinator:
Sector Manager:
