                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6291


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/06/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Paraguay                              Project ID: P123154
Project Name: Education
Task Team Leader: Ines Kudo
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 11,          Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: LCSHE                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Secondary education (100%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          20.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                          51.00
                                                                          51.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen teacher capacities and
increase the time that students spend engaged in relevant learning activities in the classroom.

 Progress toward meeting these development objectives would be measured by improvement in
key output and impact indicators which will be further identified during Project preparation.
Impact indicators for the Project are expected to be:
 (i)    Percentage of upper secondary school teachers who are independently certified in the
competencies of the new curriculum framework; and
 (ii) Percentage of time that students spend, on average, engaged in relevant learning activities
in the classroom, as measured through classroom observations in a representative sample of
schools.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) for an estimated amount of
US$20 million equivalent, over the course of four years. The stated PDO will be achieved
through the implementation of the following four components:
 Component 1. Improving teaching quality (US$8 million, 40 percent of total loan)

 This component will build upon pre-and in-service teacher training programs currently under
implementation to finance (a) assessment of teaching practices in the context of the new
curriculum framework; (b) fine-tuning the general models of pre and in-service teacher training
based on the findings of the assessment of teaching practices; and (c) implementation of
specialized training activities tailored to upper secondary teachers and principals.

 Component 2. Provision and use of teaching and learning materials (US$8 million, 40 percent
of total loan)

  This intervention will scale up the efforts to ensure adequate supply of teaching and learning
materials. Specifically, textbooks, teaching materials, and science laboratories will be provided
by this component through counterpart funds. In particular, ICT, audiovisual aids and the
training of teachers in their application will be financed by the loan.

 Component 3. Institutional strengthening (US$3 million, 15 percent of total loan)

  This component aims to strengthen the Ministry of Education (MINED)’s capacity to manage
upper secondary education at the central, provincial and school level. This component will
finance (a) the implementation of a more efficient, computerized teacher selection and
assignment system for upper secondary, based on the current teacher recruitment and
certification policies; (b) the provision of ICT equipment for de-concentrated education
supervision offices and upper secondary education management; (c) the strengthening of the
SNEPE (Sistema Nacional de Evaluación de los Procesos Educativos) for the forthcoming
student assessments, including technical personnel, test development and administration, data
analysis and dissemination, software and hardware; (d) the development and implementation of
an overall communication strategy for the Project, especially to address pressing concerns from
teachers' unions, and to involve them as partners for Project implementation; and (e) the
strengthening of administrative units in charge of Project implementation and management.

 Component 4. Monitoring and evaluation (US$1 million, 5 percent of total loan)

 This component aims to generate feedback on the implementation of Project activities and
strengthen the institutionalization of key evaluation systems. It includes the financing of: (a)
design and implementation of the Project monitoring framework; and (b) tailor-made research,
including an impact evaluation of the teacher training activities.

D. Project location (if known)
Project activities would take place throughout the entire Paraguayan territory, since upper
secondary education institutions are located throughout.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Indigenous Education Directorate will be in charge of the implementation of the Indigenous
Peoples Plan (IPP) of the Project under the supervision of the Steering Committee of the
Ministry of Education (MINED), which will implement the whole Project.

 The Steering Committee would be in charge of overall Project implementation. This Committee
would be chaired by the Minister of Education, and would comprise the Deputy Minister for
Educational Management, the Deputy Minister for educational development, the General
Director for Management and Finance, and the Executive Secretary of the Project Unit. The
General Director for Upper Secondary Education would be Executive Secretary of the Project
Unit.

 The ongoing Social Assessment related to indigenous peoples is reviewing the weaknesses and
opportunities for strengthening the management capacity of the Indigenous Education
Directorate of the Ministry of Education, in particular those skills related to OP/BP 4.10.

 Specific actions required to strengthen institutional capacity, including staff with needed
expertise, will be agreed with the Borrower, and the agreement will be included in the IPP.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Graciela Sanchez Martinez (LCSSO)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                             X
    The Project is not expected to have any environmental impact since it does not foresee any
civil works. It is anticipated that the Project’s environmental category will be a C.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
    OP/BP 4.10 will be triggered since approximately 100,000 indigenous peoples (IP) are
present in the Project#s area, which covers the entire the Paraguayan territory. A study by
UNESCO shows that the less-qualified teachers are located mostly in rural schools and in
indigenous communities. Therefore an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), based on an ongoing
Social Assessment (SA) is being developed in order to address inequality or disparities that could
negatively affect indigenous peoples. Both are being disclosed and consulted in compliance with
the OP/BP 4.10 requirements.

     The SA is being carried out building on: (a) the prior consultation with groups in indigenous
schools; and (b) data that will be provided by the recent Second Indigenous Congress. In
addition, UNIREM and the Unit of Indigenous Education will prepare a survey that will be
administered to an additional group of teachers to complement the information on intercultural
approaches to teacher training. The SA will evaluate the impact of the Project on beneficiary
groups, gender and diversity. It will also include an analysis of the JOPARA language (mix of
Guaraní and Spanish), which is spoken by 70 percent of the Paraguayan population. An
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be developed and consultations on this Plan will be held with
Project stakeholders. The SA and the IPP are expected to be finalized by June 2011. Both are
being disclosed and consulted in compliance with the OP/BP 4.10 requirements.
      A little more than half of the total indigenous population (50.6%) lives in the eastern region
of Paraguay. There are five linguistic families (Tupï-guaraní, Lengua Maskoy, Zamuco, Mataco-
Mataguayo, and Guaicurú) that are distributed into 17 ethnic groups and in more than 120 of the
total 414 indigenous communities of Paraguay. The latest census data reveal that these IP, with
great ethnic and linguistic diversity, historic wealth and their own customs, suffer extreme
poverty and serious social problems. The poverty rate among IP is higher than 95%, 8.5% live in
urban areas, and 73% are under 29 years of age. Most of the IP speak their own tongue and have
a limited knowledge of the Spanish language. The growth rate of the indigenous population is
3.9%.

       The survival strategies of the IP include a combination of economic activities including
agriculture, hunting, fishing, fruit gathering, occasional remunerated work and handicrafts.
54.1% of indigenous communities do not have land of their own, i.e. they do not have a property
title in the name of and at the disposal of the community itself. Illiteracy among the indigenous
population (15 years of age or more) is 51%, 26% of the communities have access to health
centers.

      The social organization of IP is based on kinship and joint residence. The Caciques enjoy
great authority and decision-making power but indigenous groups do not necessarily consider
such decisions as binding. Other particular characteristics of each ethnic group in terms of
political organization, cultural and historical aspects will be recorded in the SA and IPP.

     In spite of rich legislation that aims to protect the rights of indigenous ethnic groups, there
are many issues such as loss of tribal territories, segregation and absence of public policies, and
poor administration of justice. Laws conform to international conventions, among them
Convention 169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries and the United
Nation Convention.

     While the Instituto Paraguayo del Indígena (INDI) was created (Law 904/81 and Law
919/96 that modifies and expands several of its articles) to perform many functions with regard
to the development of indigenous peoples, from granting legal personality to communities up to
establishing policies, it is weak.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 08/31/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is expected to be finalized by June 2011.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Ines Kudo                                                   05/25/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             05/25/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Chingboon Lee                                               05/25/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
