                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/12/2013                                   Report No.: AC6702
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P079165                   Original Project Name: Sierra Rural
                                               Development Project
Country: Peru                                  Project ID: P127801
Project Name: Additional Financing to Sierra Rural Development Project
Task Team Leader: Renato Nardello
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28,          Estimated Board Date: April 2, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Sub-national government
administration (40%);General public administration sector (20%)
Theme: Rural non-farm income generation (30%);Administrative and civil service
reform (25%);Decentralization (25%);Rural markets (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            20
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                         5.60
         Local Communities                                                7.10
                                                                        12.70
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To improve the assets and economic conditions of rural families in selected areas of the
Borrower's Apurímac, Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Junín, Huánuco, and Pasco regions.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Rural Businesses (US$19.10 million, of which US$13.30 IBRD)
 This component will help promote rural growth and business opportunities by
supporting the design and implementation of plans proposed by groups of small rural
producers, to improve their production, market access, and income. For small producers
who already have access to markets, the project will seek to improve and diversify their
commercial activities and market access. For subsistence farmers (mainly indigenous
people) who currently produce primarily for self-consumption, the project will help
establish initial access to markets. In particular, it will promote productive alliances
between different actors in the value chain to strengthen market access and
competitiveness, increase productivity and production quality, improve capacity to
reliably deliver products to market on time, create more predictable demand, provide key
technological inputs, introduce new production practices, help disseminate timely market
and pricing information, and identify and exploit emerging niche markets.

 Plans would be both agricultural (crops, livestock, and agro-forestry) and
nonagricultural (aquaculture, tourism, services, handicrafts, small-scale industry, and
agribusiness).

  Examples of plans financed under the parent project include: (i) supporting alliances
between producers of staple crops and wholesalers, to ensure uniform quality standards
and reliable supply, (ii) collaboration between tour operators and communities to provide
training in tourist services and improving rural tourism facilities, (iii) supporting alliances
between the alpaca wool processing and export industry and local producers to provide
pricing incentives and improve upstream production quality, (iv) fostering cooperation
between producers and wholesalers/exporters of handicrafts and small-scale industry
products to overcome problems related to quality and quantity of supply by channeling
technical assistance, training, technology, and financing, and (v) helping producer groups
establish brand names to market their items better in national markets. Even though plans
are based on demand, and therefore are difficult to predict, it is expected that plans
financed under the AF will follow a pattern similar to the parent project's pattern.

 The main output will be implementation of about 1,320 agribusiness plans (620 under
the original loan and 700 under the additional financing) with clearly defined and
sustainable goals. Its main outcome will be to help an estimated 35,100 rural families
(18,600 under the original loan and 16,500 under the additional financing) attain
increased and diversified production, greater food security, improved standards of living,
and higher income when possible.

 Component 2: Territorial Development (US$7.10 million, of which US$5.70 IBRD)
 This component will support the design and implementation of plans to diversify,
expand, and improve the assets and production of rural families in areas that have limited
access to markets. It is expected that because of this lack of market access most plan
proposals will be aimed primarily at improving natural resources management, reducing
vulnerability to risks, and increasing agricultural and livestock production for self-
consumption by families and organized rural communities.

 By so doing, this component will address socioeconomic risk and insecurity among the
poor who lack access to basic services and are likely to be left behind even in periods of
broad economic growth. For these families, improving subsistence agriculture might not
increase their income, but it will improve their food security, nutrition, and overall well-
being as a first step out of poverty and escaping the "safety-first" dilemma that limits
their economic choices. The process of designing and collectively implementing
productive plans, supported by technical assistance, is intended to not only increase
community resources but help strengthen social capital, capacity, and commercial
alliances as well.

  Examples of plans financed under the parent project include: simple improvements to
increase yields, such as using improved cultivation techniques, soil conservation and
water retention methods, optimized input use, and plant protection. To the extent
possible, opportunities will also be sought to generate excess production for sale in local
markets. Even though plans are based on demand, and therefore are difficult to predict, it
is expect that plans financed under the AF will follow a pattern similar to the parent
project's one.

 The main output will be implementation of about 1,160 territorial development plans
(875 under the original loan and 375 under the additional financing) with clearly defined
and sustainable goals. Its main outcome will be to help an estimated 50,000 rural families
(35,000 under the original loan and 15,000 under the additional financing) attain
increased and diversified production, greater food security, improved standards of living,
and higher income when possible.

 Component 3: Project Management and M&E (US$6.50 million, of which US$0.9
IBRD)
 This component would ensure efficient and effective development planning in achieving
the project development objective and other indicators and to feed that information back
into enhancing project implementation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project area includes the same six regions in the southern and central Sierra area that
were covered under the parent project: Huánuco, Junín, Pasco, Apurímac, Ayacucho, and
Huancavelica. Altogether there are around 480,000 rural households in the project area.
Project activities under the additional financing will be introduced sequentially into the
six regions.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Raul Tolmos (LCSEN)
   Mr German Nicolas Freire (LCSSO)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                  Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                       X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no anticipated large-scale, significant, or irreversible adverse impacts
associated with the project.

  Environment: The project is expected to have positive environmental impacts through
financing subprojects that promote sustainable natural resources management, watershed
protection, and soil conservation. As a result of subproject activities, the project is
expected to (i) conserve soil, (ii) maintain or improve hydrological functions, and (iii)
help conserve high mountain ecosystems and their biodiversity.

 Given that the specific location and nature of specific subprojects have not yet been
determined, specific environmental impacts, location and magnitude cannot be
ascertained before appraisal. The only possible adverse environmental impacts would be
strictly unintended; they could possibly include: (i) soil erosion; (ii) biodiversity loss; (iii)
deforestation; (iv) loss, degradation or conversion of natural habitats; (v) disrupting
hydrological dynamics; (vi) water pollution; (vii) minor adverse health impacts; and (viii)
damage to watersheds.

 Social: The project is expected to have a positive impact on social inclusion by
increasing assets and economic opportunities for rural families in areas of the Sierra that
suffered high levels of violence related to the Shining Path during the 1980s and 1990s.
About 75 percent of the expected project beneficiaries are indigenous subsistence
farmers.

  PERFORMANCE UNDER THE ORIGINAL PROJECT.
  No major environmental issues have occurred in the implementation of this project,
given the small scale of the rural businesses and community development sub-projects
financed in rural areas and small towns. The project does not involve major civil works
and infrastructure. Minor environmental impacts related to subprojects such as sanitary
and hygiene conditions in guinea pig farms, work conditions in shoe manufacturing
artisanal workshops, construction of confined solid waste dumping sites, and indoor air
quality in bakeries using fuel wood have been recently reported but are easily mitigated.
These impacts have been addressed by appropriate environmental assessment guidelines
that have been incorporated into the revised Environmental and Social Management
Framework (2011) and through a workshop on social and environmental safeguard
policies held in 2011 to project team members from the six regional offices. Additional
measures to address environmental impacts and meet Bank environmental safeguards
during the AF project include: (i) full time inclusion of two environmental and social
specialists in the project executing unit, and (ii) random field visits to selected project
sites by the Bank environmental and social specialists; and (iii) quarterly social and
environmental supervision reports prepared by the PIU. Project has not supported any
subproject that could negatively affect forest ecosystems and natural habitats.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project is specifically designed to foster demand-driven subprojects in the
intervention area that have favorable long-term socioeconomic and environmental
impacts. The subprojects go through screening process to ensure that maximum
socioeconomic benefits are accrued and any possible negative environmental impacts are
avoided or minimized.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
At the time the Parent Project was prepared, a supply-chain approach was considered,
which would select certain winner products and then seek to open the bottlenecks that
were keeping them from reaching the market. This approach was rejected because of its
limited socioeconomic and development impacts given that vast areas have low market
access, particularly compared to the more inclusive territorial approach that would build
on existing assets to reduce poverty rather than only concentrating on increased
production.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of the Environmental Assessment (EA) developed during preparation of the
parent project, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was also developed,
which included identification of the potential environmental impacts associated with
project activities. Given that the exact location and specific nature of subprojects to be
developed under the project would be determined only during project implementation, the
EA evaluated the range of potential types of subprojects and the lands on which they
would be implemented that could be supported through the project. The EA and
preliminary assessments confirmed that the project area, which ranges from 2,000 meters
to about 5,000 meters above sea level, includes highland ecosystems that are ecologically
fragile and prone to degradation.

 The aforementioned EMF included a screening process for identifying the potential
impacts of proposed subprojects and proposes specific measures to mitigate such impacts
and to monitor their implementation. As indicated in the original Social Assessment (see
below), there has been ample consultation and stakeholder analysis in the preparation of
the project which included discussions regarding the potential environmental impacts and
benefits associated with the proposed project.

 The EMF included the necessary procedures to avoid, minimize or mitigate the potential
negative environmental impacts listed above. The EMF is mainstreamed within the
overall project rather than being a separate component. The environmental impact
review, prevention, and mitigation measures recommended by the EMF were
incorporated into the criteria and procedures of the Operational Manual.

 These operational rules included (i) clear eligibility and prioritization criteria for the
types of subproject activities that can be financed; (ii) clear eligibility and prioritization
criteria for the types of lands on which those subprojects can be financed; (iii) review
procedures and specific responsibilities within AGRORURAL to ensure that all
subproject contracts are awarded, administered, and supervised in accordance with these
criteria; and (iv) environmental management procedures to ensure that projects are
implemented and maintained in accordance with environmental best practice.
AGRORURAL, which will have qualified environmental and social specialists on staff,
will be responsible for supervising overall compliance of the Bank environmental
safeguards. The eligibility criteria for subprojects require, inter alia, (i) no clearing or
conversion of forests or other natural habitats to establish new agricultural systems, (ii)
any agro-forestry or reforestation activity can only use non-native species if they do not
displace native species or natural ecosystems, (iii) any small community works or
infrastructure activities strictly adhere to the 3-stage, 15-step EA evaluation process
explained in the PAD, and (iv) selection criteria will give greater weight to subproject
proposals that would directly promote conservation and restoration of degraded natural
resources.

  The EMF provided criteria to (i) screen subproject proposals by the type of activity
(including basic infrastructure) and the sensitivity of the proposed sites, (ii) identify key
potential adverse environmental impacts, (iii) ensure subprojects do not contribute to key
environmental problems currently faced in the Sierra, (iv) determine the environmental
legal and institutional requirements in Peru (including the minimum requirements for
institutional capacity), (v) provide measures to mitigate potential adverse impacts, and
(vi) carry out the process of public consultations. These criteria also include a list of
activities that are not eligible for subproject financing. It provides specific guidelines and
questionnaires for the process of reviewing subproject proposals. The EMF also includes
measures to ensure consistency with the Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest Management
(OP 4.09), and Forest Policies (OP 4.36). These policies are triggered as the project has
the potential to affect natural habitats (including forests), and may support pest
management activities as part of productive activities. As such, project and site screening
criteria have been defined and are included in the EMF within the Operations Manual.

 The EMF included in the EA developed during preparation of the parent project
provides a 15-step evaluation process in three stages: (i) preparation, (ii) prefeasibility,
and (iii) feasibility. All subprojects will go through the preparation and prefeasibility
stages. Based on the results of the prefeasibility screening, some subprojects will have to
complete the feasibility steps as well.

 Borrower's capacity to plan and implement these measures is considered moderate to
high, based on previous and ongoing project experience.

 In addition, a new and more practical Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) was prepared by the borrower during implementation of the parent
project (2011). This ESMF is the tool currently guiding the borrower's compliance with
the Bank environmental and social safeguard policies. It is expected that, during the AF,
the PIU would be strengthened with two full-time specialists to ensure compliance with
environmental and social safeguards. Also, a three-day training event on social and
environmental safeguards and management was held in Ayacucho in February 2011 with
full participation of the PIU's central and regional teams, including participation of
consultants that prepared the ESMF.

 The borrower also conducted a comprehensive social assessment (SA) in the six regions
of the central and southern Sierra that is covered by the proposed project (Ayacucho,
Apurimac, Huancavelica, Huánuco, Junín and Pasco). The main areas covered by the
social assessment include (i) social objectives, (ii) legal framework, (iii) stakeholder
groups, (iv) consultations, (v) key inputs to the project, (vi) social characteristics of the
project areas (indigenous groups, gender, potential risks, and impacts), and (vii)
monitoring and evaluation arrangements.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders involved in the project can be divided into those that are expected to benefit
or be affected directly by the project and those that may act as facilitators in the
implementation of the project. Main stakeholders in the rural Sierra include: (a) Rural
communities and organizations of subsistence farmers and indigenous people who will
participate and get benefited from the project through Component 2; (b) Regional and
provincial governments that can submit proposals for institutional strengthening under
Component 3; (c) Associations or groups of producers and small microenterprises and
groups of small producers who will participate and benefit from the project through
Component 1; (d) Civil society organizations that will participate in the project as experts
and provide technical assistance to project beneficiaries, and as members of the Mesas de
Concertación de Lucha contra la Pobreza and the Local Coordinating Councils (CCLs),
which can play a principal role in coordinating and planning development investments at
the provincial level; (e) Representatives of the public and private sector as well as civil
society entities that compose the Local Resources Allocation Committees (CLARs), in
charge of validating the selection of subproject proposals; and (f) Farmers and producers
not affiliated with peasant communities or organized groups. To avoid that rural poor,
that neither belong to such groups nor have other legally recognized affiliation, are
excluded from the activities, the project must develop a well-structured communication
plan and give unaffiliated farmers enough time to organize groups that are eligible to
participate in the project.

 During the preparation of the Parent Project, in 2006, representative of about 120 civil
society organizations with good practices and experience in rural business and rural
development attended twelve workshops and were consulted on five main topics
including on project design and component activities. Similarly, the project consulted
more than 10,000 farmers (30 percent of whom were women), which all welcomed the
project in their communities.

 To strengthen the stakeholder participation the project also includes a Communication
Plan that will use appropriate local media to disseminate information in Spanish and
Quechua to promote participation in the project (and later to disseminate information on
implementation and results).



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/01/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/25/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/17/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/30/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/30/2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/04/2006
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/15/2006
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/25/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/17/2012
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
All safeguard documents contained in the Environmental, Social, and Cultural
Management Framework revised in 2011.
 The whole project is considered to benefit Indigenous Peoples and a separate IPP/IPF is
not requested.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     No
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           N/A
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
  provisions for certification system?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Renato Nardello                           12/14/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Raul Tolmos                               11/30/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr German Nicolas Freire                     11/30/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Laurent Msellati                          12/16/2012
  Comments:
