                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC464
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Peru                                    Project ID:                      P123151
                              Project Name:                  PE Basic Education (P123151)
                              Task Team Leader:              Ines Kudo
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 16-Apr-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            24-Jul-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 LCSHE                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        General education sector (50%), Public administration- Education (50%)
                              Theme:                         Managing for development results (50%), Education for the knowledge economy (50%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  Borrower                                                                                                                470.00
                                  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                    30.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                   500.00
                              Environmental Category:        C - Not Required
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to (i) improve priority schools' capacity to provide students with quality learning opportunities, and
                              (ii) strengthen system capacity to measure quality, track results and manage information inbasic education.

                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) structured as a SWAp for an estimated amount of US$30 million equivalent,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              with a counterpart funding of approximately US$470 million, over the course of four years. The stated PDOs will be achieved through the
                              implementation of the following three components: (1) implementing new educational models to improve the quality of priority schools; (2)
                              strengthening system capacity to measure quality and track results in basic education; and (3) strengthening system capacity to manage
                              information and spending efficiency in basic education.

                              Technical assistance activities will be built into each subcomponent as part of the inputs needed to produce the specific outputs. These activities
                              will support the implementing agencies through consultancies, studies, independent evaluations, research, study-tours and other capacity building
                              and analytical activities that will be agreed upon with the government during project preparation and included in the budget lines of the supported
                              government programs.

                              Component 1. Implementing new educational models to improve the quality of priority schools (US$ 15 million, 50 percent of total loan). This
                              component would support the design and implementation of a strategy to provide students in priority schools with higher quality learning
                              opportunities. This would be achieved through the development of new educational models that are more pertinent and effective in addressing the
                              particular educational needs and conditions of rural, multigrade, and bilingual schools, as well as those operating in high-risk urban environments.
                              The component would focus on the four subject areas prioritized by the current administration –Math, Communications, Science and Citizenship–
                              and promote the development of a core set of socio-emotional skills that are directly associated with better educational outcomes, income and
                              employment in the future. This component has four sub-components:

                              (i) Subcomponent 1.1. Design and implementation of education models and classroom support materials for priority schools. This would support
                              the development and implementation of four specific education models for schools operating in the most challenging environments, and which
                              have been prioritized by the new administration: (1) Rural Multigrade Monolingual Primary (RMP), (2) Rural Bilingual Education (RBE), (3)
                              Alternative Rural Secondary (ARS), and (4) At-Risk Urban schools (ARUS). All models are grounded in global evidence of cost-effectiveness and
                              promote a student-centered pedagogy that combines more inter-active pedagogical practice by teachers with more self-directed and cooperative
                              learning by students. This subcomponent includes the development of each pedagogical model, the design and production of guides and materials
                              for students and teachers.
                              (ii) Subcomponent 1.2. Improvement of classroom environment and conditions would support the reconditioning of classrooms in priority schools
                              and the provision of adequate furnishings, classroom libraries, learning corners, teaching and learning materials and ICT resources as needed to
                              provide an “enriching environment? conducive to learning. The project would disburse against outputs (such as “improved classroom?) instead of
                              inputs, based on a detailed costing of all elements needed to improve classroom environment.
                              (iii) Subcomponent 1.3. In-service teacher training and mentoring in priority schools would support the development and implementation of in-
                              service teacher training and mentoring programs to develop teacher competencies to adequately implement the new student- centered educational
                              models. It will target priority schools and networks (where it applies) as intervention units, instead of individual teachers. This subcomponent
                           entails the development of the content, methodology, guidelines and strategy for training teachers in priority schools with the active approach
                           shared by all four educational models. It also includes the certification of decentralized education management units (Instancias de Gestión
                           Educativa Descentralizada, or IGEDs) and pedagogical institutes to deliver decentralized in-service teacher training in the new educational
                           models. It will also support the implementation of teacher mentoring activities in priority schools, the certification of teachers in the new
                           competencies, and the monitoring and evaluation of these activities. The component will be aligned with the new “National Framework for Good
                           Teaching? (NFGT). Again, the project would disburse against outputs (“trained teachers?) instead of inputs, relative to the cost of training a teacher.
                           (iv) Subcomponent 1.4. Strengthening pedagogic leadership in priority schools would support the development and implementation of in-service
Public Disclosure Copy




                           training programs for school principals in the same schools targeted with subcomponent 1.3 and the consolidation of rural school networks with
                           one principal per network. The training programs would focus on strengthening the pedagogic leadership of school principals and developing the
                           management competencies needed to implement the new educational models. In rural areas, the component would support the identification,
                           registration and operation of networks of rural multigrade schools, assigning them one full-time principal to provide pedagogic and administrative
                           support to teachers in the network. These networks are pivotal for articulating school- and teacher-support strategies, and for reducing the
                           administrativeburden on teacher-principals from small multigrade schools. The project would disburse against outputs (“trained principals?) instead
                           of inputs, relative to the cost of training a school principal.

                           Component 2. Strengthening system capacity to measure quality and track results in basic education (US$ 6 million, 20 percent of total loan). This
                           component will strengthen the Ministry’s systems for measuring student learning, evaluating teacher performance, and monitoring the quality of
                           teaching practices at the classroom level. Specifically, the government proposes to: (i) scale up its current student assessment system; (ii) develop
                           a comprehensive Teacher Evaluation System to measure teacher performance, and manage the entrance, promotion and tenure of teachers
                           within the new Teaching Career Ladder adopted in 2008 (Carrera Publica Magisterial); and (iii) to monitor how effectively teachers and students
                           interact and make use of time and other education inputs at the classroom level. This component has three sub-components:

                           (i) Subcomponent 2.1. Strengthening the Student Learning Assessment System. The government proposes to scale up its existing 2nd grade
                           student assessment to cover other subjects (Science and Citizenship) and grades (4th, 8th, 11th) in primary and secondary school, and also to
                           introduce a tool for measuring child development outcomes in preschool. This sub-component would support the development of student
                           evaluations as part of a larger student learning assessment system that promotes the use of test results to build effective community-school
                           partnerships for improving learning outcomes. It would involve the development and dissemination of national learning standards and progress
                           maps; the expansion of universal standardized tests (UST) to other grades in primary and secondary with reports to parents and schools; and the
                           collection and dissemination of early childhood development (ECD) indicators at the preschool level.
                           (ii) Subcomponent 2.2. Teacher Evaluation System would support the development and implementation of a comprehensive Teacher Evaluation
                           System (TES), in the context of the new performance-based Teaching Career (Carrera Publica Magisterial), the National Framework for Good
                           Teaching (NFGT), and the Teacher Training System. The ultimate objective of the TES is to promote teacher development and provide feedback
                           for improved performance. The system will be oriented toward evaluation activities and instruments that are formative and relevant for teachers´
                           practice, rather than punitive.
                           (iii) Subcomponent 2.3. Monitoring time-on-task in the classroom. An innovative element of this operation is the Government’s interest in
                           pushing the envelope and ensuring that having the elements for school quality in place actually translates into more effective teaching and
                           improved student learning. To monitor these dynamics at the classroom-level, the government has selected a new tool, called the "Stallings
                           classroom snapshot", which in OECD and other LAC countries has demonstrated the ability to generate quantitatively robust, direct, and
                           meaningful measures of the classroom level dynamics that are this program's ultimate goal –to ensure that all students receive high quality
                           instruction. This subcomponent would support the use of the Stallings instrument to generate the first-ever data on these critical issues in a Bank
                           project. The Ministry proposes to monitor two particular indicators in a representative sample of schools: i) the percentage of class time used on
                           learning activities; and ii) the percentage of class time that the teacher successfully maintains all students engaged in learning activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 3. Strengthening system capacity to manage information in basic education (US$ 9 million, 30 percent of total loan). This component
                           aims to facilitate the collection, organization, analysis, and use of education data for planning, management, financing and accountability in the
                           provision of basic education services.

                           (i) Subcomponent 3.1. Integrated Education M anagement and Information System (EMIS) would support the development and implementation
                           of a student-centered information system to provide accurate and timely information through an efficient architecture of integrated systems
                           supported by adequate technologies. It would connect all administrative and pedagogic information, and allow for the tracking of individual
                           students as they move through the system. The system will generate real-time data on the supply and demand for teachers and resources.
                           (ii) Subcomponent 3.2. Results-based planning and budgeting system would support the consolidation and expansion of the Ministry of
                           Education’s systems for the allocation, execution and accounting of public resources (SIGA), as well as for the planning, implementation, reporting,
                           monitoring and evaluation of intervention strategies and activities (SIGMA). SIGA is the system developed by the Finance Ministry (MEF) for
                           budgeting RBB activities, and monitoring the execution of these budgets, but it is only about to be piloted in the Ministry of Education. . SIGMA is
                           the system developed by MED, with the Bank’s support, to manage priority activities, including planning and costing, monitoring and sharing of
                           experiences. This subcomponent would support the development of detailed costing kits in SIGA for each core activity supported by this project;
                           the development of monitoring applications in SIGMA for those activities; and the interface between both systems, which would be fully integrated
                           into the EMIS.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           PERU (rural/urban)


                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Under review


                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team



                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                                            ✖        The Project is not expected to have any large or irreversible
                                                                                                                                    environmental impacts since currently no civil works or construction
                                                                                                                                    activities will be supported by this project, either with Bank financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                    or counterpart funds. However, given that it is likely someschool
                                                                                                                                    renovations may be required down the road the team will discuss
                                                                                                                                    with the client the possibility of including civil works as part of the
                                                                                                                                    project, and evaluate potential environmental impacts during project
                                                                                                                                    preparation activities.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                                      ✖                      The natural habitats policy is not applicable as no natural habitats
                                                                                                                                    will be adversely affected by proposed project activities.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                               ✖                      The forests policy is not applicable as no forested areas will be
                                                                                                                                    adversely affected by proposed project activities.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                                          ✖                      This project will not support the purchasing or use of pesticides or
                                                                                                                                    herbicides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                           ✖                      No sites with potential physical cultural resources will be included as
                                                                                                                                    possible project sites.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                       ✖                                   This will be assessed more precisely during project preparation and
                                                                                                                                    a social assessment conducted to analyze the potential impacts on
                                                                                                                                    indigenous communities.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                              ✖                      No project activities which require involuntary resettlement will be
                                                                                                                                    supported by this operation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖                      This operation will not support any activities related to the
                                                                                                                                    construction, rehabilitation or use of dams.
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖                      No international waterways are included within the project site.
                            7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      No disputed areas are found within the proposed project area.


                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 21-Feb-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                To be determined.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Maria Elena Paz Gutzalenko                                                                      Date: 29-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                           Date: 30-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Erik A. Bloom (SM)                                                                              Date: 29-Dec-2011
                            Comments:




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
