                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          APPRAISAL STAGE
.
                                                                               Report No.: 73036
.
Date ISDS
                              21-Sep-2012
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     Peru                 Project ID:                P122194
    Project Name:                Higher Education Quality Improvement Project (P122194)
    Task Team Leader:            Marcelo Becerra
    Estimated Appraisal Date: 07-Sep-2012             Estimated Board Date: 20-Nov-2012
    Managing Unit:               LCSHE                Lending Instrument:        Specific Investment
                                                                                 Loan
    Sector:                      Tertiary education (100%)
    Theme:                       Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
    Financing (in USD Million)
        Financing Source                                                                          Amount
        Borrower                                                                                     27.17
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        25.00
       Total                                                                                         52.17
    Environmental Category: C - Not Required
    Is this a Repeater project? No
.
.
    2. Project Objectives
    The objective of the Project is to improve Peru’s higher education quality assurance system through
    the promotion of self- and external evaluation, the financing of improvement plans, and the provision
    of information.
.
    3. Project Description

              1.       Component 1: Development of methods, instruments, norms and capacity for
              evaluation and accreditation (estimated total cost: US$7.92 million; Bank: US$3.80
              million). Strengthening the capacity of CONEAU, CONEACES, HEIs and EEFAs to handle
              their respective responsibilities within the quality assurance system.
      (a) Subcomponent 1.1: Development of management, planning and evaluation capacity of
          CONEAU and CONEACES (estimated total cost: US$1.41 million; Bank: US$0.68
          million). Enhancing of CONEAU and CONEACE’s management, planning and evaluation
          capacity by developing standards, norms and procedures for evaluation and accreditation,
          including those for the supervision of the EEFAs.

      (b) Subcomponent 1.2: Development of self-evaluation and external evaluation capacity
          (estimated total cost: US$1.91 million; Bank: US$0.91 million). Strengthening of the
          capacity of (i) HEIs to engage in both internal and external evaluation processes; and (ii)
          EEFAs to undertake external evaluations, including learning from other experiences at the
          regional and international levels.

      (c) Subcomponent 1.3: Support for Project implementation (estimated total cost: US$4.61
          million; Bank: US$2.21 million). Provision of support for the technical and administrative
          management of the Project.

2.      Component 2: Development and consolidation of a higher education Quality Assurance
Information System (estimated total cost: US$5.19 million; Bank: US$2.49 million). Developing and
consolidating a higher education quality assurance information system for the systematic gathering,
processing and dissemination of reliable data regarding higher education quality assurance as well as
graduates’ performance in the labor market, through:


      (a) Subcomponent 2.1: Development and consolidation of an observatory of the
          accreditation of Peru’s higher education (Acredita Perú) (estimated total cost: US$1.65
          million; Bank: US$0.79 million). Development and consolidation of an observatory of the
          accreditation process of Peru’s higher education (Acredita Perú), responsible for the
          organization and dissemination of information on standards, criteria, indicators, EEFAs, as
          well as the evaluation and accreditation procedures by degree programs and HEIs.

      (b) Subcomponent 2.2: Establishment of an observatory of higher education graduates
          (Futuro Profesional) (estimated total cost: US$3.13 million; Bank: US$1.50 million).
          Establishment of an observatory of higher education graduates (Futuro Profesional),
          responsible for systematically collect, process and disseminate statistical information about
          the performance of higher education graduates in the labor market, providing information
          regarding employability and salaries of graduates from different programs and HEIs.

      (c) Subcomponent 2.3: Elaboration of sector studies (estimated total cost: US$0.41 million;
          Bank: US$0.19 million). Carrying out of several studies aiming at a better understanding of
          Peru’s higher education, including inter alia: (i) the development of a methodology and
          initial data collection to carry out an evaluation regarding the long term effects of the
          introduction of a quality assurance system; (ii) in depth socio-cultural assessment, in the
          framework of the Project’s Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF); (iii) assessing
          the role of information in the choice of post-secondary education; and (iv) the effect of
          accreditation in Peru’s higher education system.
    3.      Component 3: Fund for Quality Enhancement (estimated total cost: US$39.06 million;
    Bank: US$18.72 million). Promoting the improvement of the quality and relevance of academic
    programs and HEIs, through the supporting of the establishment of the FEC and its two windows of
    financing, namely:


        (a) Subcomponent 3.1: External Evaluation of IEESs (estimated total cost: US$0.59 million;
            Bank: US$0.28 million). External evaluation of IEESs (institution-wide and for technical
            programs in health and education) by the EEFA of their choice, after completion of
            self-evaluation.


        (b) Subcomponent 3.2: Support to Improvement Plans (estimated total cost: US$38.46
            million; Bank: US$18.43 million). Implementation of Improvement Plans for both IEESs and
            universities (including programs within HEIs), based on the results of the self and external
            evaluation.

    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
    known)
    The implementing agency, COSUSINEACE, is located in Lima but the project will be implemented
    nationally. Many of the higher education institutions that will benefit from project investments are
    located in areas in which there are significant numbers of indigenous peoples.
.
    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Kristyna Bishop ( LCSSO )
.
    6. Safeguard Policies                     Triggered ?     Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01       No              The Project will not be financing any new
                                                              construction or civil works. The
                                                              Improvement Plans for the various
                                                              institutions are expected to include some
                                                              routine maintenance and refurbishment of
                                                              existing infrastructure that will be subject to
                                                              local legislation concerning worker health
                                                              and safety and disposal of materials such as
                                                              paint. For these reasons, this Project is a
                                                              Category C.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               No              The Natural Habitats policy is not triggered
                                                              since the Project will not finance activities
                                                              in these areas. Most if not all Project
                                                              activities will take place in urban areas.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                        No              The Forest policy is not triggered as the
                                                              Project will not finance any activities that
                                                              could affect the health and quality of
                                            forests, the rights and welfare of the people
                                            that depend on them, or changes in their
                                            management or utilization.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No    This policy is not triggered since, given that
                                            the Project is not in the agriculture sector, it
                                            will not procure pesticides or lead to their
                                            increased use.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No   The Physical Cultural Resources policy is
                                            not triggered since no major civil works will
                                            be financed under the Project and therefore
                                            it is not expected.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes   The Indigenous Peoples policy is triggered
                                            as the Project has a nationwide scope and
                                            will affect higher education institutions that
                                            have indigenous students. In order to ensure
                                            that indigenous peoples derive the
                                            maximum benefit possible from the
                                            investments made under this Project and
                                            that their interests and concerns are
                                            reflected in any programs, curricula, and
                                            pedagogic materials that are targeted for
                                            improvement under the PMI/FEC, an IPPF
                                            has been prepared and disseminated per the
                                            requirements of OP 4.10.The IPPF includes:
                                            (a) a summary of the legal and institutional
                                            framework regarding indigenous peoples
                                            and education in Peru; (b) a summary of the
                                            relevant demographic, social, cultural, and
                                            political characteristics of indigenous
                                            peoples in Peru; (c) an analysis of the
                                            current barriers to access or gaps in
                                            information that impact participation in the
                                            labor market; d) the results of the
                                            consultation with indigenous students and
                                            representatives mentioned above; and e) a
                                            matrix of recommendations based on the
                                            consultations and the social assessment that
                                            are intended to improve access and quality
                                            of higher education for indigenous peoples
                                            in Peru.

                                            The draft IPPF was shared with national
                                            indigenous leaders in Lima and indigenous
                                            students in Cusco, Iquitos and Lima that
                                            currently attend higher education
                                            institutions. Their recommendations
                                            regarding how to address the current
                                            barriers to access and the matrix of strategic
                                            options have been incorporated into the
                                           final version of the IPPF. Importantly and as
                                           a result of these consultations, the threshold
                                           for the mandatory elaboration of IPPs was
                                           lowered from 10 to 5% of indigenous
                                           students in the student body.

                                           The IPPF was formally disclosed on Sept
                                           12th on the CONEAU website and will be
                                           translated into Quechua. A summary will be
                                           translated into Aimara, Shipibo, Awajun,
                                           and 7 other indigenous languages. The IPPF
                                           and the translated versions will be
                                           disseminated by the Borrower via their
                                           institutional website and on Infoshop per the
                                           requirements of OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous
                                           Peoples).

                                           During implementation, IPPs will be
                                           prepared for those HEIs that are selected for
                                           the implementation of an Institutional
                                           Improvement Plan (PMI) and where at least
                                           5% of their student population is
                                           indigenous. The IPPs must undergo a
                                           process of free, prior and informed
                                           consultations with: (i) the Indigenous
                                           student body at the institution, (ii)
                                           representatives of Indigenous student unions
                                           related to the institution, and/or (iii)
                                           representatives of the local Indigenous
                                           community where appropriate. Based on
                                           these consultations, the IPP must receive the
                                           broad community support of the indigenous
                                           community for which it is intended in order
                                           for it to receive the no-objection of the
                                           Bank.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   No   The Involuntary Resettlement policy is not
                                           triggered. The Project would finance some
                                           upgrading of existing infrastructure and
                                           installation of equipment in existing
                                           HEI-owned buildings but there would be no
                                           new construction or land acquisition. HEIs
                                           would be encouraged, however, to ensure
                                           that information regarding the work to be
                                           completed would be proactively shared with
                                           students and faculty and that good practices
                                           regarding safe and environmentally
                                           appropriate disposal of old equipment
                                           would be used.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No   The Project will neither construct nor use
                                                               water from any dams.
    Projects on International Waterways        No              No Project activities will take place on or
    OP/BP 7.50                                                 affect International Waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No              No Project activities will take place in
                                                               Disputed Areas.
.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
    and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The Project represents an important opportunity to promote the effective inclusion of indigenous
    students in higher education institutions and programs and improve their academic performance at
    HEIs. As a result, the potential social impacts of the Project are expected to be positive. However,
    there is a risk that the Project will fail to benefit indigenous peoples if specific measures and
    considerations are not included in the project design. For this reason, an IPPF has been prepared,
    consulted and disclosed as part of Project preparation and IPPs will be prepared for institutions with
    more than 5% of indigenous students that implement an Institutional Improvement Plan under
    Component 3.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
    the project area:
    Concerns have been raised during the preparation of similar projects that improved educational
    facilities will promote outmigration from indigenous communities to urban areas or possibly out of the
    country, which has been the case in Peru since the 1950s. While not a definitive strategy, it is
    anticipated that the focus on improving access and quality of all – including “non-top? and other
    higher education institutions – will allow indigenous students to access quality tertiary education
    closer to home and the investments in better understanding the local labor market will help indigenous
    graduates make better career decisions and find employment in their field of study in their own
    communities or at least region.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
    impacts.
    The Team considered developing an Indigenous Peoples Plan for the whole Project. However, given
    that many activities are still undefined and many of the activities in Component 1 and 2 are
    administrative in nature, it was decided to prepare an IPPF for Component 3 and to have institutions
    only above a certain threshold – 5% of total student population is indigenous - develop an IPP for the
    implementation of Institutional Improvement Plans. It is felt that this approach will maximize
    ownership by institutions and ensure that better targeted and more comprehensive consultations will be
    held and will result in more relevant IPPs.
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
    assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    The implementing agency has limited experience with the Bank’s safeguard policies. As a result,
    Project activities include training and on-going support for the implementation of the IPPF and
    compliance with OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. The Borrower will be supported by the Bank team
    to undertake the following important safeguard activities: (i) prepare, consult, disseminate and
    implement the IPPs; (ii) support HEIs with significant indigenous populations to develop their IPPs;
    and (iii) monitor the implementation of the approved IPPs.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    Key stakeholders, as identified by the social assessment, are the following indigenous peoples
    organizations, national leaders and youth leaders: Asociación Interétnica de Desarrollo de la Selva
    Peruana (AIDESEP); Confederación de Nacionalidades Amazónicas del Perú (CONAP);
    Confederación Campesina del Perú (CCP); Confederación Nacional Agraria (CNA); Confederación
    Nacional de Comunidades del Perú Afectadas por la Minería (CONACAMI); Organización Nacional
    de Mujeres Indígenas Andinas y Amazónicas del Perú (ONAMIAP); Unión de Comunidades Aimara
    (UNCA); Federación Nacional de Mujeres Campesinas, Artesanas, Indígenas Nativas y Asalariadas
    (FEMUCARINAP); and Pacto de Unidad Indígena. These organizations were formally invited to free,
    prior, and informed consultation of the IPPF at the COSUSINEACE’s office in Lima. Moreover,
    consultations were held in the field with youth leaders of Hatun Nan (Cusco), AENIAP and OEPIAP
    (Iquitos).
.
    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   11-Sep-2012
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               12-Sep-2012
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                21-Sep-2012
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


.
    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
    finalized by the project decision meeting)
    OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
    Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [ X ]     No [   ] NA [   ]
    appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
    Peoples?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [ X ]   No [   ] NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been   Yes [   ]   No [   ] NA [ X ]
    reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit
    or Sector Manager?
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [       ]   No [ X ] NA [   ]
    Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [     ]   No [ X ] NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
    to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]   No [   ] NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]   No [   ] NA [   ]
    the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]   No [   ] NA [   ]
    the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [   ] NA [   ]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?
.
.
III. APPROVALS
.
    Task Team Leader:              Name: Marcelo Becerra
    Approved By:
    Sector Manager:                Name: Reema Nayar                         Date: Sep 21, 2012
