                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/08/2012                                      Report No.: AC6493
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Philippines                          Project ID: P113844
Project Name: Metro Manila Wastewater Management Project
Task Team Leader: Sudipto Sarkar
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17,        Estimated Board Date: May 3, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: EASPS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%);Sanitation (30%)
Theme: Other urban development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           275
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
         Financing Gap                                                  25.00
                                                                        25.00
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The overall project development objective (PDO) is to improve wastewater services in
selected sub-catchments of Metro Manila and surrounding areas. This will be achieved by
supporting the two Sub-Borrowers - Manila Water (MWCI) and Maynilad - to increase
the coverage of wastewater collection and treatment and septage management which will
contribute towards improving the environment in Metro Manila. This project has a focus
on improving wastewater services in the city (which will contribute to improving the
water quality in Manila Bay) and is in line with the support provided by the Bank for
overall urban development of Metro Manila. Over the years, the Bank has supported the
development of the city through a number of activities including those related to
institutional support provided to the Local Government Authorities, and urban water and
sanitation. The positive environmental externality of the project is large and it will benefit
all citizens of Metro Manila (estimated to be around 15 million people), poor and non-
poor.
  Key project development indicators are the following:

  •    Reduction of Biological Oxygen Demand in the collected wastewater (tons/year);
 •    Increase in wastewater treatment capacity (1000 m3/day)
 •    Number of people in the catchment that would benefit from the project; and
 •    Increase in septage treated before disposal (m3/day) (This applies only to
Maynilad’s South Septage investment.)

3. Project Description
The project will finance eligible investments by Manila Water and Maynilad in
wastewater collection and treatment, and septage management in Metro Manila.
Consulting assignments related to project implementation are also eligible. These would
include: preparation of feasibility studies, construction supervision, preparation of
environmental and social safeguard reports and preparation of project summary reports
and audit reports. The Sub-Borrowers will pay for any land acquisition and resettlement
costs; these will not be financed with Bank funds.

 Component 1: Investments in Wastewater Services by Manila Water ($193.4 million).
This component will support technical assistance and investments by Manila Water in
wastewater collection and treatment in the east concession zone of Metro Manila. It is
expected that there will be only one investment carried out by Manila Water which is the
North and South Pasig Sewerage System (Pasig SS) which will include the construction
of a wastewater treatment plant (capacity of 165,000 m3/day) and associated combined
interceptor lines.

 Component 2: Investments in Wastewater Services by Maynilad ($178.3 million). This
component supports technical assistance and investments by Maynilad in wastewater
collection and treatment, and septage management in the west concession zone of Metro
Manila. Six potential investments have been pre-identified that could meet sub-project
eligibility criteria for Bank financing. These investments are: (a) rehabilitation of the
existing Ayala-Alabang Sewage Treatment Plant (STP); (b) construction of the South
Septage Treatment Plant; (c) construction of the Talayan STP in the San Juan river
basin; (d) construction of a Valenzuela STP; (e) construction of the Pasay STP; and (f)
construction of the Muntinlupa STP.

 The project activities would be carried out in two phases. Phase 1 investments would be
those for which the sub-project sites are known and for which the safeguard documents
have been submitted to the Bank. There are four investments in this phase with the first
one being undertaken by Manila Water and the remaining three by Maynilad: (a) North
and South Pasig Sewerage System; (b) rehabilitation of an existing STP in Ayala
Alabang; (c) construction of a new STP and associated wastewater interceptors in Pasay;
and (d) construction of a new STP and associated wastewater interceptors in Talayan.
Phase 2 investments are the indicative investments for Maynilad where construction will
start after March 31, 2013. These potential investments are for the Muntinlupa STP and
Valenzuela STP and the South Septage Treatment plant. Maynilad is in the process of
acquiring land for these sites. Once the land is acquired, site specific conditions would be
known and Maynilad would be able to prepare the necessary safeguard instruments
during project implementation. The safeguard documents would be prepared under Phase
2 as per the procedures outlined in the Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework
(ESSF). This approach taken on the preparation of social safeguard documents is in line
with the Bank’s policy where a Borrower submits a resettlement policy framework when
the precise alignments of a site cannot be determined prior to appraisal (OP 4.12,
paragraph 28).

  Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP), a fully owned Government Bank, will be the
Borrower of the IBRD loan. A Loan Agreement between the Bank and LBP would be
signed, while Manila Water and Maynilad, as Sub-Borrowers, each would sign Sub-Loan
Agreements with LBP and Project Agreements with the World Bank. As the Borrower,
LBP will implement the project with Manila Water and Maynilad and ensure that the
terms and conditions outlined in the Loan Agreement – including those related to
safeguards – are included in th Sub-Loan Agreements.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The sub-projects would benefit the environment as the investments would help to reduce
the water pollution arising from untreated wastewater. However, investments would be
carried out in densely populated parts of Metro Manila and as a result due attention has
been paid in planning the investments to ensure that the environmental and social
considerations are properly addressed. The investments in Ayala Alabang are for an
existing STP and the treatment capacity of the plant (10,000 m3/day) will not be
increased. Thus, the safeguard impacts due to activities in this plant are expected to be
minimal and they are described below in Section II.A.1

 For the remaining three new STPs under Phase 1, the safeguard impacts are linked to the
acquisition of land and environmental concerns related to the construction and operations
of the STP. To ensure that the land acquisition process has been carried out in a proper
manner, Manila Water and Maynilad have documented the process of the open market
purchases that were carried out for the sub-projects of North and South Pasig Sewerage
System (capacity of 165,000 m3/day), Talayan STP (capacity of 15,500 m3/day), and
Pasay STP (capacity of 45,000 m3/day).

 The wastewater conveyance systems for the new Phase 1 investments (North and South
Pasig Sewerage System; Talayan STP, and Pasay STP) comprise the wastewater
interceptors, discharge pipes and the pumping stations. The conveyance systems are still
being designed and the land requirements for them will not be known until the designs
are completed. However, it is expected that the most of the wastewater conveyance
system will be installed in public land and under existing roads which would minimize
the area of land to be acquired. In case land for the conveyance system is needed, the
procedures outlined in the ESSF would apply.

  Under this project, a sub-catchment is comprised of the area occupied or affected by a
wastewater treatment plant, sewerage lines to convey wastewater and pipelines for
conveying and disposing treated wastewater, and systems for sludge management and
transportation. In a sub-catchment where there is Bank financing, all activities – Bank
financed or non-Bank financed – necessar to achieve the stated development objective
will follow Bank safeguard procedures. For the proposed South septage treatment plant,
the Bank's safeguard policies will apply to the construction and operation of the proposed
septage treatment plant under the project, including the associated septage collection,
treatment and disposal activities. The sub-catchment areas for the new STPs [North and
South Pasig: 3,443 ha; Pasay: 538 ha; and Talayan 714 ha] are defined in the feasibility
studies and help to determine the safeguard requirements for the respective projects.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASPS)
   Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASPS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The following Bank safeguard procedures will be triggered:

 •      OP/BP 4.01 EA: The environmental category of Financial Intermediary (FI) will
apply for this project, with distinct environmenta categorization assigned to each
respective sub-project. Individual sub-projects will be screened and assigned the
appropriate environmental categorization in accordance with OP 4.01. Manila Water’s
North and South Pasig Sewerage System sub-project is considered as a Category A sub-
project, given the environmental impacts of the wastewater treatment plant. Maynilad’s
investments for the rehabilitation of the Ayala Alabang STP, construction of the Pasay
STP, and construction of the Talayan STP are each considered to be Category B sub-
projects as the investments would not lead to significant and irreversible environmental
impacts.
 •      OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats: For Phase 1 investments, the sub-projects are not
expected to cause significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats. However, the
policy is triggered in case any Phase 2 sub-projects affect natural habitats. This will be
determined during preparation of the environmental instruments for these investments.
All Phase 2 sub-projects would be screened for potential adverse impacts on critical and
non-critical natural habitats; as necessary, mitigation measures will be prepared as part of
the sub-project specific EA and EMP, and a Natural Habitats Management Plan will also
be prepared to complement the EMP.

  •     OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement: Land acquisition and involuntary
resettlement are anticipated under the project, mainly for the acquisition of land for the
STPs. Land may be required for the installation of wastewater conveyance systems but as
mentioned above, the need for land acquisition is expected to be minimum. In case land
is to be acquired, the process outlined in the ESSF will apply.

 Provisions for chance finds will be included in the bidding documents. All construction
activities will include mechanisms to address chance finds to avoid or mitigate adverse
impacts on Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) in Metro Manila. Further, the
environmental assessments to be carried out will confirm whether PCR are affected. In
case the environmental assessment identifies that PCR will be affected, the Bank’s policy
on Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) will be triggered and appropriate measures will
be taken as per the policy and included in the EMP.

 The Indigenous Peoples policy (OP 4.10) is not triggered. No indigenous people that
correspond to the Bank's definition of Indigenous Peoples are residing within project
influence area. There are no ancestral domains in Metro Manila and indigenous peoples
found there are dispersed and do not form distinct cultural communities. Further, no
forced severance from ancestral territories has occurred. This has been confirmed in a
discussion held with National Commission on Indigenous People (NCIP) in August 2010
as well as a review of the database in the NCIP website
http://202.57.46.78/adis/Public/default.aspx.

 Environmental safeguard instruments for the investments have been prepared in
accordance to the project’s Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF).
For Phase 1, Manila Water has prepared an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for its
North and South Pasig Sewerage System investment. Maynilad has also prepared three
Environmental Assessments (EAs) for its investments. These environmental documents
mention that site-specific impacts during construction would be those linked to: traffic,
noise, discharge of construction materials, and sediment run-off. For the operational
phase, the impacts would be due to the discharge of the treated wastewater in a receiving
water body (the water quality would be better than what is currently discharged), sludge
handling, solid waste management as solid wastes are transferred to sewage treatment
plants through the combined open sewers, and odors due to the operation. Appropriate
mitigation measures have to be in place for the environmental authorities to provide
permits for construction and operations of the treatment plant. These mitigation measures
are outlined in the EMP; a template of the EMP is also included in the ESSF.

 As per the policies of Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR),
industries have to pre-treat their own wastewater before it is discharged to the storm
drains. DENR’s Environmental Management Bureau monitors discharges from industries
and the effluent standards are specified. This policy of pre-treating wastewater will apply
for industries that are covered under the project, addressing the concern that untreated
industrial wastewater may reach the sewerage plant affecting the operation of the plant
and creating hazardous sludge. In addition, once the sewerage plant is operational, the
influent wastewater will be regularly monitored and if hazardous materials are found,
enforcement actions would be taken by DENR as agreed in the EMP.

  Regarding resettlement, the procedures carried out for the land acquisition for this site
are in line with Bank policies. Manila Water prepared a Resettlement Completion Report
(RCR) describing the process that took place for the willing open market purchase land
transaction for the treatment plant (50,000 m2) and an access road (890 m2). Twenty-
nine families were displaced due to the purchase of the land. The Bank conducted a due
diligence and concluded that they were all adequately compensated and that the
procedures followed are in line with Bank’s OP 4.12.

 For Maynilad’s investments, resettlement and land acquisition are not required for
Ayala-Alabang STP Rehabilitation because it is an existing facility that will not be
expanded. Retroactive financing is being considered for this plant since a contract for
rehabilitation has already been awarded (Ph Peso 51.6 Million). For the Pasay STP and
Talayan STPs, Maynilad has acquired about 10,025 m2 and 1,841 m2 of land,
respectively, through open market purchases. The details of the transaction are
documented in two separate Land Acquisition Reports prepared by Maynilad. The OP
4.12 does not apply for these transactions as a willing buyer and willing seller transaction
was carried out and no person was involuntarily displaced. Nevertheless, the process
followed by Maynilad was in line with OP 4.12 in terms of carrying out a consultative
process prior to the acquisition of the land.

 For all other proposed sub-projects, the ESSF will be followed. The procedures outlined
in the framework indicate how the two concessionaires should carry out the assessment
of environmental and social safeguard issues and the process by which the documents
prepared would be reviewed by LBP and the World Bank to ensure that Bank policies are
being followed.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Overall the project will benefit the environment through improved wastewater collection
and treatment services. It is expected that wastewater generated by more than 2 million
people will be treated through the proposed wastewater treatment plants under the project
which will help to improve the environment and reduce health risks linked to polluted
water. Any indirect or long term negative environmental impact is expected to be minor
in the project area since each project will implement and monitor the implementation of a
comprehensive Environmental Management Plan.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
For the Phase 1 investments, through the feasibility studies, different site and technology
options were considered for the sub-projects where new STPs would be constructed
(North and South Pasig Sewerage System, Pasay STP, and Talayan STP). Each sub-
project is located in a sub-catchment and the feasibility studies determined optimal points
where the wastewater could be collected and treated in a sub-catchment. The sub-project
sites and sewage treatment technologies were chosen from the options laid out in the
feasibility studies. The sites were based on willingness of an owner to sell the property to
the concessionaires and the willingness of the community to accept the construction and
operation of an STP. Both concessionaires have demonstrated that in purchasing land for
STPs, they carried out a diligent process to ensure that social and environmental impacts
are identified and addressed. To this end, various land options have to be considered. For
instance, in the case of the North and South Pasig Sewerage System, five different sites
were considered by Manila Water. Similarly, Maynilad considered six sites and three
sites for the investments in Pasay and Talayan, respectively. This process of paying
attention to alternative site locations to minimize social and environmental impacts is
expected to continue during the implementation period.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower (LBP) has prepared the ESSF which has been reviewed by the Bank and
found to be acceptable for a project categorized as FI. The ESSF addresses relevant
national environmental and social policies and the World Bank’s safeguard policies.
Based on th ESSF, the Borrower will require the Sub-Borrowers to carry out assessments
that would ensure that the Bank’s environmental and social safeguard policies are being
followed. The Project will have a detailed Operations Manual to implement the ESSF.
The Operations Manual will provide instructions and clarifications where needed on how
to implement the ESSF.

 LBP, Manila Water, and Maynilad have the capacity to implement the safeguard
requirements under the project. Both Manila Water and Maynilad have nominated teams
to work on the social and environmental aspects of the project. These two companies
carry out large infrastructure projects on a regular basis and are familiar with the issues
related to environmental and social concerns that arise due to the construction and
operations of wastewater treatment plants. LBP has also carried out previous Bank
projects and is also the Borrower under the ongoing Manila Third Sewerage Project
which is implemented by Manila Water. Training would be provided to staff of LBP,
Manila Water, and Maynilad on Bank’s safeguard policies, as needed.

 Manila Water has prepared an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the North and
South Pasig Sewerage System. The company has also prepared a Resettlement
Completion Report outlining the process of land acquisition and how twenty nine
families that occupied the land were compensated. An Environmental Compliance
Certificate was issued to Manila Water to construct and operate the Sewerage System.
Similarly, Maynilad has prepared Environmental Assessments (EAs) for all three Phase 1
investments. The company has also prepared the Land Acquisition Reports for the Pasay
and Talayan STPs. The above-mentioned documents were prepared in a consultative
manner. Impacts (noted earlier) have been identified and all concerns raised by the
affected population were documented in public meetings. Appropriate mitigation
measures to address the impacts and concerns have been outlined in the Environmental
Management Plans, which have been publicly disclosed.

 For the Phase 2 site investments, Maynilad is expected to acquire additional land for the
STPs. The company intends to acquire the land through open market purchases,
consistent with the protocol which has been established in the Environmental and Social
Safeguard Framework (ESSF). Through a letter to the Bank dated November 10, 2011,
the company has outlined the process through which it would carry out the open market
purchases of any required land. Once land is acquired, Maynilad will prepare the
necessary safeguard documents to comply with Bank policies in line with the ESSF. This
approach taken on the preparation of social safeguard documents is in line with the
Bank’s policy where a Borrower submits a resettlement policy framework when the
precise alignments o a site cannot be determined prior to appraisal (OP 4.12, paragraph
28). It is expected that for the new STPs, the wastewater interceptors and pumping
stations will not require land acquisition as the lines would be laid under existing public
roads. The final designs for the sewer lines will be carried out during project
implementation and in case the final designs require land to be acquired, the procedures
outlined in the ESSF.

 Specifically for this project, LBP has proposed a series of arrangements to ensure that
all aspects of the project are adequately covered. [Note: The Bank's OP 8.30 (Financial
Intermediary Lending) does not apply to LBP under this project since LBP is acting as an
agent of the Government to provide funds under this project for public good investments
that will improve the environment and reduce health risks.] A Project Management
Office (PMO) has been created for the project. It will be responsible for screening the
sub-projects to determine their environmental category, reviewing and commenting on
their individual EAs, supervising project implementation, and complying with the
reportorial requirements of the project and will have adequate staffing to carry out these
activities. The PMO will draw on Corporate Banking Department-I (CBD-I), Program
Management Department-II (PMD-II), and Environmental Protection and Management
Department (EPMD) staff as well as the services of a consulting firm in project
implementation. The CBD-I will assist in financial management; EPMD will handle the
environmental compliance concerns of the project; and the PMD-II will supervise the
Sub-Borrowers’ compliance with the agreed framework on procurement, technical and
socia aspects of the project. In addition, the Bank will review all safeguard documents
prior to confirming their eligibility to financing. Through this review, the Bank would
provide advice as needed to LBP and the two concessionaires.

 Grievance Redress Mechanism. An appropriate grievance redress mechanism is in place
to address legitimate concerns of affected individuals and groups. Manila Water and
Maynilad each have a public complaints section in their consumer relations departments
to address complaints and grievances received from members of the public. These public
complaints sections will be responsible for addressing and resolving any grievances from
the project-affected persons or other members of the public in regards to the sub-projects.
Claimants can resort to the court system in case their claim is not satisfactorily addressed
by the Concessionaires. All complaints would have to be in a written form and
documented properly. The functioning of the grievance redress mechanism will be
regularly monitored by LBP during project implementation. The ESSF explains in
further detail the Grievance Redress Mechanism that will have to be followed by the
Borrower and Sub-Borrowers.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The major stakeholders of the project are the Borrower (LBP), the two Sub-Borrowers of
the Manila Waterworks and Sewerage System (Maynilad and Manila Water), and the
populations that live in the sub-catchments where the wastewater would be treated,
including those people that will live next to the STPs. LBP, Manila Water, and Maynilad
jointly prepared the ESSF which describes the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies. The ESSF (the original name was Integrated
Environmental and Social Safeguard Management Framework) was discussed on October
5, 2010 in a public meeting at Department of Environment and Natural Resources
(DENR). Subsequently, it was publicly disclosed in-country on February 11, 2011. The
ESSF was also disclosed through the InfoShop on February 4, 2011.

  The North and South Pasig Sewerage System (Category A sub-project) project has been
prepared with extensive consultation. The project was presented to the stakeholders on
May 24, 2010 at the Damayan Court, Pasig City. The purpose was to present the project
to the residents and more than 100 people attended. On April 15, 2011, a public
consultation took place that outlined the environmental assessment that would be carried
out for the project. In addition, social perception surveys were conducted between April
15 and 18, 2011. The draft EIS for the sub-project (which is a Category A sub-project)
was publicly disclosed in the Bank’s InfoShop on June 9, 2011 and in-country on June
16, 2011. Furthermore, Manila Water carried out a public consultation with the draft EIS
on October 28, 2011 and a final version was disclosed in-country on December 22, 2011
and through the InfoShop on February 10, 2012. After Manila Water had entered into a
conditional sale with the owner of the land for the Pasig STP (April 2010), it installed a
prominent sign outside the gate of the property informing the residents that a sewage
treatment plant would be built.

  For the Talayan STP (a Category B sub-project), Maynilad also carried out a
consultative process in preparing the environmental safeguard documents. Maynilad
sought reactions from the neighborhood residents on April 14, 2011 to determine their
reaction to the proposed construction and operation of the STP. Further discussions
(interviews and focus groups) were conducted during November 23-25, 2011 to gather
more information on the level of awareness and acceptability of the proposed project. The
draft EA was discussed in a public meeting on December 9, 2011 and the suggestions
received in the meeting have been incorporated in the final EA, which was disclosed in-
country on December 15, 2011 and at the InfoShop on February 10, 2012.

 For the Pasay STP (also a Category B sub-project), Maynilad sought reactions from the
residents on September 7, 2011 to determine their reactions to the proposed construction
and operation of the STP. During November 15-18, 2011, additional discussions
(interviews and focus groups) were also conducted to gain better understanding of the
community’s level of awareness and acceptability of the proposed sub-project. The EA
for the sub-project was publicly discussed in a meeting on December 9, 2011 and the
suggestions provided by the meeting participants have been incorporated into the final
EA, which was disclosed in-country on December 15, 2011 and at the InfoShop on
February 10, 2012.

 For the Ayala Alabang STP (also a Category B sub-project), the public consultations
were held on August 1, 2009 and November 4, 2011 on water and sewerage management.
The home owners expressed their support for the project but wanted Manila Water to
address issues related to traffic and ensure that the security of the area would not be
affected due to the construction activities. The Final EA was disclosed in-country on
January 20, 2012 and at the InfoShop on February 2, 2012.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/26/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/11/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/04/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              01/27/2012
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/26/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/11/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/04/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                 Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Sudipto Sarkar                    02/28/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz         02/28/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Victoria Florian S. Lazaro        02/28/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan   03/08/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Mark C. Woodward                  02/29/2012
  Comments:
