                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/26/2012                                   Report No.: AC6682
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P082144                 Original Project Name: PH-Social Welfare
                                             and Development Reform
Country: Philippines                         Project ID: P122702
Project Name: Social Welfare and Development Reform Project Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Nazmul Chaudhury
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 5, 2012 Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2012
Managing Unit: EASHS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (27%);Health (27%);Primary education (27%);Public
administration- Other social services (19%)
Theme: Social safety nets (84%);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (16%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           100
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project’s original development objective will be maintained which is: To strengthen
the effectiveness of DSWD as a social protection agency to efficiently implement the
CCT program (4Ps) and to expand an efficient and functional National Household
Targeting System of social protection programs.

3. Project Description
The additional financing will support Component 2 of the original Project (i.e. Support to
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program or 4Ps). The $100 million in additional financing
will be used to finance the costs associated with expanding the coverage of Pantawid
Pamilya (Philippines conditional cash transfer program) to cover 75% of grant payments
to household beneficiaries in the Set 4 areas.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will be implemented in municipalities with poverty incidence above 36.99
percent

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria Loreto Padua (EASPS)
   Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Similar to the original Project, the proposed additional financing will not support any
physical or civil work activities thus the Category C classification will remain the same.
Although the final selection of the target households has yet to be finalized during the
initial months of implementation, it is anticipated that the expansion of the 4Ps will likely
directly benefit additional indigenous households from the 0.5% of IP communities that
are not currently covered by the Project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Long terms impacts on the IPs are positive. The inclusion of more IP households in the
expansion of 4Ps is expected to improve the school attendance of IP children 6-14 years
old as well as increase the number of IP children 0-5 years old undergoing growth
monitoring and health check-ups in accordance with the protocol of the Department of
Health.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the original project, the DSWD has prepared an IP Policy Framework to ensure
compliance with OP/BP 4.1. The Project has been in compliance with the safeguards
covenants in the Loan Agreement. Bank supervision has consistently rated safeguards
performance as satisfactory with no major issues. The following are the highlights of the
Project’s implementation of the IP Policy Framework

 a.     As indicated in the IPPF, IP data are included in the National Household
Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHST-PR) which serves as a mechanism for
identifying the poor households and target for the 4Ps as well as other poverty reduction
programs (e.g., Indigent Program of the Philippine Health Insurance). The NHST-PR
involves the conduct of a survey among all households in the target poor municipalities.
Through the NHST-PR, the DSWD was able to identify which of the poor households
belonged to the indigenous groups during the first year of implementation (2010). To
date, the NHST-PR has covered 204 or 99.5% of the 205 IP communities as identified by
the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples.

 b.    Based on the NHST-PR the database of the 4Ps also indicates the grantees that
belong to IP groups. As of February 2012, 450,236 or 19% of the 2.3 million total
household-grantees have been identified as IPs. The Bank supports a total of 629,487
household-grantees of which 20% (127,248 households) are IPs.

  c.    In accordance with the design of 4Ps, each of the household-grantee was oriented
about the program and requested to register, if they are willing to be part of the Program.
The registration involved the signing of an oath of commitment which was translated to
local languages/dialects so that the grantee will understand the terms of the programs,
particularly the conditionalities that they need to comply with. The household surveys
(through the NHST-PR) as well as the individual household orientation and registration
represent a direct and broad consultation with all IP grantees in accordance with the
provisions of the IPPF. Since the program involves household-level beneficiaries, the
oath of commitment, which states the education and health conditions that each grantee
needs to comply with, serve as the IP plan per grantee once it is signed.

 d.     To implement the other provisions of the IPPF, the DSWD national and regional
offices prepared an IP annual plan starting in 2011. The plan was presented and
approved by the National and Regional Advisory Committees with representation from
the NCIP as regular member. In accordance with the IPPF, the Plan involved: (i) the
conduct of periodic consultation and analysis of the profile of IP grantees as basis for
ensuring responsiveness and culturally-sensitive program mechanisms; (ii) representation
of IPs in all program committees at all levels; and, (iii) monitoring and reporting of
program progress in relation to IPs. As of December 2011, the following are the
highlights of accomplishment with regard the aforementioned plan:

 i.    Staff complement: The Program hired 16 IP Regional focal persons and I national
IP coordinator whose responsibilities include the monitoring of the progress of IP
participation in the program as well as the identification of implementation issues that
affect the IP grantees.

 ii.    Conduct of periodic consultations with IPs: The National Project Management
Office (NPMO) of the 4Ps has undertook periodic analysis of the profile of the IP-
grantees such as the analysis of report from the compliance verification system (CVS) to
determine if the IPs have issues regarding the education and health conditionalities. The
review of the CVS report is complemented by conduct of focused group discussions
(FGDs) with indigenous leaders in all regions with IP grantees. Overall, the analysis and
FGD indicated the acceptability of the project conditionalities among IP groups.
However, there continues to be issues on the sufficiency of the supply requirements (e.g.,
classrooms and health services) particularly in isolated IP communities as the demand for
basic education and health services increased as a result of the 4Ps. These issues are now
being addressed through coordination with the Department of Education and Department
of Health (both of which are represented in the 4Ps National Advisory Committee) and
through coordination with other programs such as the KALAHI-CIDSS Project of
DSWD.

 iii. In addition, the DSWD and local representative of the National Commission on
Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) conducted consultation-dialogues with local partner civil
society organizations (CSOs) to establish a network of support services for IPs covered
by 4Ps particularly in relation to literacy and livelihood services.

 iv. It is also important to mention that the Family Development Sessions, which is a
meeting among 4Ps grantees, include a simple and popularized module on the rights of
IPs.

  v.    IP representation in Program committees: The NCIP is a regular member of these
4Ps Advisory Committees at the national, regional, provincial and municipal levels which
is the policy/decision-making body for the project at all levels. Thus, the NCIP is not just
consulted but is part of the decision-making for project implementation.

 vi. Reporting: 4Ps NPMO regularly submits report to the various Advisory
Committees on the results of the implementation of the IP plan as highlighted above.The
status of 4Ps implementation for IP grantees are regularly disclosed or disseminated at
the national and municipal levels through the Advisory Committees where NCIP is
represented and through periodic community assemblies of grantees.

  e.    The NPMO has recently drafted the 2012 IP Plan which is pending approval by
the NCIP and other members of the National Advisory Committee. Its major thrusts
include: (i) adoption of alternative modes of education as conditionality for IPs and other
marginalized groups which will be undertaken with the Department of Education; (ii)
consultations and review of the 4Ps Grievance Redress System to ensure that it is IP
sensitive; (iii) development of additional gender and IP-sensitive information materials;
(iv) establishment of IP pool of advocates for 4Ps; and, (v) continued monitoring of status
of IP grantees.
 f.     Under Component 3 of the SWDRP, the DSWD is in the process of developing a
National Social Protection Framework which will serve as a blueprint for a
comprehensive and strategic response to issues affecting marginalized groups including
the IPs in the country. The Framework is targeted to be completed in 2012 and will be
adopted by the Sub-committee on Social Protection of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA).

 The proposed additional financing will likely cover additional IP grantees. As
mentioned above, however, the current total coverage of the program, including those
funded by ADB and national budget) already includes 95.5% of IP communities. Thus,
only 0.5% new IPs communities will be added. Related to this, the DSWD deemed it
appropriate to use the existing IPPF for the proposed additional financing operations.
The DSWD will also ensure that any additional IP grantees will be covered by the annual
IP Plans. As indicated above the current IPPF was found to be sufficient and effective.
Moreover, the 4Ps basic operational designs already mainstream or embed the broad
consultation with the IP grantees.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The 4Ps involves, at least, a monthly assembly of grantees through which DSWD ensures
that IPs are able to participate in information dissemination and decision-making at the
village level. DSWD also ensures that IP representatives are consulted throughout the
project through their participation in municipal, provincial, regional and national
Advisory Committee of 4Ps. Moreover, the NCIP is a regular member of these Advisory
Committees. Similarly, DSWD ensures that IP groups and NCIP are represented in all
policy dialogues, social marketing, program monitoring and evaluation activities which
the Project will undertake.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/28/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/30/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/23/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Nazmul Chaudhury       03/30/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gerardo F. Parco       03/30/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Maria Loreto Padua     03/30/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Mark C. Woodward       03/30/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Hana Polackova Brixi   03/30/2012
  Comments:
