                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6030


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/07/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Philippines                       Project ID: P119069
Project Name: Results-Based National Program Support for Kalusugan Pangkalahatan
(Universal Health Care)
Task Team Leader: Sarbani Chakraborty
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1,      Estimated Board Date: February 24, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASHH                       Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and
                                           Maintenance Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):        300.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                     0.00
                                                                     0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objectives are to (i) increase effective coverage (health insurance
coverage, utilization and financial protection) under NHIP for underserved populations (ii) build
the institutional capacity of the Department of Health (DOH) in crafting a sustainable health
policy and regulatory environment for universal health care.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project will support the DOH in the three pillars (Health Financing, Health Facility
Enhancement and achieving the MDGs). The goals under each pillar as articulated by DOH are
as follows:

 Health Financing: A roadmap towards universal health care through a refocused
 PhilHealth: (i) Enrollment of the poorest of the poorest, (ii) Mandatory enrollment for informal
sector (as per NHIP Law); (ii) Improvement of membership services to increase awareness of
PhilHealth benefits and entitlements, (iii) Access to inpatient and outpatient services through
PhilHealth, (iv) Zero co-payment, no balance billing for health care costs incurred by the poorest
in government hospitals.

 Health Facility Enhancement Program: improved capacity for health services delivery through
increased numbers of PhilHealth accredited facilities in underserved areas, public-private
partnerships, regional clustering, fiscal autonomy and income retention for government hospitals,
streamlining of licensing and regulation, LGU performance-based grants under ongoing Service
Level Agreements (SLAs).

 Achieving the Health MDGs: Enhance technical support to LGUs to implement public health
interventions. This largely entails continuation of the performance-based grants for LGUs.
Strengthened monitoring and evaluation and using MDG tracer conditions to evaluate the
broader health system interventions under financing and delivery. For example, MDG 5
(maternal health) is likely to be a key tracer.

 A cross-cutting theme across all three areas is policy and regulation including issues such as
PhilHealth governance, the policy and regulatory framework for enhanced service delivery, good
quality, accessible medicines and medical technology.

 Some components of the project (Health Financing and LGU performance grants) will be
designed as Results-Based Lending with Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). For example,
for health financing, the Bank is expected to finance national government (NG) contributions for
premiums under the Sponsored Program as well as possibly NG contributions for the partial
subsidy program for near poor informal sector workers. The DLIs will be linked to agreed
performance indicators for PhilHealth monitoring and would be consistent with enhanced
stewardship of DOH over PhilHealth. While the DLIs for PhilHealth are still under discussion
these are likely to focus on the following:: (i) accreditation and performance-based payments, (ii)
adoption of revised arrangements with partners (LGUs, firms) and providers to facilitate
confirmation of eligibility of benefits at the point of service such as through online access to
membership, (iii) improved mechanisms of benefit entitlements and simplification of procedures
and requirements for filing claims, (iv) strengthened purchasing and contracting such as through
fast-tracking case payments and preferred provider models, (v) Philhealth to conduct regular
orientation and advocacy for LCEs and the SP/SB especially on benefits enrollment (social
marketing).

 A well-defined and costed medium-term implementation plan (again aligned to the DOH's
sector program) will underpin the results-based approach of the proposed Project. It is expected
that together the disbursement-linked indicators and the eligible expenditure programs will be
those that are most relevant to achieving the PDO indicators. To support strengthening of DOH's
institutional capacity, a small technical assistance component will be developed, and could
disburse in a traditional project manner.

 Under Health Facility Enhancement Program, initially the support will be for scaling up health
services in underserved areas, especially through DOH-LGU partnerships. However, given the
outdated classification of health facilities in the Philippines, and various problems associated
with variation in efficiency and quality across hospitals, eventually, the goal of this Program is to
redress these service delivery challenges through a comprehensive and well-designed service
delivery transformation program, taking into account the complex health financing and delivery
arrangements in the country. The DOH#s initial thoughts are to incrementally move towards a
network-based approach to service delivery at the provincial level. But this is a complicated
reform in a country where LGUs are the service providers, and have vested interests in
maintaining their own facilities.

 The proposed project will be implemented using similar institutional and implementation
arrangements as under the ongoing NSSHRP. Project financing will flow directly to specific
DOH budget lines (as under the current NSSHRP). The project will be implemented by the
DOH. PhilHealth will participate as a supplier of services (improved health insurance services)
Within DOH, the Sector Management and Coordination Team (SMC team) under the leadership
of a designated Under Secretary, who will be responsible for overall program management and
coordination and for monitoring and reporting on the implementation progress of the reform
program, including the reforms supported by the project. A Technical Coordination Group,
chaired by the Under Secretary, with multi-agency participation (PhilHealth, DBM, NEDA) will
be established to oversee policy and program issues under the project.

D. Project location (if known)
The location of project sites are not yet known and will be determined during project
implementation. In general, the project sites may be located in any part of the country.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The DOH has an Environmental Health and Sanitation Unit which has an adequate number of
permanent staff. Staff from this unit are assigned to the world Bank and other Donor-financed
projects as the DOH counterpart. They are familiar with World Bank Safeguards Policies having
worked on several World Bank Projects such as the Second Women's Health and Safe
Motherhood Project and the National Sector Support for Health Reform Project. Both projects
have satisfactorily implemented and complied with the various safeguards instruments of the
aforementioned projects.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria Loreto Padua (EASPS)
   Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    There are no projects identified during the preparation of this project. A screening
instrument will be used to assess the potential impacts of the investments which will be done
under the project. Depending on the scope of the proposed project, an environmental assessment,
environmental management plan, or both, may need to be prepared. This screening will be
carried out by the DOH as part of project implementation. It is expected that the likely
investments will identify two major impacts 1) general construction related impacts and 2)
impacts from generation of health care waste. The DOH has a comprehensive technical
guideline on the proper management of Health Care Waste. These guidelines have been used in
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes           No         TBD
the previous WB funded projects with similar investments. These guidelines will be used in this
project as part of the Environmental Code of Practice.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
    Investments will be limited to expansion and rehabilitation of existing facilities or new
facilities located in built up communities (barangay health centers). It is not expected to impact
any natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
    Investments will be limited to expansion and rehabilitation of existing facilities or new
facilities located in built up communities (barangay health centers). It is not expected to impact
any forest areas.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
    The project will not involve the use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
    No physical cultural resources or areas of cultural significance are expected to be in the
impact area of the investments. A chance find procedure and assessment of the cultural value of
structures will be included in the screening of projects.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                      X
    Since the proposed investments will focus on underserved areas, it is likely that these areas
will include indigenous peoples communities. However, the specific target areas are still to be
identified in the course of implementation. Thus, the IP policy for which purpose, the DOH shall
prepare a simplified IP Plan based on an assessment of its existing IP Planning Framework
which is being used under the National Sector Support For Health Reform Project as well as the
learnings from the implementation of the IP plan in Surigao del Sur under the Second Women's
Health and Safe Motherhood Project. A revised IP Plan will be submitted and disclosed for
completion of appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
    The proposed investment will support on the rehabilitation of existing facilities and no major
civil work is included that will require land acquisition nor involuntary resettlement.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
    Not applicable
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
    Not applicable
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X
    Not applicable


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 06/29/2011
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   February 2011 - November 2011

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Sarbani Chakraborty                                         10/27/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             11/07/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Eva Jarawan                                                 10/28/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
