                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/13/2011                                    Report No.: AC6519
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Philippines                         Project ID: P119069
Project Name: Results-Based National Program Support for Kalusugan Pangkalahatan
(Universal Health Care)
Task Team Leader: Sarbani Chakraborty
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 12,        Estimated Board Date: March 8, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: EASHH                         Lending Instrument: Sector Investment
                                             and Maintenance Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           300
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     0.00
                                                                      0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to increase effective coverage (health insurance
coverage, utilization and financial protection) under the National Health Insurance
Program (NHIP) for underserved populations identified by the National Household
Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTS-PR).

3. Project Description
The project consists of three components: (i) health financing, (ii) service delivery
transformations, (iii) strengthened implementation of results-based management and
monitoring and evaluation in DOH and PhilHealth.

  Component 1: Health Financing: The objective of this Component is to support financial
risk protection for poor Filipino families nationwide identified through the NHTS-PR by
expanding NHIP enrollment and benefit delivery. Poor families are to be protected from
the financial impacts of health care use by improving effective coverage/ the Benefit
Delivery Ratio (enrollment, utilization and financial protection) of the NHIP. This will be
achieved through: (i) expanding membership coverage into the NHIP, (ii) improving the
availment/utilization of PhilHealth membership services, (iii) improving support value of
the NHIP benefits package, (iv) supporting efficient health spending through risk
pooling, fund management and strengthened strategic purchasing functions.

 (1) Sub-Component 1.1: Increasing membership of NHTS-PR households into the
NHIP: Enrollment of NHTS-PR families into NHIP and supporting mechanisms to
expand targeting mechanisms using NHTS-PR to identify near poor families. The GOP
will provide full national government (NG) subsidy, contingent on the adoption of
amendments to the NHIP Law, for the poorest 20 percent of the population (identified
through the NHTS-PR) and implement partial subsidy schemes for near poor families
identified through NHTS-PR in partnership with local government units (LGUs) and
members.

  (2) Sub-Component 1.2: Increasing Availment/Utilization of PhilHealth benefits: The
GOP will implement an outreach program for NHTS-PR families enrolled into NHIP.
The program will focus on the creation of community health teams (CHTs) at the
municipal level. All NHTS-PR families will be assigned to a primary health care facility
supported by the CHT. Moreover, CHT teams will be supported by RNHeals (Registered
Nurses for Health Enhancement and Local Service) and the PhilHealth AKO (Advocacy
and Knowledge Officers). The DOH, jointly with PhilHealth will implement a program to
put the CHTs in place, deploy RNHeals and PhilHealth AKOs, and implement a training
program for the outreach teams. In addition to implementing a strong outreach program,
GOP will streamline PhilHealth processes, upgrade PhilHealth information systems, and
implement a rational accreditation policy by PhilHealth to ensure that poor and near poor
households can access PhilHealth benefits. This will entail harmonization of DOH
licensing procedures and PhilHealth accreditation for Centers for Safety. Many of the
interventions for availment/utilization are cross-institutional, requiring close cooperation
and collaboration between DOH and PhilHealth during implementation.

 (3) Sub-Component 1.3: Improving Support Value of the NHIP benefits package:
The GOP will implement a no balanced-billing (NBB) policy, initially for the lowest
income quintiles (NHTS-PR targeted poor households), implement case payment
schemes within a coherent payment strategy for inpatient acute care that promotes access
and quality of care, (iii) enhance LGU accountability for the current outpatient benefits
package and incrementally increase outpatient benefits (including access to outpatient
drugs) linked to premium increases for NHTS-PR groups and actuarial calculations, (iv)
define and begin implementation of a Catastrophic Health Package.

 (4) Sub-Component 1.4: Supporting Efficient Health Sector Spending: The GOP will
support, through the DOH Health Financing Cluster and related offices a policy of raising
additional resources for the health sector, consistent with the DOH#s medium-term
expenditure framework, allocate resources to the most appropriate financing agent, and
pool resources for KP/UHC priorities to prevent duplication and fragmentation.

 Component 2: Service Delivery Transformations to Support a Reformed NHIP and
DOH Public Health Program for Local Government Units (LGUs)
 The objective of this component is to support the Department of Health (DOH)
implement Strategic Thrust 2 of KP/UHC which focuses on improved access to quality
hospitals and health care facilities through accelerated upgrading of public health
facilities. The health service delivery reforms identified under KP/UHC complement the
health financing interventions.

 (1) Sub-Component 2.1: Transforming DOH Hospitals: This sub-component would
support the implementation of various interventions to enable DOH hospitals to earn
Centers of Quality or Centers of Excellence accreditation status from PhilHealth. The
attainment of Centers of Quality or Excellence awards requires that both DOH and the
DOH hospitals undertake several steps that would transform DOH hospitals. These will
include: (i) Crafting of policies that would mandate costing of hospital services and the
setting up of unified financial management systems, improved information management
systems, and dynamic quality improvement systems; (ii) Training of hospital managers
on the above interventions, and implementation of the said policies; (ii) Mobilizing
additional financing through increased government funding, public-private partnerships,
retention of expanded hospital income, and other mechanisms in order to increase
resource inputs including health personnel, drugs, and diagnostics.

  (2)     Sub-Component 2.2: Transforming LGU Provision of Hospital and health-related
MDG services – This sub-component would support the improved implementation of
Health Facility Enhancement Program (HFEP) and LGU performance grants to leverage
improved service delivery by LGUs. This will also support the prioritization of the DOH
inputs in 11 provinces and the National Capital Region which would only prioritize the
LGUs with the most numbers of NHTS poor families but also LGUs where gaps in
vaccination, facility-based deliveries, and TB control are highest. These reforms are
expected to lead to improved LGU provision of hospital and health-related MDG services
for their constituents, particularly PhilHealth enrolled NHTS poor families. Among the
reforms that would contribute in transforming LGU service delivery are: (i) Ensuring the
completion of all necessary infrastructure and equipment upgrading of LGU health
facilities and the accreditation of the upgraded health facilities with PhilHealth (as agreed
bilaterally in the PIPHs), (ii) Service level agreements between DOH and provinces, and
between provinces and their component LGUs that would set clear responsibilities and
accountabilities and mobilize additional financing through increased government
funding, public-private partnerships, retention of expanded hospital income, and other
mechanisms in order to increase resource inputs including health personnel, drugs, and
diagnostics, (iii) Leveraging DOH transfers for increased LGU investments in
implementing the immunization, and maternal, newborn, child health and nutrition
(MNCHN) programs, (iv) Supporting the improvement of LGU supply chain and
logistics management particularly drugs and medicines supply chain and logistics
systems for the immunization, TB control, and MNCHN programs, (v)Supporting the
improvement of management and financial systems of LGU hospitals and health centers
including advocating to and convincing local chief executives to grant management and
fiscal autonomy to hospitals and health centers
  Component 3: Strengthened Implementation of Results-Based Management and
Monitoring and Evaluation in DOH and PhilHealth: The objective of this component is to
support DOH and PhilHealth in the strengthened implementation of the various
scorecards for results-based management of KP/UHC as well as strengthen systems for
monitoring and evaluation of KP/UHC. The DOH already has in place a Monitoring and
Evaluation framework (ME3 or Monitoring for Equity and Effectiveness). The ME3
framework has been updated to reflect the policy directions of KP/UHC. The Health
Policy Development and Planning Bureau (HPDPB) of DOH has built capacity in
monitoring and evaluation. The DLIs support the implementation of this framework.
PhilHealth does not have a dedicated M&E team but is in the process of establishing this
team linked to its Corporate Strategy Department.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
This is a national project. The location of project sites is not yet known and will be
determined during project implementation. In general, the project sites may be located in
any part of the country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria Loreto Padua (EASPS)
   Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The potential infrastructure investments are described in Component 2 of the Project
under Health Facility Enhancement Program. This component can allow for financing of
necessary infrastructure and equipment upgrading of LGU health facilities. The scope of
investment is limited to the upgrading of existing LGU health facilities. No new health
facilities are to be constructed. There are no specific projects/investments identified
during the preparation of this project, for implementation during the first year. It is
expected that the likely investments will have two major impacts 1) general construction
related impacts and 2) impacts from generation of health care waste. The impacts of
general construction activities are temporary and easy to mitigate. Health Care Waste
should be properly handled, processed and disposed to avoid impacts such as cross
contamination by pathogenic material and toxic waste. Since the project aims to increase
coverage of health services among underserved population, it is expected to improve the
access of indigenous people to health care.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The long term beneficial impact of the Project is to provide increased access to health
care services to the underserved communities in the country, which would likely include
indigenous communities. Prevention, early diagnosis and treatment of disease due to
increased access to health services will lead to lower medical costs and more
productivity.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) has been developed by the DOH to manage
the general construction related impacts of the Project. This ECOP will be included in all
construction contracts to be financed under the Project. The DOH has a comprehensive
technical guideline on the proper management of health care waste. These guidelines
have been used in the previous World Bank funded projects with similar investments.
These guidelines will be used in this project and implemented by each health care
facility. The DOH has also assigned focal persons in charge of Safeguards in the PMO.

 The DOH has adopted an IP Planning Framework (IPPF) for the National Sector
Support for Health Reform Project. For the Second Women’s Health and Safe
Motherhood Project, the Department, in coordination with the Regional Office of the
National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) satisfactorily implemented an IP
Development Plan for Surigao del Sur. This involved discussions/consultations with key
IP leaders in the course of the implementation. Related to this, the DOH also adopted
Administrative Order 18 (Establishment of GIDA) which defines the strategic guidelines
for reaching Geographically Isolated and Disadvantaged Areas (GIDA). The GIDA goals
and objectives, policy statements and program components cover the IP groups since they
are among those that are in geographically isolated and disadvantaged areas. Thus, the
GIDA served as critical guidelines that enhanced geographic reach of health services and
facilities among IPs. Although health services for IPs and non-IPs involve the same
procedures, health communication activities were adapted to IP groups to improve their
health-seeking behavior and convince them to avail of health services. For purposes of
this project, the DOH has prepared a simplified IP plan. The IP plan draws from the
lessons learned from implementing the previous IPPF under the WHSMP2 and NSSHRP
as well as the GIDA. It focuses on continuing the development and adoption of IP
responsive health policies, financing, and communication and delivery mechanisms to
ensure increased access of IP to UHC. A key component of the plan is monitoring
KP/UHC indicators among IP groups in order to track and address (as needed)
differential uptake of KP/UHC policies.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The groups which will be affected by possible investments of the project are the
following; health care facility staff and personnel, community served by the facility
including the LGU and the households living close to the facility. Public consultations,
especially in GIDA areas where a large number of IPs are based have been completed
during project preparation, ensuring the representation of vulnerable/marginalized groups
including women, urban poor and indigenous people



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/10/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/13/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/27/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/25/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/01/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/29/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Sarbani Chakraborty   11/24/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gerardo F. Parco      11/25/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Maria Loreto Padua    11/25/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Toomas Palu           11/28/2011
  Comments:
