                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/30/2011                                     Report No.: AC6381
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Philippines                           Project ID: P115184
Project Name: Philippines Public Health
Task Team Leader: Eduardo P. Banzon
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 6, 2011         Estimated Board Date: August 30, 2011
Managing Unit: EASHH                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Population and reproductive health (29%);Health system performance
(29%);Child health (14%);Other communicable diseases (14%);Other financial and
private sector development (14%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    0.40
         Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                      4.20
         LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES                                        2.03
                                                                     6.63
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                Yes [ ]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the proposed OBA project is to pilot interventions that would improve
the health status, particularly maternal and reproductive health status, of poor populations
in the provinces of Leyte, Southern Leyte, Samar, Northern Samar and Eastern Samar in
the Eastern Visayas Region of the Philippines. It aims to increase the uptake of health
services through provision of subsidized health insurance, Philippine Health Insurance
Corporation (PhilHealth) accreditation of 45 service providers, and subsidized vouchers
to cover co-payments for normal spontaneous deliveries.

 This will contribute to:
 -     Increased proportions of births attended by a skilled provider in the target
provinces
 -     Reduction in maternal and infant mortality and morbidity rates in the target
provinces
 -     Reduction of unintended pregnancies and unsafe abortions
 -     Increase in insurance coverage rates in the target provinces
 -    Reduction in burden of disease and illness as measured in disability-adjusted life
years

3. Project Description
The proposed project has three main components that are expected to support the ongoing
drive towards universal health care by addressing barriers and constraints in ensuring
access to health services.

 The first component is the enrolment component which will facilitate the health
insurance coverage of the poor by subsidizing the local government unit (LGU) share of
the premium for the two lowest income quintile families with focus on the 291,505 poor
families in Eastern Visayas. It will both enroll the poor and help them avail their health
insurance benefits by financing a program that will educate and empower community
health workers and government health workers to fully understand the rules and
regulations of the National Health Insurance Program or NHIP. Since government and
community health workers are the first persons usually consulted by the poor when they
seek health care services, health workers must fully understand the admittedly
complicated rules and regulations set by PhilHealth in order that they can empower
enrolled poor families fully utilize and avail their NHIP benefits.

  The second component is an output-based accreditation system wherein the grant
recipient will work with 45 service providers in order to bring them in line with
PhilHealth accreditation criteria. The operational risk for this component will be shared
by the service providers. The first output to which the GPOBA is expected to pay against
is the initial accreditation of health care providers plus provision of reproductive health
services to PhilHealth members and dependents, particularly fully subsidized members or
the Sponsored Program members and the soon to be launched partial subsidy program
members. The target will be private midwife owned clinics, private 1st level hospitals,
and a select number of rural health units. The grant recipient is expected to pre-finance
the cost of the facility upgrading, equipment and trainings needed by these health care
providers to attain initial PhilHealth accreditation requirements. There will be no
construction of new facilities. Any upgrade or rehabilitation of facilities will be limited
within the existing site/land area.

  The third component is to implement a subsidized voucher scheme that will complement
and supplement PhilHealth coverage, particularly maternal health services. Currently,
PhilHealth covers normal spontaneous delivery (NSD) as a benefit package and mandates
the provision of prenatal and postnatal care family planning services, including family
planning (FP) counseling, as part of the NSD benefit package. PhilHealth does not pay
the whole costs and/or charges and allows accredited providers to charge co-payments or
to balance bill for the health services it does cover. This component proposes to subsidize
the cost of co-payment charged by health care providers, particularly private health care
providers. The subsidy will not only help access to quality delivery services but will be
leveraged to ensure that postnatal FP services as mandated in the NSD benefit package is
appropriately provided.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The provinces of Leyte, Southern Leyte, Samar, Northern Samar and Eastern Samar in
the region of Eastern Visayas shall be the project sites.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria Loreto Padua (EASPS)
   Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This project will not fund construction of new facilities. What may be funded are
upgrades of existing facilities within the current sites. Thus, there will be no land
acquisition and involuntary resettlement under the project. The project will increase the
utilization of existing health care facilities in the target provinces of Leyte, Southern
Leyte, Samar, Northern Samar, and Eastern Samar. These target provinces do not have
ancestral domains or do not have presence of indigenous peoples, thus, the safeguards IP
policy (OP4.10) is not triggered.

 The impact of the project will be the increased generation of healthcare waste in relation
to activities such as mother and child health services, family planning services and sexual
and reproductive health services. These healthcare waste, if not treated and disposed
properly may lead to cross contamination of food and water sources. The upgrade of
facilities will also have typical construction related impacts which are temporary and
easily mitigated. One issue which needs to be assessed is the presence of asbestos in old
structures. An Environmental Code of Practice will be drafted and its compliance shall
be ensured by the grant recipient as the TORs of contractors for the said upgrades. Since
many hospitals are old, an assessment of the cultural and heritage value of these
structures will be done as needed, before any renovation work is carried out.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Improper treatment of healthcare waste may lead to cross contamination of food and
water sources.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Bank has implemented several projects in the past which had the same potential
impacts (Second Women’s Health Project). The implementing agency is the Department
of Health (DOH). This agency has a comprehensive technical guidelines on the
Management of Healthcare Waste. This technical guideline has been used in previous
projects and it sufficiently covers the different healthcare waste streams such as
contaminated sharps, pathological waste, pharmaceutical waste etc. The DOH has an
established Environmental Health Unit that oversees the implementation of these
guidelines. These guidelines are also part of the Technical Guidelines on Toxic and
Hazardous Waste Management of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources
(DENR). To cover typical construction related impacts, an Environmental Code of
Practice will be drafted by the DOH. Compliance with the code will be included in the
TOR of all construction related contracts. In the case of old facilities such as hospitals
and clinics, an assessment of the cultural and heritage value of the building will be
assessed in consultation with the National Museum and local government units.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of this project are the following: beneficiaries of the project (i.e.
women and children from Eastern Visayas region), health personnel working in
participating HealthCare facilities, communities living in the vicinity of participating
healthcare facilities. The training or educational activities for community health workers,
service providers and staff of health facilities will be the primary venue for consultations
and dissemination regarding the comprehensive technical guideline on the Management
of Healthcare Waste.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/01/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/02/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/14/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Eduardo P. Banzon                 06/30/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gerardo F. Parco                  06/30/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Maria Loreto Padua                06/30/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Emmanuel Y. Jimenez                 06/30/2011
  Comments: ECOP to be submitted for approval.
