                                                                                        81348


                          INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE


                                                                              Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          20-Sep-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                      Philippines          jProject ID:               jPI47646
 Project Name:                 Philippines Renewable Energy Development (P 14 7646)
 Task Team Leader:             Alan F. Townsend
 Estimated Board Date:           14-Nov-2013
 Managing Unit:                EASPS
 Sector(s):                    Other Renewable Energy (60%), Transmission and Distribution (40%)
 Theme(s):                     Climate change (60%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                               development (30% ), Regulation and competition policy ( 10%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        500.00                    Total Bank Financing:      0.00
 Total Cofinancing:         44.0                      Financing Gap:             0.00
     Financing Source                                                                             Amount
     Borrower (Private Sector)                                                                     500.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                           0.00
     IBRD Guarantee                                                                                  0.00
     Clean Technology Fund (Guarantee)                                                              44.00
     Total                                                                                         500.00
 Environmental Category:       F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred         No
 project?



 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The higher order objective of the proposed project is to assist the Philippines in meeting the demand for
 electricity and to increase access to electricity in a sustainable manner. The Project Development
Objective is to increase renewable energy generation in all parts of the Philippines, including in off-grid
areas, and to bolster private sector lending to electric cooperatives that are focused on operational and
financial efficiency. It is expected that thereby ECs will be able to provide service to more customers
and with better quality, while at the same time becoming more creditworthy and therefore better able to
develop and/or purchase bulk renewable energy.


3. Project Description
The proposed Philippines Renewable Energy Development (PHRED) project will be implemented as a
stand-alone guarantee operation with two windows backed by $44-million of CTF resources. PHRED
will provide capital, in the form of callable cash, to a successful, Government initiative, the Electric
Cooperative Partial Credit Guarantee (EC-PCG) program. EC-PCG was originally supported by a
Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant that included $1 0-million for capitalization of the fund; the
GEF grant was implemented with assistance from the World Bank. These resources were put in an
escrow account, and with interest and program revenues, have grown to about $16-million. EC-PCG
provides partial credit guarantees to commercial banks in the Philippines that make term loans to electric
cooperatives. Up to 80% of regular principal and interest payments are guaranteed through maturity.
EC-PCG, by end 2013, will be directly covering $70-million in lending, and leveraging an additional
$30-million in uncovered debt and equity, to 30 of the Philippines 119 electric cooperatives. There
have been no defaults.

EC's provide electricity service in most rural areas and many secondary cities in the Philippines,
including over half of the residential electricity customers in the country. EC service territories include
most of the remaining un-electrified households nationwide. PHRED will increase the capital of
EC-PCG from $16-million to $60-million; the $44-million will provided in the form of a $44-million
guarantee, financed by the Clean Technology Fund (CTF), to LGUGC, acting on behalf of the
Department of Energy as the program manager of EC-PCG. This capital can be leveraged many times,
with up to $500-million in new investment (covered debt, uncovered debt, and equity) expected in the
five year period 2014-2018. The program will expand financing for EC network investments and, for
the first time, extend financing to renewable energy. 70 megawatts of clean energy projects, located
within the franchise territories of the EC's, would be developed; 400,000 new connections will be
supported by investments in renewables and rural distribution networks. CTF does not require
indemnification against losses for guarantees. CTF's risk is mitigated by placing it in a second-loss
position, in the event of calls on EC-PCG. Under this approach, EC-PCG cash, held in escrow accounts
in Manila, will cover first losses of the program. Only when that cash is fully exhausted can the CTF
guarantee be drawn.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project will support the development of renewable energy facilities and equipment and related
support services in the entire Philippines; it will also finance the expansion and rehabilitation of the
distribution networks of the electricity cooperatives. The EC's will be involved in any renewable
energy sub-projects, either as buyers of the power and/or as equity investors.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz ( EASPS)
Victoria Florian S. Lazaro ( EASPS )
6. Safeguard·Policies                 Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01   Yes          The project has an environmental category
                                                   of Financial Intermediary (FI). It will
                                                   support the development of renewable
                                                   energy sources the bulk of which will be on
                                                   mini-hydropower. Depending on the scale
                                                   and location, the subprojects will fall under
                                                   the World Bank's Environmental
                                                   Assessment Categories A, B or C and under
                                                   the Philippine EIS System Project
                                                   Categories II and III.

                                                   The potential adverse direct impacts of the
                                                   subprojects particularly mini-hydro are
                                                   related to: (i) civil works impacts on water
                                                   and air quality, noise, occupational health
                                                   and safety, etc.); (ii) disruption of
                                                   environmental flow and habitat alterations in
                                                   the case of mini hydropower projects, (iii)
                                                   change in land use and disturbance in natural
                                                   habitats; (iv) possible conflict in water use
                                                   for hydro power subprojects; and (v) induced
                                                   impacts on forests and natural habitats where
                                                   hydropower subprojects and associated
                                                   facilities are close to forests and natural
                                                   habitats.

                                                   The project has prepared an Environmental
                                                   and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) to
                                                   screen environmental and social impacts of
                                                   the subprojects, assign environment category
                                                   of the subproject and determine the specific
                                                   environment and social safeguard
                                                   instruments to address impacts of the
                                                   subprojects. The ESSF presents screening
                                                   and scoping checklists and describes detailed
                                                   plans for mitigation, monitoring and
                                                   reporting of all identified impacts. It also
                                                   lays out institutional responsibilities of the
                                                   Borrower and sub-project proponent s as
                                                   well as the relevant policy and legal
                                                   framework, financing, monitoring and
                                                   reporting. The EMPs and ECOPs will be
                                                   included in the bidding documents and the
                                                   technical specifications in the design and
                                                   construction contract of the subprojects, the
                                                   details of which will be incorporated in the
                                                   PHRED Project Operations Manual. The
                                                   ESSF also contains a Grievance Redress
                                                   Mechanism.
                                    LGUGC, assisted by NEA, will conduct the
                                    screening of the individual subprojects to
                                    determine potential environment and social
                                    impacts, assign the appropriate
                                    environmental category and advise on the
                                    appropriate EA instrument to be prepared
                                    commensurate to the projected environment
                                    and social impacts. LGUGC will also lead
                                    the review and clearance process for
                                    safeguards compliance to the ESSF, but
                                    arrangements will be made and agreed with
                                    LGUGC for the Bank to be involved in prior
                                    review and clearance of all Category A
                                    subprojects and the initial sets of Category B
                                    subprojects.

                                    LGUGC, NEA and other agencies involved
                                    in the project will undergo capacity building
                                    activities such as Regular project trainings
                                    on safeguards requirements and the ESSF to
                                    include the screening, scoping, and review of
                                    the EA instruments and safeguards
                                    compliance monitoring and reporting.
                                    LGUGC will organize regular trainings for
                                    project clients and participating agencies to
                                    include lessons learned and previous
                                    implementation experiences.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The project will not fund any subproject
                                    proposed to be located in critical natural
                                    habitat or will cause to convert or degrade
                                    such. This policy is triggered because by the
                                    nature of the proposed subprojects, it is
                                    possible that some would affect natural
                                    habitats, as defined in the policy. All
                                    subproject proposals will be screened for
                                    potential impacts on non-critical natural
                                    habitats and necessary mitigation measures
                                    will be prepared as part of the subproject
                                    specific EA and EMP. Adequate natural
                                    habitats conservation/protection measures
                                    will be spelled out in the EMP and the
                                    ECOPs. For mini hydropower projects, the
                                    EMP will include monitoring of potential
                                    changes in flow regulation that may be
                                    brought about by water retention structures
                                    that may have consequent downstream
                                    impacts.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   The policy is triggered when sub-projects
                                             involve the generation of impacts on forest,
                                             forest health and forest-dependent
                                             communities. The ESSF has provisions for
                                             screening and managing subproject impacts
                                             on forest, forest health and forest-dependent
                                             communities.

Pest Management OP 4.09               Yes    The project may support biomass sub-
                                             projects for power generation. Plantations
                                             for biomass production may involve use of
                                             pesticides for plantation pest management.
                                             The ESSF provides guidance on the
                                             preparation of a Pest Management Plan
                                             should biomass subproject triggers the
                                             policy. The project is not expected to use
                                             pesticides in distribution line maintenance
                                             since manual labor maintenance is practiced
                                             in the Philippines.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes   The project will involve civil works for the
                                             construction of RE sources and distribution
                                             lines. Although unlikely, the subprojects
                                             may affect PCRs during civil works. The
                                             ESSF has provisions for chance find
                                             procedures in case PCRs will be discovered
                                             during construction.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes    It is estimated that 17% ofthe Philippine
                                             population belongs to one of the 11 0
                                             indigenous tribes of the country. Most of the
                                             acknowledged ancestral domains are in the
                                             upland areas of the country which are where
                                             renewable energy subprojects particularly
                                             mini hydropower, are constructed. There is
                                             probability that IPs living within or outside
                                             their ancestral domain may be presentin
                                             subprojects guaranteed by the PHRED. An
                                             IP Policy Framework (IPPF) annexed to the
                                             ESSF has been developed during preparation
                                             and disclosed to ensure that negative impacts
                                             on IPs are mitigated and sharing of benefits
                                             to affected IP communities are enhanced.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes    Construction of new energy facilities such as
                                             substations may require temporary and
                                             permanent acquisition of commercial,
                                             residential and agriculture lands. Scales of
                                             impacts are quite limited and can be
                                             minimized due to the flexibility in site
                                             selection. Rehabilitation of existing
                                             structures may require small land acquisition
                                             for some expansion. This may have
                                                      unavoidable impacts to persons by way of
                                                      losses in assets or access to livelihood
                                                      sources. Construction of mini-hydro power
                                                      plants may trigger the policy because it may
                                                      inundate agricultural lands and also affect
                                                      livelihood of people dependent on the river.
                                                      At smaller magnitude, the expansion of
                                                      distribution lines may also trigger this policy
                                                      as there are occasions when these are laid
                                                      across private lands. A Land Acquisition
                                                      and Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy
                                                      Framework as an integral part of the ESSF
                                                      was developed and disclosed. In the event
                                                      that displaced persons of a subproject are
                                                      mostly indigenous peoples then the IP Plan
                                                      may be integrated with the Resettlement
                                                      Action Plan. An independent Panel of
                                                      Experts will be established to oversee the
                                                      implementation ofthe resettlement studies
                                                      and provide guidance, where needed. The
                                                      Panel will include expertise in social,
                                                      resettlement, and technical issues.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               Yes           This policy is triggered as it is expected that
                                                      subprojects will involve the construction of
                                                      dams. The ESSF has provisions for Dam
                                                      Safety requirements, including ensuring that
                                                      dams are designed and constructed by
                                                      experienced and competent professionals.
                                                      The Bank requires to adoption and
                                                      implementation of dam safety measures for
                                                      the design, bid tendering, construction,
                                                      operation, and maintenance of the dams and
                                                      its associated works. For dams considered to
                                                      pose significant risk, regardless of height,
                                                      the ESSF specifies the process, such as
                                                      general operational technical guidance to be
                                                      followed for screening the hazardous nature
                                                      ofthe dams and determination of the dam
                                                      safety instruments required under the Policy.
Projects on International Waterways     No            There will be no subprojects in international
OP/BP 7.50                                            waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No            There will be no subprojects in disputed
                                                      areas.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The potential impacts are those typically associated with the construction and operation of mini
hydropower plants, installation or upgrading of power distribution lines and construction of substations.
Positive environmental and social impacts will result from increased power supply from renewable
energy, improved efficiency of power distribution, improved reliability of power supply, and increased
access to electricity through intensification in and expansion of service areas. However there are also
negative impacts associated with the project. On the social side , there will be minor land acquisitions
which may also affect crops and trees in areas where mini hydropower plants, distribution lines and
related rights of way for these infrastructure will be constructed. Since mini hydro power plant are
generally built in upland areas this may also affect indigenous peoples and their ancestral domains
which are mostly found in upland areas also.

It is expected that the adverse direct impacts of the sub-projects will be related to: (i) civil works
impacts on water and air quality, noise, occupational health and safety, etc.); (ii) disruption of
environmental flow and habitat alterations in the case of mini hydropower projects, (iii) change in land
use and disturbance in natural habitats; (iv) possible conflict in water use for hydro power subprojects;
and (v) induced impacts on forests and natural habitats where hydropower subprojects and associated
facilities are close to forests and natural habitats.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Overall the project will benefit the environment and social development of the country and particular
specific service areas of guaranteed projects with the promotion of renewable energy sources to meet the
long-term, clean energy requirements. The long term impact of the project is the provision of electricity
in a sustainable manner shifting power generation to renewable sources particularly in off grid areas
supporting the country social inclusion objectives. Any indirect or long term negative environmental
and social impact is expected to be minor in the project area since each sub-project will conform with the
PHRED Environment and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) and implement and monitor the
implementation of the project activities in accordance with subproject specific Environmental
Management Plan and Environmental Code of Practice.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The use of renewable energy sources is the best means of producing clean, sustainable energy for the
masses. Introducing wholesale financing into the market that could potentially crowd out private
commercial finance, was considered as a component of the project but the success ofEC-PCG in
leveraging private lending for the EC sector suggests that renewable energy as well could be more
effectively supported with guarantees rather than IBRD or CTF lending. At the subproject level, the
conduct of the environmental and social assessment will be used by the proponent to select from
different alternatives for the most sustainable project to finance using the best available technology and
most environmentally sound location.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The PHRED Environment and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) was developed by the borrower to
establish the objectives and procedures and implementation arrangements for identifying, managing and
monitoring potential environment and social impacts of project activities. This contains a separate IP
Policy Framework and a Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy Framework in its
Annexes. Early stages of project development when safeguards screening, scoping and planning for
appropriate mitigations for adverse findings happen will be done with technical guidance from the
Renewable Energy department ofNEA. This complements the EMP and the Environmental Code of
Practice that the contractors should follow. At a later stage when financing arrangements are prepared,
LGUGC becomes highly involved and they will confirm project's Environmental and Social Safeguard
Framework (ESSF) as they evaluate each subproject for guarantee. The procedures outlined in the
framework to indicate how their potential clients will carry out the assessment of environmental and
social safeguard issues and the process by which the documents prepared would be reviewed by
LGUGC and the World Bank to ensure that Bank policies are being followed. Appropriate
environmental and social assessment and mitigating measures are incorporated in the planning and
design of each investment, as an outcome of each sub-project that will be undergoing the ESSF process.
The review ofLGUGC, assisted by NEA, on the safeguard instruments begins with the screening and
scoping to determine its environmental category and assessment of the scope and coverage of
significant impacts and the type of safeguard instruments, capacity assessment and implementation
arrangements needed for each sub-project.

It is the responsibility of the sub-project proponent to prepare and carry out the necessary safeguards
instruments required by the ESSF, and to obtain the environmental clearances for each sub-project
before starting the construction. The sub-project proponents are responsible for the quality and accuracy
of the information in the EA document, as well as the transmission of the EA documents to DENR.

LGUGC will be supported by Project Monitoring Boards (a separate PMB for each sub-project,
comprised of borrower, lender, LGUGC, and NEA, with DOE and the World Bank have observer status
at their discretion) to ensure the success of the EC-PCG program. PMB's, which include program
management staffofLGUGC, also monitor safeguards compliance.

The ESSF describes the institutional and implementation arrangements and capacity building activities
that LGUGC and NEA will undertake to ensure that the screening and scoping of the subproject
proposals and the monitoring of the safeguards measures during project implementation are addressed.
LGUGC has regular staff that manages small to large accounts of renewable energy technical
proponents who are also well-experienced in the screening and review of project proposals from electric
cooperatives and independent power providers. It, however, lacks environment and social safeguards
staffto carry out safeguards screening for subprojects. It outsources the safeguard screening and review
process to consultants. They have the demonstrated ability to review and evaluate project proposals
from technical and financial prespective. However, since they have been involved in the first phase of
the EC-PCG program which also required compliance to the country's safeguards policies basic
knowledge of safeguards is present. NEA has the technical expertise in screening and managing the
performance of energy cooperatives (ECs) and other companies who are in joint venture with the
independent power providers. LGUGC and NEA will be asked to participate in specific trainings and
workshops as well as participate in the WB safeguards forum and other capacity building activities.
Also, LGUGC will organize regular workshops and symposia with its potential clients- ECs, financial
institutions, renewable energy developers and independent power providers, to regularly update them as
part of their marketing strategy, on the EC-PC process requirements, including the safeguards
requirements described in the ESSF. On the job support, including learn-by-doing activities, will be
provided by the task team to help NEA, LGUGC and subproject proponents especially in the first year Of
operations.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the projects are the electric cooperatives, participating private banks,
Department of Energy (DOE), LGUGC, NEA, and consumers ofthe electricity that will be
generated/distributed which would also include project affected persons. Public consultations with
representatives from identified key stakeholders was conducted and several meetings with potential
proponents of sub-projects and the oversight agencies to discuss the details of the project including the
safeguards requirements. In addition several workshops and joint site visits were also done by the task
team of the WB and staff ofLGUGC, NEA and DOE to hold discussions with both the EC Officers and
local citizens. For the future sites, the public consultation process outlined in the ESSF will be followed.
The dates below refer to the disclosure of the ESSF.


B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      04-Jun-20 13
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   10-Jun-2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary ofthe
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Philippines                                                                      05-Jun-2013
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      04-Jun-2013
Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                   10-Jun-2013
"In country" Disclosure
Philippines                                                                      05-Jun-2013
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      04-Jun-20 13
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   10-Jun-20 13
"In country" Disclosure
Philippines                                                                      05-Jun-20 13
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      NA
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   NA
"In country" Disclosure
Philippines
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X]           No []       NA [   ]
OP/BP 4.04- Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes [     ]   No [X]      NA [   ]
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [X]
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?             Yes [X]      No [    ]   NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                                            Yes [    ]   No [X] NA [        ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards         Yes [    ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design? If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 -Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes [X]         No [    ]   NA [   ]
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [X]      No [    ]   NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [X]         No [    ]   NA [   ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [X       No [    ]   NA [   ]
Sector Manager review the plan?                                            ]
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been Yes [       ]   No [    ] NA [     ]
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or
Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [X]           No [    ]   NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [X       No [    ] NA [     ]
Sector Manager review the plan?                                            ]
OP/BP 4.37- Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                 Yes [   ]   No [X       NA [ ]
                                                                                    ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Yes [      ]   No[X        NA [ ]
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?                              ]
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and           Yes [   ]   No [    ] NA [X]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X]        No [    ] NA [       ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [X]      No [    ] NA [       ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [X]     No [    ] NA [       ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [X]     No [    ]   NA [     ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [X]     No [    ] NA [       ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [X]     No [    ]   NA [     ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


Task Team Leader:              Name: Alan F. Townsend
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor:
Sector Manager:
