                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: AC6284


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/16/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Philippines                       Project ID: P118904
Project Name: National Program Support for Basic Education 2
Task Team Leader: Lynnette Dela Cruz Perez
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 18,      Estimated Board Date: January 17, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASHE                       Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and
                                           Maintenance Loan
Sector: Primary education (60%);Secondary education (40%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         300.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                     0.00
                                                                     0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed National Program Support for Basic Education 2 (NPSBE2) seeks to improve the
quality and coverage of basic education. This will be achieved through a) capacity building for
improved reading and numeracy skills of students; b) development of more effective approaches
to improve access; c) strengthening of performance accountability and incentives; and d)
improved targeting of divisions and schools that are lagging behind in terms of performance and
availability of resources.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project will continue to support the implementation of the government’s Basic
Education Sector Reform Agenda (BESRA). This proposed US$300 million operation will build
on the gains and experiences of the Bank’s ongoing project, the first National Program Support
for Basic Education (NPSBE 1) project, which spearheaded support to the implementation of the
government’s BESRA. The proposed project considered DepED#s limited capacity and focuses
on a number of critical reforms in areas that are lagging behind. This was also meant to
maximize the project’s contribution to the achievement of MDG and EFA goals. In line with
both government and Bank emphasis on "convergence" to improve project impact, the project
will also work in areas covered by the Philippine Government’s CCT project (the Pantawid
Pamilyang Pilipino Program or 4Ps). The proposed interventions are intended to selectively
address remaining gaps in terms of learning and access, strengthening and expanding some of the
critical reforms started in NPSBE 1 but which were not completed or fully implemented. The
idea is to keep the project simple yet strategically critical by linking it to the Government’s
comprehensive but complex basic education reform agenda.
 The key features of the project could include support for the following activities to achieve its
PDO:

 (i)    improved targeting of schools/areas that are lagging behind in terms of performance and
resources for focused interventions and extra resources, with emphases on full implementation of
reading programs, particularly in the early grades and numeracy programs at the elementary and
secondary level, supported by teacher training, teaching and learning materials, and assessment;
 (ii) motivating and enabling schools, teachers, parents, and the community to ensure that by
the end of Grade 3, students can meet clear, understandable, and easily measurable reading
standards and similarly, to increase student numeracy at the primary and secondary level;
 (iii) mobilization of schools, communities, media, and civil society in identifying and
enrolling 6-year olds in school and minimizing their drop-out rate;
 (iv) annual measurement of the share of disadvantaged communities in total education budget
and tracking of education expenditures from budget source to the intended beneficiaries; and
 (v) development and institutionalization of programs to improve education performance
accountability, incentives and management capacity, including the establishment of a formula for
distributing budgetary resources to compensate for the disadvantages of schools/communities
and reward them for performance beyond what might be expected given their disadvantages.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed NPSBE 2 will cover priority areas that have been identified by the Department of
Education (DepED) on the basis of their low education performance indicators, particularly in
terms of reading and math, participation and drop-out rates. The choice of beneficiary
communities/schools within each selected division will be done through a methodology that
would allow credible impact analysis. Final selection of the target schools/ divisions will be
done during project implementation. It is highly possible that a lot of the target areas will have
presence of indigenous students since indigenous communities are among the disadvantaged
areas in the country where educational outcomes are low.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The DepED has satisfactorily complied with the various safeguards requirements during the
implementation of the NPSBE. As part of the preparation for the second phase, NPSBE2, an
assessment of the implementation and effectiveness of the safeguards procedures/instruments
will be done by DepED to further improve and learn from the experience in the original project.
The unit in the DepED in charge of implementation of the safeguards requirements is the
Physical Facilities and Schools Engineering Division (PFSED). This unit has undergone training
on the Bank’s Safeguards Operational Policies and requirements. This is the same unit which will
implement safeguards in the proposed project.
 An Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) will be drafted by the DepEd to cover the typical
impacts related to the construction of classrooms. This ECOP will be included as part of the
Bidding Documents and will be imposed on all the contractors.

 Specific to safeguards for indigenous peoples, the DepED has demonstrated its commitment
and capacity to adopt IP-responsive education strategies as part of its reform agenda.
Specifically, the DepEd conducted a social assessment on IP education which involved various
local consultations as part of the NSPBE1 preparation. On the basis of the social assessment, the
Department formulated and adopted the Indigenous Peoples’s Planning Framework (IPPF) for
the NPSBE1. The IPPF, which is in accordance with the Philippines’ Indigenous People’s Rights
Act (IPRA) and the World Bank Operational Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10), outlines
the various strategies that will ensure inclusion of indigenous peoples throughout the project.

 In accordance with the aforementioned IPPF, the DepED DepEd designated a Technical
Working Group (TWG) for Indigenous Peoples and Muslim Education in 2006, which
systematically went through its tasks of translating the IPPF into operational strategies. In the
process of formulating the operational strategies for IP-responsive basic education, the
Department also demonstrated its capacity to ensure meaningful participation from the IP
groups. Specifically, all of the activities of the TWG was coordinated with the National
Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) and involved series of local consultations with IP
groups. The consultations culminated with the National Conference Workshop on the
Development of a National Policy Framework on IP Education in July 2008 with almost 100
participants, including representatives of IP groups, NCIP, civil society organizations, key
government agencies and development partners. The Workshop highlighted the various
strategies to IP education which involved popularization or adaptation of culturally-sensitive
educational program; defining the educational standards and programs from indigenous systems;
review of the IP database; inclusion of IP dimension in School Improvement Plans in areas
where there are IPs; and, provision of guidelines for inclusion of IP representation in the School
Governing Council and/or Parent Teacher Associations. With support from AusAID, the
Department is implementing the project "Philippine Response to Indigenous and Muslim
Education"(PRIME) Program which aims to revitalize the IP Education Action Plan in line with
the Framework. The PRIME provides opportunities to pilot-test more strategic adjustments in
educational curriculum, learning resources, teacher training and deployment and targeting of the
Alternative Learning System (ALS) and Alternative Delivery Modes (ADMs) to ensure IP-
responsive basic education.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Maria Loreto Padua (EASPS)
   Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes        No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    The project will include the construction of classrooms. These are typically classroom
facilities consisting of two adjoining rooms. The construction of these facilities will have impacts
typical of construction activities such as noise, dust, and debris disposal. An Environmental
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No         TBD
Code of Practice (ECOP) will be drafted to cover the impacts of classroom construction. These
typical construction related impacts which are temporary and can be effectively mitigated
through an ECOP. A Chance Find procedure will be included as part of the ECOP. The ECOP
will be included as part of the Bidding Documents.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
    Classroom construction will be done within existing school sites. There is no foreseeable
impact on Natural Habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
    Classroom construction will be done within existing school sites. There is no foreseeable
impact on Forests
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
    The project will not involve the use of Pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
    A chance find procedure will be included as part of each ECOP.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
    Since the proposed project will support key reforms in basic education, it is anticipated that it
will have positive impact on increasing coverage of basic education among IP students. Thus,
the IP policy is triggered. Since the specific target schools/ divisions have yet to be done during
project implementation, the DepED will start with the review and updating of its existing IPPF
under NPSBE1 to capture the lessons learned and provide more specific strategies for
implementing IP-sensitive strategies which will be pursued under NPSBE 2. The enhanced
IPPF will include the screening elements and procedures and will be undertaken in close
coordination with representatives of NCIP. Once the specific project locations are identified
during implementation phase, DepED will prepare specific IP plans for those areas/schools
which cover IP students as part of the School Improvement Plans which will involve consultation
with the specific IP groups in each area of coverage.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
    No involuntary resettlement is expected since the proposed operations will involve only the
construction/rehabilitation of classrooms in existing school sites/land.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 10/27/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   10/27/2011
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   - Revew & updating of the IPPF (to include screening elements & procedures) July-August
   2011
     - Review and Assessment of Environmental Safeguards Procedures July - August 2011

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                       Ms Lynnette Dela Cruz Perez                        07/07/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:        Mr John R. Butler                                  07/14/2011
      Comments: Acting Regional Safeguards Adviser
    Sector Manager:                         Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo                          07/07/2011
      Comments: Project will involve the construction and rehab of classrooms. Impacts from construction
      of such facilities are temporary and can be mitigated. An ECOP will cover the appropriate mitigation
      measures.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
