                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 73299
Date prepared/updated: October 8, 2012.

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Philippines                               Project ID: P132238
                                                   Additional Project ID: P095173 (parent code)
Project Name: Multi-Donor Facility – PH Mindanao Reconstruction & Development Project
Task Team Leader: Matthew Stephens
Estimated Appraisal Date: 22-31 August 2012 Estimated Board Date: September 2012
Managing Unit: EASPS                               Lending Instrument: SIL
Sector: Other social services (85%); Vocational training (10%); SME Finance (5%).
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (70%); Micro, small and medium
enterprise support (15%); rural non-farm income generation (15%).
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: Mindanao Trust Fund $5.6 m
                                   : Recipient (International Labour Organization) $160,000
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a transferred project                      Yes [ ]                 No [ x]
Simplified Processing                              Simple [x]              Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises          Yes [ ]      No [x]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

To improve social and economic recovery in conflict-affected communities of Mindanao through
activities which promote peace and demand-driven governance. Major indicators/outcomes are:

      Improved social communication to rebuild trust between diverse (conflicting) groups
      Improved access to basic services and economic opportunities.
      Improved decision-making and development processes that are inclusive, participatory,
       gender sensitive and non-conflictual.
      Improved capacity of the Bangsamoro Development Agency to plan, manage and
       implement local development activities.
      Improved capacity of People’s Organizations to plan, manage and implement local
       development activities.




                                               1
3. Project Description

The Mindanao Reconstruction and Development Program is a multi-donor facility to support
reconstruction and development in conflict-affected areas of Mindanao in the Philippines. Funds
are delivered through Recipient-Executed Trust Funds – so far to the Mindanao Land Foundation
and Community & Family Services International. A third recipient, the International Labour
Organization, will be added under the Additional Financing.

Under detailed Program Partnership Agreements between the Trust Fund Recipients and the
Bangsamoro Development Agency (BDA), the main aim of the project is to support community-
development and sustainable livelihood interventions for socio-economic recovery in conflict-
affected areas of Mindanao. The second core objective is build the capacity of the BDA, as the
main implementing organization at the community level.1

In addition to the recipient-executed activities, Bank-Executed Trust Funds have been
established for program management, monitoring and evaluation and capacity-building for
program partners.

The $5.6m additional financing will be used to: (i) support a scale up of community-driven
development activities in conflict-affected areas of Mindanao for three years through the
program’s two existing grant recipients; (ii) support new activities for community-based
livelihood and income-generation with a new grant recipient, the International Labour
Organization (ILO); and (iii) allow for refinement and updating of the Project Development
Objective and Results Framework.

The Program employs the community-driven development (CDD) approach and as such is
expected to finance a wide range of small community-based infrastructure sub-projects such as:
(i) Level I and/or II water systems; (ii) small post-harvest facilities including warehouses and
solar driers; (iii) tire paths; (iv) barangay health centers; (v) small bridges; (vi) small-scale food
processing facilities; and (vii) productive assets and core shelters for Internally Displaced
Persons. Under the new “Creation of Sustainable Livelihood Opportunities? component, the
program will support training and capacity building for community enterprise development and
waged employment, but will also build a limited number of small common service facilities to
support livelihood at the community level.

Under the Additional Financing phase, the component structure will be revised as follows:

    a. Community-driven development: Block grants will be provided to People's Organizations
       at the village level to fund community-driven development activities according to
       subprojects identified by the communities themselves.
    b. Creation of Sustainable Livelihood Opportunities: This component will work with
       people's organizations on the development of at least 3-4 economic subsectors with
       growth and employment potential. Community-based enterprises will be developed or

1
 The BDA is the development arm of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) and was established in 2001
pursuant to the Tripoli Agreement between the Government of the Philippines and the MILF. It has essentially been
built up from scratch by the Mindanao Trust Fund program.

                                                        2
      strengthened along the value chains. Market-oriented skills development to increase
      employability for wage employment will also be provided.
   c. Capacity & Institution Building: Based on a detailed capacity-building plan, this
      component will build the capacity of the Bangsamoro Development Agency (BDA), local
      government units, people’s organizations and selected non-government organizations to
      plan, implement, monitor and evaluate development and livelihood interventions. This
      component will include funding for the operational costs of BDA; capacity-building for
      LGU and private sector partners; and social mobilization and capacity-building for
      people's organizations.
   d. Monitoring & Evaluation: This component will support rigorous monitoring and impact
      evaluations for the program and M&E capacity development for BDA. The component
      will also fund Secretariat costs for the World Bank to oversee and manage the MTF.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The total project universe is the 3,800 poor barangays in 150 municipalities affected by the
conflict between the Government of the Philippines (GPH) and the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front (MILF). These municipalities and barangays were identified by the Joint Coordinating
Committee on the Cessation of Hostilities (JCCCH) of the negotiating panels, based on a 2005
Joint Needs Assessment conducted by the Bank, the BDA and development partners. So far the
project has covered 162 barangays in 75 municipalities. The Additional Financing phase will
support at least another 65 barangays across 21 municipalities. These are selected based on
poverty, conflict-affectedness, accessibility and local government commitment and support.

The project target areas are among the poorest communities in the Philippines. The areas are
subject to repeated patterns of violence and associated displacement. Between 2000 and 2010,
for instance, displacement affected 82 percent of community members in Maguindanao province,
one of the main target areas. Forty-five percent of people in Maguindanao reported the
destruction of their house in the same period. These factors can lead to relatively low levels of
social cohesion within communities and a deficit of trust between citizens and the state.

While mostly targeting Muslim communities, the potential target areas of the project include
mixed communities that are home to Mindanao’s so-called “tri-people? (Muslims, Christian
settlers and Indigenous Peoples). Thus, IPs could be included as project beneficiaries. However,
so far project implementation has covered Muslim communities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Roberto Tordecilla – Social Safeguards Specialist (EASPS)
Gerardo F. Parco – Environmental Safeguards Specialist (EASPS)
Jose Marie Lim – Environmental Safeguard Consultant (EASPS)




                                               3
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                 Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                         x
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                x
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                         x
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                    x
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                     x
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                x
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          x
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                  x
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                             x
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                      x

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguards issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Program works at the community level (CDD) approach and as such is expected to finance a
wide range of small community-based infrastructure and livelihood creation sub-projects as
described in Section I.3 above. Construction-related environmental impacts (e.g., increase in
dust and noise) of these subprojects are minimal, temporary and easily mitigated.

The project uses an environmental screening mechanism to identify prohibited subprojects or
activities with adverse environmental impacts. Mitigation of negative impacts from subprojects
that are not on the negative list is addressed in the design and in subproject Environmental and
Social Management Plans (ESMPs) consistent with the Environment and Social Safeguards
Framework (ESSF) developed for the project. To ensure compliance with safeguards
requirements, all subproject proposals are required to have an assessment of impacts, and an
attached environmental and social safeguards checklist that describes impacts and mitigation
measures. Specific checklists are developed for different types of civil works (Irrigation and
Water Management Structures, Buildings, Road Structures, and Water Supply).

While new community-based activities will be introduced in the Additional Financing, such as
sustainable livelihood activities and small common service facilities, these subprojects are still
small scale and community-based, with minor and localized impacts similar to the parent MTF.
Thus, there is no change in the overall risk and the environment category “B? will remain the
same. However, the new activities could possibly include agricultural intensification, which
could potentially involve the use of pesticides. Should this be the case and OP4.09 on Pest
Management need to be triggered, the Safeguards instruments will be updated accordingly.

The project is, however, currently addressing a minor safeguards issue. During 2011, sub-
project proposals were approved for funding that included approximately $32,000 in expenditure
on Category II and III insecticides and herbicides. These are identified in the negative list in the
project Operations Manual. This was reported by the Trust Fund Recipient in question,
Community & Family Services International (CFSI) to the Bank and later documented by a
World Bank financial management review.
                                                 4
To better understand the implications on the ground, the task team fielded a technical mission in
July 2012, led by the Environmental Safeguards Consultant under the guidance and supervision
of the Bank’s Environmental Specialist. A separate technical memo is being prepared for the
Regional Safeguards Adviser on this issue. The main outcomes were that: (i) the expenditure
was minor (0.02% of the total budget for the project); and (ii) the pesticide items were used and
disposed of appropriately at the field level under the supervision of the Municipal Agricultural
Officers. The Project, henceforth, will ensure that this violation will not be repeated and, as an
immediate measure, CFSI and BDA have been strongly reminded about the negative list of
subprojects and the prohibition on the use of pesticides and herbicides. The environmental
screening checklist of the ESSF has been improved to detect future use of pesticides. Detailed
training on the new screening checklist and the ESSF was been given to BDA Safeguards Focal
Points in August 2012. This will be cascaded down to people’s organizations to further enhance
their capacity to properly implement the ESSF.

Experience in the initial phase of the project and from other CDD projects has shown that some
community subprojects, such as tire paths and community centers, involve the acquisition of
small parcels of land, primarily through voluntary donation. The community mobilization
process should ensure that the acquisition of land, no matter how small, is done through a
genuinely voluntary donation. Leasehold agreements between the land owner and the subproject
proponent at a nominal cost, transactions between willing-seller-willing-buyer, and access to use
vacant government land, may also be explored as an option. Diligent documentation across these
modes is expected from the subproject proponent, with close supervision and monitoring from
concerned units from the community to the BDA Central Management Office level.

The project aims to facilitate the inclusive participation of IPs in subproject sites where they are
present or targeted to be program beneficiaries to ensure IP-responsive community subprojects
that promote their welfare and preserve their cultural heritage. So far no IPs have been present in
project areas. This could change as the geographic scope expands, so the task team will conduct
a thematic review of social safeguards compliance during 2012 to deepen the regular Bank
supervision and implementation support on IPs in particular.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

The Program seeks to have positive long-term impacts at the community level, including
improved social communication and trust between community groups; improved community
capacities to define development problems and solutions; established systems for participatory,
transparent, inclusive, conflict-sensitive and gender-sensitive planning and management of
community development initiatives; and improved access to basic services and economic
opportunities. Infrastructure and the construction of facilities to be financed under the Project is
small in scale. Negative impacts from these are neither significant nor long term.

3. Describe any project alternatives considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts:

Not relevant.


                                                 5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The Program has sufficient staff to monitor compliance with safeguards policies. The Bank has
hired an Environmental Safeguards Consultant under the supervision of a Bank Safeguards staff
who works closely with the Program’s Operations Officer/Social Safeguards Specialist. At the
level of the main implementing partner, the Bangsamoro Development Agency (BDA), the rural
infrastructure engineers at the central office and the six regional management offices have been
designated as safeguards focal persons. They were provided reorientation/training in August
2012 on safeguards policies and will receive regular refresher training and coaching as necessary
through the course of project implementation.

The MTF has an existing Environment and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) embedded in
the Operations Manual to address safeguards issues that may arise during subproject preparation
and implementation. It consists of the Environmental Assessment (EA), Indigenous Peoples (IP)
Planning and the Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation (LARR) Frameworks. The
ESSF has proved to be useful in screening and addressing impacts under the Program.

To ensure compliance during implementation, an Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP) is required to be submitted by communities for each subproject, as part of the proposal
package. When a sub-project proposal is approved by the Multi-Sectoral Committee, the
environmental and social screening checklist attached to the proposal is reviewed by the BDA
CMO, which also thereafter conducts periodic compliance monitoring. The Trust Fund
Recipients (TFRs) conduct the final check before the releasing the first tranche of the subproject
fund. Thus, there are three levels of review.

Specifically for EA, the Program employs: (i) a negative list of sub-projects that includes
activities with adverse environmental impacts and; (ii) an environmental screening mechanism
that identifies prohibited sub-projects (e.g., community roads into protected areas) and those with
adverse environmental impacts. Mitigation of negative impacts from sub-projects that are not on
the negative list is addressed in the design and in sub-project environmental and social
management plans (ESMPs). The Environmental Guidelines in the Operations Manual provide
the ESMP templates for use by sub-project proponents.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The key stakeholders include the communities, the LGUs (provincial, municipal and barangay
levels), the BDA Central Management Office and regional management offices, and the three
trust fund recipients. Orientation and training on safeguards policies has been conducted for the
BDA and the trust fund recipients on annual basis. This will be continued through the
Additional Financing, as necessary.

Since safeguards concerns are part of the social preparation and sub-project implementation
phases of the project, the communities and participating local government units have access to
the safeguards-related aspects of the project. The Operations Manual (including Safeguards

                                                6
Instruments) has been revised for the Additional Financing phase and shall be disclosed on the
Mindanao Trust Fund website.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                            15 August, 2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        15 August, 2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                         15 August, 2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                               N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                            15 August, 2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        15 August, 2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                         15 August, 2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                            15 August, 2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                        15 August, 2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                         15 August, 2012
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]     No [ x ]      N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     N/A
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [x ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [ x ]
issues?


                                                 7
Is a separate PMP required?                                 Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to            Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning             Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for          Yes
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for          Yes
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional    Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                        Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?      Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]



                                                8
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ x ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes.
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ x ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?




                                                9
D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                         Name      Date
 Task Team Leader:                 Matthew Stephens       August 18,
                                                            2012
 Environmental Specialist:         Gerardo F. Parco       August 18
 Social Development Specialist     Roberto Tordecilla     August 18
 Additional Environmental and/or   Jose Marie Lim         August 18
 Social Development
 Specialist(s):
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards               L. Panneer Selvam     September 13,
 Coordinator:                                                2012
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                   Mark Woodward           August
                                                           22,2012
   Comments:




                                            10
