                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA597
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Mexico                                  Project ID:                      P121116
                              Project Name:                  Sustainable Production Systems and Biodiversity (P121116)
                              Task Team Leader:              Svetlana Ognianova Edmead
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 23-Mar-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            22-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 LCSAR                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                    Biodiversity
                              Sector:                        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                              Theme:                         Other environment and natural resources management (60%), Other rural development (40%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                       19.20
                                  Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                        11.69
                                  Total                                                                                                                    30.89
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              The specific Project Development Objective (PDO) is: to conserve and protect nationally and globally significant biodiversity in Mexico through
                              mainstreaming biodiversity-friendly management practices in productive landscapes in priority biological corridors.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project has three major activities: (i) mainstreaming sustainable production and biodiversity conservation practices into production systems in
                              targeted biological corridors; (ii) strengthening producer associations’ capacity to expand market opportunities for biodiversity-friendly products
                              from the project area; and (iii) enhancing the institutional framework to support the adoption of sustainable production systems and related market
                              instruments, including regional exchange programs among Mesoamerican Biological Corridor (MBC) countries.

                              Components 1 and 2 will be implemented through sub-projects and activities formulated around production systems. The project will make
                              matching grant financing available to existing producer associations and producer groups that have developed a business plan for the production,
                              processing and marketing of biodiversity-friendly products. Component 3 comprises cross-cutting aspects of project implementation that go beyond
                              the local and national levels and focus on the promotion of public-private arrangements for, such as strategic alliances to foster markets for
                              biodiversity-friendly products. Component 4 covers project management, as well as monitoring and evaluation activities. Annex 2 provides details
                              pertaining to project components.

                              Component 1. Sustainable Production Systems and Biodiversity Mainstreaming. (GEF Grant US$ 4.6m, Government US$ 10.7m). In the context of
                              the project, sustainable production system refers to a series of activities (including the management system) carried out to produce a defined set of
                              goods and services for the market, which use land in ways that do not progressively degrade its productive capacity .

                              The objective of this component is to introduce and mainstream biodiversity-friendly practices into a number of production systems in order to
                              conserve biodiversity of global and national importance. This will be achieved mainly by assisting existing producer groups in the adoption and use
                              of biodiversity-friendly production practices. The producer groups will be trained and assisted in the process of transfer of knowledge and adoption
                              of biodiversity-friendly production practices by Technical Service Providers (TSPs).

                              The project’s approach to biodiversity mainstreaming includes building producer resilience to climate, production and market shocks through the
                              implementation of biodiversity-friendly practices that can translate into better production outcomes (e.g. adoption of improved plant nutrition
                              systems; integrated management systems for critical pest and diseases; shade management, etc.), as well as marketing opportunities (e.g.
                              labeling, standards, etc.).

                              Because most producers lack the necessary capital to transition from conventional to biodiversity-friendly production practices, GEF incremental
                              funding will be used for the investments and training that will enable the conversion, while built-in incentives in project design will ensure its
                              environmental and financial sustainability.

                              GEF funds will be used to co-finance about 20%-30% of the grants to producer associations and producer groups. The remainder of the financing
                              will come from two main sources: 1) financial support from existing state programs available through SAGARPA, CONAFOR, CONANP, CDI and
                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         other agencies; and 2) up to 30% of the total value of the sub-project will be provided by beneficiary producer groups and associations as direct
                         co-financing, which will be a combination of in-kind and cash resources.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Assisting producer groups in the use of sustainable production practices. The project will support approximately 190 existing
                         producer groups (consisting of at least 6,000 producers) that have some experience with sustainable production practices. The project will help
                         them to expand, diversify and improve such practices, and include more biodiversity-friendly ones so that the products can be sold under a
                         biodiversity label (bio-label) or with biodiversity related characteristics that are valued in the market place. Support to producers and producer
Public Disclosure Copy




                         groups will be done in a holistic manner aimed at catalyzing opportunities for biodiversity gains, but also for quality and productivity improvements.

                         Under sub-component 1.1., the project will finance the introduction and implementation of biodiversity-friendly production practices, including
                         infrastructure improvements, acquisition of storage or processing equipment, on-farm conditioning, operational costs (such as day labor for the
                         rehabilitation of forests), training and consulting services for the development of farm-based biodiversity management. It will also finance Technical
                         Service Providers (TSPs) to train and assist at least 2,300 leading producers from those groups in the adoption of biodiversity-friendly practices
                         into their production systems.

                         Project financing will be provided in the form of matching grants, defined here as a one-time subsidy for a concrete investment or capacity building
                         activity. To ensure that grant recipients have a stake in the investment or capacity building, they are required to match a portion of the grant with
                         own contributions in cash and/or in kind. Annex 2 provides greater detail on the matching arrangements.

                         The production systems for which matching grants would initially be available include 1) forestry (timber and non-timber forest products), 2) silvo-
                         pastoral cattle-raising systems, 3) coffee production, 4) cocoa production, 5) honey production, 6) wildlife use and 7) ecotourism . The selection
                         criteria for project interventions will include factors such as global, national and local conservation value, threat to biodiversity, connectivity, costs/
                         benefits, suitability of goods produced and services delivered, logistics, organizational strengths of producer associations.

                         By the end of the project, the grants will have contributed towards the incorporation of biodiversity-friendly practices for land-use or management
                         planning instruments (in particularly for wildlife use and ecotourism) on 34,500 hectares (10%) of the target area landscape by approximately
                         6,000 producers.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Training through Technical Service Providers (TSPs). This component will finance training and technical advice by TSPs to
                         producer associations and groups. The TSPs (persons or groups that perform specialized professional services for groups and associations of
                         producers) are accredited by and registered as service providers with federal institutions such as SAGARPA (for agricultural and livestock
                         production), CONAFOR (for forestry), and SEMARNAT (for environmental services). CONABIO will hire the TSPs based on their adequate
                         technical profile (capacity, experience and local presence) from a shortlist selected by the beneficiary producer groups or associations. In
                         production systems or areas where TSPs are underrepresented, the project will implement a flexible strategy and contract specialists for the
                         provision of the required services, enabling producers’ access to needed technology for the implementation of biodiversity-friendly practices.

                         The project will work with three types of TSPs, each fulfilling a different function: 1) the Local Technical Groups (GTL) will fulfill the role of
                         development agents providing training and technical assistance to producer groups and producer associations; there will be one GTL by producer
                         association; 2) Technology Transfer Units (UTT) will provide services for research, technology development and innovation (R&D+i) by production
                         system; there will be one UTT by production system; 3) Financial Agents (AFS) will support the management of financial services in each
                         production system; there will be one AFS by production system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         By project closure, about 31 TSPs will have been supporting producers and producer groups committed to the adoption of biodiversity-friendly
                         practices in their production systems. All TSPs will be connected by networks and coordinated by the Program for the Development of Capacities
                         for Sustainable Production Systems, included under Component 3.

                         Component 2: Producer Associations and Biodiversity-Friendly Market Initiatives. (GEF Grant US$ 3.6m, Government US$ 3.7m). The objectives
                         of this component are twofold: 1) strengthen the capacities of producer associations managing biodiversity-friendly production and marketing
                         systems, and 2) improve associations’ collaboration capacity with other economic agents of the value chain.

                         The project will work with existent producer associations and will support producer groups currently organized in formal, but not yet legalized,
                         networks across production systems. Project financing (technical assistance and investments) will be provided to established producer
                         associations. Producer groups organized in networks will receive technical assistance support until they establish themselves as producer
                         associations .

                         The organization of producer groups into associations has advantages related to the cost-effectiveness of economies of scale in ensuring quality
                         standards and forming commercial linkages that will enable market access and niche penetration for value capture related to biodiversity-friendly
                         attributes. This will be achieved through the internalization within producer associations of the capacity to promote and manage biodiversity-
                         friendly practices hereby ensuring compliance with biodiversity-friendly production standards and labeling, existing or to be developed under sub-
                         component 3.2.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening producer associations and networks of producer groups. This sub-component will co-finance infrastructure
                         improvements, acquisition of equipment, training and consulting services to improve/upgrade at least 17 existing producer associations or
                         networks of producer groups. In the period that existing producer groups (organized as informal networks) are not yet united under the umbrella of
                         a single association, the project will strengthen the networks and support them into becoming an association.

                         Project support will provide producer associations and networks of producer groups with internal capacity to promote biodiversity-friendly practices,
                         implement quality control services to group members and carry out marketing activities. It will also enhance the associations’ capacities for quality
                         control verification and inspection systems for biodiversity-friendly production as well as market promotion for those products.

                         The project will also co-finance studies, legal and administrative fees to organize or strengthen the associations, as well as fees for third-party
                         verification of production management systems. Producer associations and networks of producer groups will be eligible for training in themes such
                         as marketing, advertising, contract negotiation, access to credit/financial support, feasibility studies, business planning, etc.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Establishing business alliances for bio-labeled products. The sub-component will finance technical advice and consulting
                                                                                                                                                              Page 2 of 7
                         services for the establishment of collaborative and contract arrangements (alliances) between buyers (brokers, exporters, supermarkets) and
                         producer groups for the marketing of the biodiversity-friendly products.

                         The project will finance consulting services to assist the producer associations with market studies and the development of marketing plans for the
                         promotion of products holding biodiversity labels, and for the establishment of links with potential national and international end-markets. The
                         project will also encourage alliances between producer groups, local institutions, service providers and/or local/regional and international buyers, to
                         initiate and sustain biodiversity-friendly production and marketing systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         By project closure, about 7 business alliances for biodiversity-friendly products will be fully operational and at least 5 production systems are
                         expected to be in compliance with standards for biodiversity-friendly production and to be marketing their products with indicative bio-labeling.

                         Component 3. Institutions, Labels, and South-South Cooperation. (GEF Grant US$ 2.3m, Government US$ 2.3m). The objective of this component
                         is to develop and strengthen the cross-cutting aspects of the project: institutional framework and associated capacities to support and encourage
                         the use of biodiversity-friendly production systems (by producers) and bio-labeled goods and services (by consumers), while promoting strategic
                         public-private partnerships, as well as collaborative initiatives across Mesoamerican country institutions.

                         Sub-component 3.1: Strategy for developing institutional capacities: The objective of this sub-component is to influence the institutional context
                         related to biodiversity-friendly production systems by: (i) improving the entrepreneurial skills of the leaders of producer associations and of TSPs,
                         and (ii) developing institutional capacities related to biodiversity-friendly production systems and building links with other actors and agents in the
                         public and private sectors. This subcomponent will finance consulting services, training and study tours for the implementation of the cross-cutting
                         strategies influencing the biodiversity enhancing production and marketing systems.

                         This will be achieved through a Program for the Development of Capacities for Sustainable Production Systems, which has five lines of action:
                         (1) Business development and entrepreneurial capacities of the leaders of producer associations, coordinated by the network of GTLs, through
                         training, capacity building and the establishment of links between producer associations;
                         (2) Innovation and technology transfer, coordinated by the network of UTTs, promoting links with universities and research centers,
                         (3) Support the provision of financial services for sustainable production systems, coordinated by the network of AFSs, promoting links with
                         organizations in the financial market,
                         (4) Eco-labeling and verification of quality assurance, which promotes links with organizations of inspection, certification and accreditation, and,
                         (5) Strategic marketing of biodiversity-friendly products (market research, presence at national and international trade fairs and exhibitions, market
                         intelligence).

                         Another important element of the strategy is to train the TSPs and enhance their capacities to provide technical assistance required for producer
                         groups to undertake changes in production management and to build up their environmental and socio-economic performance.

                         As part of the strategy, the project will develop a market information system on biodiversity-friendly products and will collaborate with SAGARPA
                         for its merging with existent agricultural value chain information. This system will be instrumental for the collection, consultation, analysis and
                         communication of information relevant to production decision making and marketing.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Designing and using market differentiation tools. To support the market differentiation strategy for biodiversity-friendly
                         products, the sub- component will finance the development of biodiversity standards and/or market labels (bio-labels) for at least 5 products in
                         cooperation with technical experts, producers and public institutions. Standards or bio-labels will have to meet defined environmental,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         socioeconomic and health-related criteria. They will be developed in a transparent way in consultation with key stakeholders (producers, technical
                         experts, public organizations, etc.), and under the premise of promoting a process of continued improvement. In addition, the project will finance
                         the contracting of third-party verification firms to maintain the integrity of the standards/labels, to ensure compliance and generate consumer
                         confidence.

                         Sub-component 3.3: Promoting partnerships and South-South cooperation. Because corridors extend across national boundaries, a regional
                         program for training and technology transfer related to rural sustainable production between Mexico and other Mesoamerican country institutions
                         will be established and implemented. This regional program will include the organization of exchange meetings between decision makers from
                         producer associations of sustainable production systems in biological corridors. It will also encourage the formation of a regional network of
                         centers for applied research and technological development related to agricultural production and the conservation of biodiversity.

                         Component 4: Project management and monitoring. (GEF Grant US$ 1.2m, Government US$ 2.5m). Component 4 will finance consulting services
                         and operational costs for project management, monitoring and evaluation and will provide technical and fiduciary support to ensure efficient
                         execution of the project through administration, monitoring and evaluation, planning and coordination. A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be
                         established within CONABIO and will operate under the Coordinator of Biological Corridors and Resources.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will be implemented across a number of production systems in nine biological corridors spanning six states of Mexico (Yucatan,
                         Quintana Roo, Campeche, Oaxaca, Tabasco and Chiapas).

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
                         Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)




                                                                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01   Yes   Mainly positive impacts are expected given the reduced pressure on natural
                                                                     ecosystems achieved through the use of sustainable production activities. No land
                                                                     use change activities will be supported and no primary forests will be degraded.

                                                                     The Environmental Assessment produced a series of recommendations for each
                                                                     one of the productive systems pre-identified by the project: Coffee, Cacao, Honey,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Forestry, Cattle-Ranching, Wildlife use and Ecotourism. Through component 1, the
                                                                     project will increase a) number of producers implementing best practices, b)
                                                                     number of hectares under biodiversity friendly production practices and c) value of
                                                                     products obtained through improved practices, by training and providing technical
                                                                     assistance to producer groups already employing sustainable practices to expand
                                                                     their operations, while components 2 and 3 will promote collaboration to achieve
                                                                     economies of scale, gain access to better markets where environmental attributes
                                                                     are recognized, reorient institutional support, design financial mechanisms and
                                                                     develop standards to guarantee biodiversity friendly products reach the final
                                                                     consumer.

                                                                     During appraisal, the Environmental Management Framework will be discussed in
                                                                     experts and stakeholder focus groups, and during implementation, through the
                                                                     state multi-sector consultative committees which have operated for over 5 years in
                                                                     the 4 initial corridor states (Chiapas, Campeche, Yucatan, Quintana Roo) and
                                                                     have already been formed in the 2 new states (Oaxaca, Tabasco) incorporated to
                                                                     this new operation.

                                                                     During preparation, the Environmental Management Framework was discussed in
                                                                     public consultation meeting with experts and stakeholder groups, and during
                                                                     implementation will be supervised by the state multi-sector consultative
                                                                     committees which have operated for over 5 years in the 4 initial corridor states
                                                                     (Chiapas, Campeche, Yucatan, Quintana Roo) and have already been formed in
                                                                     the 2 new states (Oaxaca, Tabasco) incorporated to this new operation.

                                                                     The EA has recommended that two conditions be incorporated in the Operational
                                                                     Manual for the Project:
                                                                     a) The Project will only finance activities in production units that are explicitly
                                                                     committed with the best environmental practices and standards promoted by the
                                                                     project, and
                                                                     b) The Project will only finance activities in production units which have complied
                                                                     with every environmental/legal requirement, evaluation or permit applicable.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           Yes   Within the project eligibility conditions, the screening for any potential impacts on
                                                                     Natural Habitats is also incorporated, under the responsibility of CONABIO which
                                                                     is the primary agency responsible for establishing conservation priorities in Mexico.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     The variables used by CONABIO to determine Priority Regions include: Critical
                                                                     types of vegetation, Plant richness: families and gender, Protected plants, trees
                                                                     and cacti under Mexican Norm 059, Resident birds, Reptiles, Amphibians,
                                                                     Mammals, and Richness in species of vertebrates.

                                                                     The project focuses on areas currently under production within ejidos and
                                                                     communities, and a commitment to prevent any expansion which induces land use
                                                                     change is required for producer groups to participate, as well as compliance with
                                                                     standards for the market promotion of biodiversity friendly products and services.
                                                                     The adjacent protected areas will benefit from the corridors established by
                                                                     securing the long-term integrity of ecosystems through improved production and
                                                                     harvesting techniques that seek to maintain biodiversity.

                                                                     The recently completed CONABIO Gap Analysis guides the location of activities to
                                                                     avoid potential impacts on natural habitats and the Natural Protected Areas
                                                                     System (SINAP) will serve as a reference to confirm that proposed activities are
                                                                     consistent with conservation objectives and Natural Protected Areas Management
                                                                     Programs.

                                                                     Monitoring will include natural and induced perturbations, by analyzing the
                                                                     expected vs. observed distribution of selected species; habitat fragmentation
                                                                     through rural evaluation, zoning and land use community plans; loss of continuity/
                                                                     connectivity through success rate observed in distribution/colonization in remote
                                                                     places; and finally, biodiversity loss, through the actual distribution of selected
                                                                     species that may be observed and counted, directly or through photo traps and
                                                                     footprints. The monitoring will also consider the area under improved management
                                                                     using the GEF tracking-tools 2 as well as other parameters relevant to establishing
                                                                     project-level and aggregate impacts.




                                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 7
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                          Yes   CONABIO promotes best management practices through the technical manuals
                                                                           developed under the previous Mexico Mesoamerican Biological Corridor project
                                                                           (based on the Mexico Community Forestry Project guidelines). As stated above,
                                                                           the Project will only finance activities associated with the best environmental
                                                                           practices and standards promoted by the project, and for communities which have
                                                                           an approved sustainable forest management programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           As provided for under the Bank´s forest policy, management will be geared
                                                                           towards achieving internationally accepted certification standards, although not all
                                                                           sub-projects will be certified given the need for long-term capacity-building and the
                                                                           high transaction cost that certification may imply for small producers.

                                                                           With regards to screening/scoping, SEMARNAT and CONAFOR regional and state
                                                                           offices will ensure that all sub-projects are developed and implemented by
                                                                           producers and producer groups incorporating both the legal requisites and the best
                                                                           available management practices. Through the state multi-stakeholder project
                                                                           committees, academic institutions and forestry/agricultural research agencies will
                                                                           be incorporated to assist in reviewing practices and developing practical lessons-
                                                                           learned for this project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                     Yes   The EA reports impacts derived from the use of agrochemicals in the production
                                                                           units which have not adopted sustainable practices, and conclude that the
                                                                           adoption of biodiversity friendly practices promoted by the project is expected to
                                                                           reduce significantly the use –and hence environmental impacts- of fertilizers and
                                                                           pesticides. The quest for niche markets demands the use of bio-fertilizers and
                                                                           biological pest control, minimizing the need for agrochemicals. As a result of
                                                                           training, technical assistance and the eligibility conditions -production units have to
                                                                           explicitly commit to adopt best environmental practices and standards, and comply
                                                                           with every environmental/legal requirement, evaluation or permit applicable, the
                                                                           impact is expected to be fully positive. Monitoring for adoption of best practices will
                                                                           confirm the extent of the benefit achieved. The EA includes the provision that no
                                                                           activities that incorporate or increment the use of pesticides will be supported by
                                                                           the Project. (see Table 7.1. Medidas Ambientales del Proyecto)
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      Yes   No large-scale or linear infrastructure is expected under the project (the ceiling for
                                                                           goods and non consulting services/subprojects is US100,000 of which only a small
                                                                           part of the investment could be devoted to works provided they are fully justified as
                                                                           part of the plan to improve or expand biodiversity friendly production practices),
                                                                           however considering that many projects will be carried-out in areas that may have
                                                                           sites of cultural significance and historical resources, all technical studies for the
                                                                           sub-projects will consider any physical cultural resources in the managed
                                                                           landscapes that are a focus of the activities and the EA has included a specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           provision indicating that no activities that impact cultural patrimony will be financed.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               Yes   OP 4.10 is triggered as roughly 30% of eligible beneficiaries are expected to be
                                                                           Indigenous peoples. The total population of the six project states is 14,940,741.
                                                                           The 173 priority municipalities have a population of 5,382,135 inhabitants, that is,
                                                                           36.02% of the total population of the six states. Of this population 76% is non-
                                                                           indigenous and 24% indigenous 24%. Indigenous peoples in these areas are
                                                                           mainly Mayan, Chol, Tzetzales, Chontal and Tzotzil.

                                                                           As the exact location of the project activities and hence benefits remain unknown
                                                                           at appraisal, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been
                                                                           prepared. The IPPF will assist the executing agency to determine whether
                                                                           indigenous peoples are present in any of the project areas, and if so, to ensure
                                                                           that the interested communities support the proposed activities as well as any
                                                                           additional measures required to maximize their culturally appropriate benefits and/
                                                                           or avoid potentially adverse impacts.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         No    The project will finance goods and services and existent infrastructure upgrades.
                                                                           Beneficiaries will include only existing Producer Associations and Groups currently
                                                                           engaged in one of the seven proposed productive activities. Eligibility criteria will
                                                                           explicitly limit the geographic scope of investments to existing lands held privately
                                                                           or communally by Association members. Furthermore, the project will not finance
                                                                           the creation of any new legally designated parks or protected areas, nor will it
                                                                           finance any activities that impose any restrictions on the use of resources located
                                                                           in such areas. Therefore the Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP 4.12) is not
                                                                           triggered as none of the project activities will require the involuntary taking of land
                                                                           or restrictions of access to legally designated parks or protected areas.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No    Safety on Dams does not apply since the project does not include dam
                                                                           construction nor any influence of the performance of the project on existing dams.
                         Projects on International Waterways OP/BP   No    Projects on International Waterways does not apply since the project does not
                         7.50                                              include any investments in International Waterways or activities that may affect the
                                                                           relations between the World Bank and its borrowers, and between riparian states.


                                                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No              Projects in Disputed Areas does not apply since the project does not include any
                                                                                              investments or activities in any territory under dispute.

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  No large, significant of irreversible social or environmental impacts have been identified in in the EA or Social Assessment.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  Long term impacts are expected to be positive. Any success, expansion or future adoption of the sustainable practices promoted will have
                                 positive impacts. Failure to adopt them will merely leave the current status unchanged. The Social Assessment also assessed the risks that
                                 expanding market opportunities for green goods and services could pose to traditional economic activities. These risks are considered minor
                                 given the prevalence of multiple livelihood strategies among potential beneficiaries. For example, honey or forestry producers are unlikely to
                                 give up traditional corn and beans production in response to increased market opportunities as these traditional crops provide valuable
                                 subsistence resources that supplement cash income earnings.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  The proposed alternative is based on lessons learned and a decade of Bank/GEF work with the borrower.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                  CONABIO has many years of implementation experience with projects funded by multilateral agencies and bilateral donors. They are a lead
                                 organization in Mexico regarding the establishment of ecosystem conservation priorities and biological monitoring of species. Much of this
                                 experience has involved working with indigenous peoples and rural producers who live in or make use of the priority project locations.
                                 CONABIO will hire a Social Specialist who will be responsible for supervising the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Development
                                 Framework (IPDF) and assisting with the preparation of site specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) and safeguard monitoring reports to the
                                 Bank.

                                 CONABIO is the primary agency for establishing conservation priorities in Mexico and the project responds directly to these national and
                                 international priorities for ecosystem conservation within the productive landscape. The variables used by CONABIO to determine Priority
                                 Regions include: Critical types of vegetation, Plant richness: families and gender, Protected plants, trees and cacti under Mexican Norm 059,
                                 Resident birds, Reptiles, Amphibians, Mammals, and Richness in species of vertebrates. CONABIO is currently preparing a rapid strategic
                                 environmental assessment (SEA), to assess environmental management capacities throughout and document baseline environmental
                                 conditions in the corridors, as well as major threats and drivers of deforestation, in close collaboration with the REDD+ Readiness work led by
                                 the Forestry Commission (CONAFOR).
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   During preparation, the Environmental Management Framework was discussed in public consultation meeting with experts and stakeholder
                                 groups, and during implementation will be supervised by the state multi-sector consultative committees which have operated for over 5 years in
                                 the 4 initial corridor states (Chiapas, Campeche, Yucatan, Quintana Roo) and have already been formed in the 2 new states (Oaxaca,
                                 Tabasco) incorporated to this new operation

                                 Three regional consultations were conducted in Oaxaca, Quintana Roo and Chiapas. These engaged a broad cross-section of representative
                                 stakeholders and relevant information was presented in a form and language they could understand. Many were already aware of the project's
                                 proposed goals and implementation arrangements, ample opportunities were provided for participants to ask questions and raise concerns, and
                                 the CONABIO team responded to participants’ feedback and confirmed their commitment to explain how such comments will be taken into
                                 account in project design and implementation. The Social Assessment also developed a communications strategy to encourage participation
                                 and transparency in local natural resource management and use decision-making processes such that any potentially adverse effects on
                                 vulnerable groups are adequately identified and mitigated.

                                 Given that some sustainable management activities fall under the aegis of other agencies within the GoM, as well as technical capacity in some
                                 areas (forestry, fisheries, among others), CONABIO will engage SEMARNAT, CONAFOR, CDI and other agencies to provide this assistance
                                 and to review and authorize sustainable management plans as pertinent. As an inter-ministerial agency, CONABIO is well positions for the
                                 exchange of national expertise and coordination between entities.

                                 All project documentation, including the Environmental and Social Assessments and relevant frameworks will be available to the public on
                                 executing agency’s website: http://www.conabio.gob.mx/

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                                 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                                 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              20-Feb-2012
                                 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          16-Mar-2012
                                 Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           19-Mar-2012
                                 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                                 Directors

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                             Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    20-Feb-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                16-Mar-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 19-Mar-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Pest Management Plan
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 NA
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    NA
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                NA
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 NA
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     Svetlana Ognianova Edmead
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                       Name Marianne Grosclaude (SM)                                                    Date: 20-Mar-2012




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 7 of 7
