                                                                                               80779

                    INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 26, 2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Republic of Djibouti               Project ID: P145323
                                            Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Access to Quality Education Project
Task Team Leader: Noah Yarrow
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 28, 2013 Estimated Board Date: November 25,
                                            2013(*)
Managing Unit: MNSHE                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan (SIL)
Sector: General education (100%)
Theme: Education for All ( 100%)
GPE Amount (US$m.): 3.8
Environmental Category: B (Partial assessment)
Simplified Processing               Simple X]                      Repeater []
Is this a transferred project       Yes [X                         No []
(*)GPE proJects are not subm1tted for approval to the Board but to the GPE Secretanat Board.
The GPE Secretariat Board is expected to meet in November. Negotiations and RVP approval
follow GPE approval, and are therefore expected in December 2013.

B. Project Ob,jectivcs

The Project Development Objective is to improve the learni ng environment and teacher
instructional practices in the first three grades of primary education. Component 1 of the
project seeks to increase access and improve the learning environment through the
construction of one school and the extension and rehabilitation of selected schools in the
rural areas of Arta, Dikhil, Tadjoura, and Ali Sabieh, based on a set of selection criteria.
Component 2 focuses on improving student performance through investments in teaching
and learning materials, as well as training for teachers, pedagogic counselors, school
directors and inspectors. This component will further support investments for the most
vulnerable children in school health and pre-primary education. Component 3 provides
supplemental financing to the existing project management unit, which supports multiple
donor projects.

The key results of the Project would be:
   (i) Percentage of teachers implementittg at least three pedagogic practices in wllicll
       tltey have received Project-supported training. Teachers will be trained on
       specific instructional strategies for teaching number sense, basic operations,
       geometry and measurement as well as differentiated instruction and management
       of large classes. The use of these strategies in class will be measured using a
       revised teacher observation tool and collected for all grade 1-3 primary teachers
       who have received project-financed training.
   (ii) Administration of enhanced 1rational 2nd grade exam. The national standardized
        test to assess student learning outcomes (O~ject(f terminal d'integration, OTI)
        exams will be revised during year one through project support to increase
        comparability between years and correspondence with the curriculum, and will be
        administered in Y2 and Y3 of the Project. This will enable the monitoring of
        student achievement in mathematics.
   (iii)Increase in the proportio11 ofscltools wlticlt have a school/earning achievement
        plan. This result corresponds to the Quality Indicator #18 of the Schema
        Directeur which mandates a learning achievement plan for each school in the
        country. The number of schools implementing those plans will be monitored
        annually through inspectors' reports and project progress reports.
   (iv)Number of direct project beneficiaries, by gender. The number of beneficiaries
       of school construction and rehabilitation will be monitored annually through the
       school survey and project progress reports, in addition to training reports and
       assessments which will capture beneficiaries of Project investments in training
C. Project Description

The project aims to address two central human development and education system
challenges: access to education services and quality of education services. While a
focused approach on just one area may have greater chances of success, current system
performance levels for these two metrics do not allow either to be ignored at present.
The proposed objectives are ambitious, but achievable in a country with a population of
less than one million. The proposed theory of change is that by investing in classroom
and system level student assessment capacities, the Project will increase the ability of
teachers and the system to monitor student performance in real time. When this data on
student learning outcomes is combined with Project inputs in teacher support systems,
training and instructional tools, teachers will have access to appropriate resources to
improve student learning of mathematics in primary classrooms. These investments in
capacity and information will be linked to performance monitoring as part of the school
learning achievement plans, which will act as an incentive to changes in behavior. While
the Project will work at the system, school and classroom level, the focus will be on
classroom teachers, as this is where student learning occurs.

The Project will focus on early primary mathematics instruction, complementing planned
investments by USAID in early primary literacy. Investments in ECD and school
construction will contribute access goals as well as to quality learning outcomes, for
example through the establishment of model community-based ECD programs, as led by
UNICEF. Investments in school construction will further provide access for girls and
vulnerable populations who have not benefitted from prior expansions in school
infrastructure, as well as in areas where there is existing but severely inadequate supply.
Finally, investments in materials for children with limited hearing and eyesight will allow
these students to be more fully integrated into the classroom and improve their
opportunities to learn.

The Project will benefit from current and prior IDA-financed capacity bui lding initiatives
with the MENFOP, work in primary grade literacy supported by USAID, as well as
teacher training activities supported by a variety of donors including the French
Cooperation Agency. However, the GPE interventions wi ll be designed in such a way
that the results will not depend on other donor financing. Investments in teacher training
in math could be programmed to coincide with training in reading instruction financed by
USAID, for example, to save on transportation costs among other expenses. This Project
will also support the work of other donors, for example by supporting the strengthening
of all of the OTI exam subjects.

The Project will be complimented by investments by other donors, including UNICEF,
USAID and the French Development Agency (AFD), among others. In order to address
the major challenge of access to quality primary education, the proposed Project will
comprise the following three components:

Component 1: Access to J>rimary E ducation (estimated cost: US$1.6 million). The
purpose of this component is to promote equitable access to quality primary education
while improvi ng physical learning environment in selected rural schools, in the four
targeted areas of Dikhil, Arta, Ali Sabieh and Tadjourah. To achieve this objective, the
project will finance: (i) the construction and equipping of a new primary school in
Tawaoco Chiniley (Dikhil), which will also include one cafeteria/kitchen, one
teacher/school director dormitory, six toilets, and the installation of solar panels; (ii) the
rehabilitation of six existing schools in Dorra and Adaillou (Tadjourah), Sankal (Dikhil),
Ali Addeh (Ali Sabich) Omar Djagga and Wea (Arta), and extensions in those same six
schools to add a total of about 20 new classrooms and necessary additional toilets as
necessary, with the aim of reducing overcrowding in those schools. The project will also
finance the provision of the necessary furniture and equipment for these additional
classrooms (i.e., desks, tables, chairs, cabinets, chalk boards, additional solar panels
needed, etc.).

Component 2: Q uality of P rimary Education (estimated cost: US$1.9 million). The
objective of this component is to improve students' learning outcomes through the
training of teachers, school directors, pedagogic counselors and inspectors, combined
with support to the most vulnerable children in school health and pre-primary education.
This Project will benefi t from and contribute to a multi-donor effort to support pre- and
in-service teacher training in Djibouti, including the French Agency for Development and
UNESCO. In particular, thi s Project will leverage fmancing from USAID in early grade
literacy to support early grade math, providing a unified package of support for quality
early primary instruction in Djibouti. Math and literacy are considered the two
foundational academic skills of early primary education, and the two donor institutions
have aligned their investments with their comparative advantage to better support the
MENFOP. The project will :

    (a) Provide in-service training for teachers, school directors, school inspectors and
    pedagogic counselors to · increase teacher knowledge of student performance and
    support them to provide effective instruction in mathematics, in line with ongoing
    work in Djibouti in this sector. This support would include training on differentiated
    instruction, student formative assessment, lesson planning, support to low-performing
    students and effective math instruction. These trainings would use a mix of workshop
    and in-classroom training, and be supported with scripted lesson plans and classroom
    resources.
    To support the implementation of the teacher and school director trainings,
    instructional resources will be purchased for ex isting regional training centers. In
    order to ensure fo llow-up and supervision of these investments, three primary
    inspectors will be trained and equipped under this component. Special trainings will
    also be fmanced for teachers of students with hearing and visual impairments, for
    example training in the use of sign language and braille. This component will further
    finance the purchase of hearing aids and eyeglasses to be distributed through a
    national school-based audio-visual health campaign in cooperation with the Ministry
    ofHealth and the World Health Organization.
    (b) Support the development of a student assessment policy, including the
    development of in-class formative assessment tools for teachers focusi ng on early
    grade math as well as strengthening the existing national primary examinations
    system, with a focus on math. 1 This component will also support the implementation
    of at least one adapted Early Grade Math Assessment (EGMA-lite) to be
    implemented in partnership with an Early Grade Reading Assessment to be financed
    by USAID.
    (c) Support the development and piloting of a community-based model for pre-school
    service provision in partnership with UNICEF. This component will support student
    learning outcomes in primary school targeted by the Project through improvements in
    student readiness for primary and age-appropriate enrollment. Training and
    instructional materials for providers of pre-school education will be financed.


C omponent 3: Project Monitoring and Management (estimated cost: USS0.3
million)

The objective of this component is to support the project implementation unit (Service de
Gestion des Projets, SOP) in facilitating the implementation and monitoring and
evaluation of the project, while continuing to reinforce the capacity of SGP. SGP is
currently responsible for managing four donor-financed projects: ACIGEF, financed by
IDA,; Pro}et de Renforcement d 'acces a I 'enseignement fondamenta/ (PRAEF) financed
1
  USAID is likely to fund a significant portion of activities in early grade reading, which would be
complemented by this proposed investment in math.
by Islamic Development Bank (IDB); Projet de construction et d'equipement d 'un
etablissement de formation des enseignants de I 'enseignement fondamental financed by
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA); Projet Education pour tous a Djibouti
(EPTD) financed by AFD and one nationally-financed project (Projet d'extention et de
construction des ecoles primaires). Two other donor-financed projects are currently in
the pipeline: the Projet d'appui a l'enseignement secondaire general et technique
(financed by AFD) and the Projet de construction d'un college d'enseignement moyen a
Balbala financed by a grant from the Government of China. In order to prevent an
overload of SOP capacity, the project would finance: (i) incremental operating costs
(communications, bank fees, consurnables, fuel, office supplies, procurement
advertisements), i.e. extra costs generated by the project; (ii) the recruitment of an
accountant and a procurement assistant dedicated to the project; (iii) transportation fees
relatea to the supervision of works and follow-up of environmental aspects by the SOP,
Department of environment and DHU; (iv) audit expenses; and (iv) training in
procurement, financial management and monitoring and evaluation of SOP staff
dedicated to that specific project. T hese activities will be complementary to other
capacity building and training activities already planned in the ongoing ACIGEF project
for SOP and MENFOP departments; and (vi) travel expenses related to the participation
ofMENFOP staff in conferences and seminars ofthe Global Partnership for Education.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known):

The construction of one primary school (on voluntary conceded land) and
extension/rehabilitation of six existing schools will take place in rw-al sites that were
already identified by the MENFOP in the four targeted areas of: Dikhil, Arta, Ali Sabieh
and Tadjourah. Mobilization of land for the new school and for extension/rehabilitation
of existing schools will be done on state owned land and documented in consultation and
agreement with relevant traditional and administrative authorities. All sites were visited
by the World Bank team during the preparation and pre-appraisal missions.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

The MENFOP, through its project implementation unit ("Service de Gestion des Projets",
SOP) revised and updated the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which had been
prepared for the previous EF A-FTI grant. The MEN FOP also conducted, during the
months of July and August 2013, consultations with affected communities; these
consultations are documented in minutes which are attached as an annex to the EMP.
The EMP will be disclosed in-country and in the World Bank lnfoshop prior to appraisal.
The entity responsible for implementing the EMP for school construction projects is the
"Direction de !'Habitat et de l'Urbanisrne (DHU)"of the "Ministere de !' Habitat, de
l'Urbanisme, de l'Environnement et de I' Amenagement du Territoire ». The SOP works
with the DHU as the DHU supervises school construction contracts. They have
experience in implementing Bank safeguards instrun1ents of past education projects and
they will receive support from the environment and social safeguards team members in
the Bank team. The capacity of the DHU to monitor the implementation of the EMP was
assessed and found satisfactory.
D. Key Safeguards Policy Issues and their Management:

Environment: The main environmental issues associated with the project include:
possible negative impacts associated with construction and rehabilitation activities. Other
main issues that are identified for consideration include: water availability, and sanitation
and hygiene. In order to ensure that water is available in schools, availability of water
was one of the criteria for new school location selection. In addition, the project will
ensure availability of water and sanitation (water point rehabilitation, latrines
rehabilitation in expanded/rehabilitated schools). The project will work with sanitation
and hygiene specialist to ensure that proper sanitation and hygiene measures are included
early on in the design.

Social: OP 4.12 will not be triggered. Mobilization of land for purposes of building one
school and extending/rehabilitating existing schools will be done on state owned land and
documented in consultation and agreement with relevant traditional and administrative
authorities. MENFOP has confirmed that these construction and extension/rehabilitation
works will not cause involuntary land acquisition or involuntary displacement of people
leading to Joss of access to resources and /or revenues. In August 2013, MENFOP
submitted draft copies of official signed documents attesting to voluntary land
mobilization, with prior consultation and non-compensated agreement of beneficiaries'
communities.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Fatou Fall, MNSSO
Helena Naber, MNSEN

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)             Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                          X
This policy is triggered due to the site specific and less
adverse impacts associated with schools construction.
The     MEN FOP       has    already     developed an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) for the previous IDA- fmanced projects,
which will be updated during preparation. The EMP
of the PJ 17424-Djibouti-EFA/FTl CF Additional
Financing Project was revised and updated. These
instruments will be disclosed in-country and ln.foshop
prior to appraisal

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
  Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explai11 why)   Yes   No     TBD
  Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                       X

  Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  X

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                   X

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                            X

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      X


  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                X

  Projects on International Watenvays (OP/BP 7.50)           X

  Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                    X


  Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address            X
  Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in
  Bank-Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


  IV. APPROVALS

Si 11ed 011d submitted b :                                          Dote
Task Team Leader:

                                                                    Date
                                                                  08/26/2013

  Comments:
