                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/01/2011                                       Report No.: 63775
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Russian Federation                    Project ID: P095554
Project Name: Microfinance Project
Task Team Leader: Pierre Olivier Colleye
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 5, 2011     Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2011
Managing Unit: ECSPF                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: SME Finance (50%);Microfinance (50%)
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (50%);Other Financial Sector Development
(50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            21.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    19.00
                                                                     19.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the proposed project are to develop (i) a proper legal, regulatory and
supervisory framework to enable safe and sound growth of the microfinance and credit
cooperative sectors, and (ii) the industry#s capacity to meet the sectoral regulations and
institutional standards.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Legal and Regulatory Framework Development (USD 5.5 million,
including USD 2.75 million from IBRD). This component will support the creation of an
enabling legal and regulatory environment and build the capacity of the MoF and the
DGA to regulate and supervise the sector. First, the project will finance technical
assistance (TA) to build consensus and draft and/or modify a number of laws and
regulations in a number of areas, including but not limited to bankruptcy, tax, banking,
loan loss provisions, consumer protection, deposit insurance, reporting standards or
prudential norms. It will conduct a review of the two existing laws which regulate CCs
and MFIs and recommend and draft amendments, when necessary, in the latter part of the
project. It will also finance the dissemination and training on these new regulations to the
sector.
 Second, the project will strengthen the capacity of the Government to regulate and
supervise the industry. To achieve this goal, it will finance a mix of TA, training, study
tours and IT support to help design and set up the overall supervision system and the
supervisory authority (DGA) in particular. It will help develop the methodology for
supervision, and design and roll out the technical and IT tools to conduct direct
supervision of the largest CCs (>5,000 members), the MFIs, the SROs and 2nd tier CCs.
The project will also finance assistance in developing supervision manuals, internal
policies and procedures for the MoF, the DGA and SROs, as well as the training of
government officials in charge of regulation and supervision of the industry.

 Component 2: Capacity and IT Development (USD 15.5 million, including USD 7.75
million from IBRD). The industry will need the support of the project to learn, implement
and meet the new legal, regulatory and reporting requirements. In order to meet this
objective, the project will conduct an inventory of existing training programs, develop a
unified core curriculum on these issues and will deliver them to the industry in
classrooms and on-line. It will make use of a number of retailing arrangements, including
the contracting of Specialized Training Centers, typically but not exclusively affiliated
with the industry, to provide for a massive delivery of this training program and build the
capacity of these Training Centers (i.e. Training of Trainers) to continue to
provide/update these programs past project closing. Partnership with public and private
higher education institutions will also be sought to incorporate courses related to CCs and
MFIs into their curriculum with the goal of training the future leaders of Russian
microfinance. More general training on basic management skills for CCs and MFIs is
already provided by the private sector, on a commercial basis, and will not be covered
under this project.

 Also, MoF has extremely limited information on the sector and its performance. The
new legal framework will require the DGA and SROs to be equipped with the appropriate
software to monitor and analyze industry performance. The industry itself will also
require basic reporting software. The project will finance the design, testing, installation
and roll-out of modular monitoring and reporting tools (and will finance training for their
use) at all levels of the industry (DGA, SRO, 2nd tier CCs, CCs and MFIs). This software
will be provided for free to the industry, at least initially and for some period of time. The
software will be designed to interface with most software currently being used by the
industry so that it can continue to use its own software platform for accounting and loan
management purposes.

 Component 3: Institutional Standards Development and Support Services (USD 10.5
million, including USD 5.25 million from IBRD). Under this component, the project will
help the industry and the regulator develop a range of industry standards and definitions
on topics such as governance, operations, accounting, performance and reporting, in line
with international best practice and the current legal framework. It will also help develop
standard internal documents and procedures for CCs and MFIs (by-laws, sample
contracts and loan documents, internal regulations, internal audits, etc.), help disseminate
them, and train CCs and MFIs on their use.
 The project will also bring best practice to the design, creation or scaling up of
supporting institutions and services that could strengthen the sector by reducing risk,
increasing transparency, enhancing the capacity of the sector to attract funding or more
generally improve services to the final clients/ and members. Practically, the project will
initially finance a number of feasibility studies with considerable consensus building
effort, taking into consideration international best practices, and taking stock of the
desirability and demand for such institutions and services in Russia. For these
institutions/services where demand is indeed strong, the project will also work with the
regulator, the DGA and the industry to build an implementation strategy. Expected topics
include (but are not limited to) audits, credit bureaus and rating services (either through
specialized firms or by expanding the services of existing actors). Also, the project will
review potential strategies to ensure that CCs and MFIs are able to manage their risks,
possibly through appropriate insurance mechanisms such as deposit insurance or Mutual
Insurance Societies. Other topics such as branchless banking (e.g. mobile technology,
internet or card-based services) or the development of other microfinance products and
services will also be analyzed with the industry. Finally, this component will help the
Government establish minimum requirements on consumer protection and transparency
and will provide support to both the regulator and the industry in implementing these
requirements.

 Component 4: Strengthening the Microfinance Industry Structure and Communication
(USD 6.5 million, including USD 3.25 million from IBRD). After having built the
capacity of the DGA on the supervisory end of the microfinance market, and of the CCs
on the retail end, the project will help establish and strengthen the institutional
arrangements for the multi-tiered cooperative system and its supervision: The new law
calls for SROs, 2nd tier cooperatives and associations or unions of CC to play a critical
role in a wide range of tasks:
 #      SROs will contribute to the monitoring of the sector under the overarching
supervision of the DGA and may provide training, either by themselves or through
specialized training centers affiliated to them.
 #      2nd tier cooperatives, legally cooperatives themselves, will also be able to handle
excess liquidity and the refinancing of their member CCs.
 #      According to the general NGO law, associations or unions of CCs will represent
the interests of their members, provide training, share information, etc.
 The component will finance a mix of TA and training to help these institutions design,
document, and deliver these often new services efficiently as the industry itself will have
to cover the operational costs of these SROs, 2nd tier CCs and associations/unions.
Because of the complexity and geographical spread of the sector, an important
consensus-building, study tours and communication activity will also be financed by this
component. It will also increase the awareness of the general public on the microfinance
sector. Coordination with the World Bank-financed Financial Literacy Project will also
be sought to ensure consistency and synergies.

 Component 5: Project Management (USD 2 million, all from IBRD). This component
will finance the project management function, including procurement and financial
management, as well as periodic monitoring, evaluation, audit and reporting on the
project. This will be undertaken by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) already selected
by the MoF. A Working Group of the MoF has been established to oversee project
preparation, implementation, and the monitoring and evaluation framework. (For more
details, see annex 3.)

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented nationwide, starting with regions with well developed
CC and MFI coverage.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Nicolas Perrin (ECSS4)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                       X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will not finance any credit line nor the financing of any work other than
possibly minor rehabilitation or installation of equipment which would not require
substantial excavation or generation of large quantities of debris requiring disposal. The
project is primarily financing (i) legal and regulatory technical assistance in the field of
financial sector regulation and supervision, (ii) training of financial institutions on legal
and regulatory issues, (iii) software for supervising and monitoring the microfinance
sector and (iv) conferences, study tours, information dissemination and (v) hands on
technical assistance for the financial regulator/supervisor.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower, through the establishment of a project implementation unit (PIU) with
considerable experience in Bank-funded project, has adequate capacity for the
implementation of a project of this type. The Ministry of Finance has been designated as
the implementation agency for this project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The stakeholders are primarily the Government and the financial institutions (credit
cooperatives and microfinance institutions) whose legal and regulatory framework will be
strengthened and who will primarily benefit from the technical assistance, training and IT
support (software) which the project will finance. They have been consulted throughout
the preparation of the project but no safeguards have been triggered by the Project’s
design.

  There is a risk that inadequately supervised deposit-taking institutions will lose the
savings of an often poor segment of the population and, that clients or members with little
financial literacy will not be able to evaluate the safety of the institutions they invest their
savings in or that they will not be aware of their rights. The project specifically will
address this risk. Indeed, as a result of the project, the security of members’ savings will
be considerably increased by improving governance, reporting, and supervision of
deposit-taking CCs. The project will also determine the feasibility of setting up a ratings
system which will inform existing and potential members and investors about the safety
of their institutions. Finally, the Government has also incorporated an activity to educate
clients about a wide range of topics, including their rights. The members of these
institutions are therefore expected to be better protected thanks to the project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Pierre Olivier Colleye   08/01/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Sophie Sirtaine          08/01/2011
  Comments:
