                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/28/2011                                       Report No.: AC6535
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Rwanda                              Project ID: P127105
Project Name: Rwanda - Governance & Competitiveness TA Project
Task Team Leader: Lucy M. Fye
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 21,        Estimated Board Date: January 26, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTFE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Central government administration (30%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
(40%);General industry and trade sector (30%)
Theme: International financial standards and systems (60%);Managing for development
results (20%);Other Financial Sector Development (10%);Other Private Sector
Development (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              5
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the institutional capacity of
selected institutions to improve competitiveness in selected sectors in Rwanda.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Support to Priority Institutions under the Strategic Capacity Building
Initiative (SCBI) (US$1.30million)
 The objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional frameworks of the
project’s selected priority institutions to better deliver on their respective mandates, in
support of improved competitiveness and the implementation of Rwanda’s Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS) and National Export Strategy
(NES).

 Component 2: Support for Implementation of the National Export Strategy (NES)
(US$2.60million)
 The objective of this component is to support implementation of the NES and,
specifically, two key growth sectors - tourism and horticulture. It will: (a) provide
assistance for the review and development of tourism and horticulture strategies and
plans related to competitiveness; and (b) provide technical assistance to guide the
implementation of these competitiveness strategies.

 Component 3: Improved Public-Private Dialogue for Competitiveness (US$0.6million)
 Within Rwanda, the umbrella organization that represents the private sector is the
Private Sector Federation (PSF). Support to the PSF will consist of technical assistance
for: (i) strengthening analytical, research and public relations roles of PSF vis-a-vis the
GoR; (ii) strengthening PSF interaction with relevant member Chambers and
Associations (e.g. Chambers of Agriculture and Livestock (including horticulture),
Chamber of Commerce and Services and the Chamber of Tourism); (iii) strengthening
capacity for the private sector and the GoR to hold each other mutually accountable to the
implementation of the NES; (iv) functional review of PSF vis-à-vis its mandate; and (v)
support to the Exporters Forum as a vehicle for improved dialogue between government
and the private sector.

 Component 4: Project Coordination (US$0.5million)
 This component will support the coordination of the project under the Single Project
Implementation Unit (SPIU) under the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MINICOM).

 The TA will not include the provision of farm equipment, fertilizer, pesticides or other
farm inputs. In this regard, the project does not have any environmental or social impact.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Kigali, Rwanda

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of "in-country" disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
  * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
  the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
  Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
  explain why:
  Not applicable


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Lucy M. Fye                               12/28/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Irina Astrakhan                           12/28/2011
  Comments:
