                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/24/2011                                    Report No.: AC6303
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Rwanda                               Project ID: P116360
Project Name: Promoting Economic Empowerment of Adolescent Girls and Young
Women
Task Team Leader: Christopher Finch
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 23,        Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011
2010
Managing Unit: AFTCS                          Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                              Loan
Sector: Vocational training (75%);Secondary education (15%);Other industry (10%)
Theme: Improving labor markets (33%);Social risk mitigation (33%);Other human
development (17%);Other social development (17%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                       2.70
                                                                       2.70
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
1.     The development objectives for the project are to improve employment, incomes
and empowerment of targeted disadvantaged adolescent girls and young women (age 15-
24 years), in two urban and two rural districts of Rwanda, and to test two integrated
models for promoting education, empowerment and employment.

3. Project Description
2.       The project will assist adolescent girls and young women to establish small
businesses or to resume their formal education. Being a pilot project, it will draw upon
the Bank’s comparative advantage in conducting rigorous impact evaluations of new
initiatives.

 3.    The project will have three components:

 i.    Vocational skills and support for entrepreneurship;
 ii.   Scholarships to resume formal education;
 iii.   Project implementation support.

 Component 1: Vocational skills and support for entrepreneurship
 4.      The objective of this component is to provide the necessary skills and support to
aproximately 2,700 adolescent girls and young women in two urban and two rural
districts of Rwanda (the proposed districts are Rulindo, Gicumbi, Gasabo and Kicukiro),
to enable them to establish themselves in profitable small enterprises. The interventions
will provide them with a set of technical, business and life skills, along with institutional
and social support, mentoring and links to credit. The component is built on a public-
private partnership and on an integrated and phased approach to bringing disadvantaged
adolescent girls into the labor market. Component 1 will account for 77.6% of project
costs.

 5.    Training will provide occupational skills for which demand is anticipated to
expand in the future. An assessment undertaken during project preparation identified
opportunities for self-employment in a number of areas including: agro-processing (e.g.
food processing, honey production, baking, juice processing), clean and sustainable
energy, culinary arts, and arts and crafts. Training curricula will stress the development of
industry-based technical skills. Life skills training will address crucial gaps to the access
of adolescent girls to the labor market in Rwanda.

 6.     As the minimum age for cooperative membership in Rwanda is 16, project
beneficiaries under Component 1 must be between the ages 16 to 24 at enrollment.
Project beneficiaries will receive a daily stipend during the program. This will be 700
RWF / day during the induction and technical and skills formation phases, and 300 RWF/
day during the mentoring phase. From this stipend, 200 RWF/ day for the duration of
phase 3 (training) and phase 4 (mentoring), will be deposited in a savings mechanism for
each individual beneficiary, accessible only on successful competition of the training
program.

  Component 2: Scholarships for resuming formal education (secondary S1-S3)
  7.     GoR has recently moved from compulsory Universal Primary Education (UPE) to
Universal Basic Education (UBE), under which all children in Rwanda have the right to
free primary and junior secondary education (6 plus 3). This transition implies the cohort
of girls who dropped out before the new policy will not be catered for. The opportunity
for this group to complete grades 7 to 9 will improve their chances of obtaining
employment and increasing their incomes. Component 2 will provide scholarships to
eligible adolescent girls and young women aged 15-24 years who have dropped out of
school but now wish to pursue secondary education rather than vocational training.
Scholarships will be paid as tuition payments directly to schools on behalf of clearly
identified candidates as per process described in Project Implementation Manual. The
scholarship program will be administered by the Imbuto Foundation and will account for
approximately 14.6% of project costs.

 8.      The component will adopt a tailored approach to assist 120 women (30 per project
district) to return to formal education for three years. Beneficiaries will be accommodated
by one private school in each district. In those districts without suitable schools, the
beneficiaries will be accommodated in a school in a nearby district. In case one private
school failed to accommodate all district beneficiaries, the beneficiaries will then be
accommodated in more than one school per district. Additional support, including a
mentorship program and psychosocial support, will be provided to enable participants to
catch up with their peers who have remained in school. One mentor will be assigned to
each of the four schools to support the young women in their studies. Mentors will
receive training in psychosocial support, to enable them to identify signs of depression,
stress, and trauma among project beneficiaries and refer them for individual counseling
as in Component 1. Project beneficiaries in Component 2 will also participate in Imbuto
Foundation’s activities to empower and inform young women, such as their annual
empowerment camps.

  Component 3: Project Implementation Support
  9.    Technical and logistical support will be provided for MIGEPROF and other
partner agencies in the areas of project management, and monitoring and evaluation. The
project will be implemented under the Single Project Implementation Unit modality that
will be integrated under MIGEPROF. Support for policy and institutionalization of
policies for MIGEPROF will also be provided by the project, for mainstreaming the
lessons learned by the project into the Ministry’s policy frameworks and strategic plans.
Activities to be supported must be identified and planned with the guidance of the Project
Steering Committee. Component 3 will account for approximately 7.6% of the project
budget.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
10.    The districts proposed are Gasabo and Kicukiro in Kigali (urban) and of Rulindo
and Gicumbi (rural).

  11. From the field visits undertaken to all districts and sectors, it is clear that there is a
serious shortage of physical facilities and equipment for training. The project would
partner with local governments and WDA to upgrade existing facilities for use in the in-
classroom training. Existing locations identified and assessed by local governments,
MIGEPROF, and other implementing partners will require equipping as well as minor
upgrading (i.e. installation of windows and doors, roofing, plumbing, minor internal
adoptions for use as workshops/ classrooms, and painting). Environmental impacts will
be localized and very minor, and upgrading will be conducted in all cases following the
corresponding national and local laws and regulations. This process will not involve the
acquisition of land, restrictions of access to resources, or the construction of new
structures. In locations where it does not prove possible to identify potential training
location under this arrangement, the project will rent facilities and equip them for the
training.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTOS)
   Ms Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Christopher Finch       05/04/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist       Ms Paula F. Lytle          05/10/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ian Bannon              05/19/2011
  Comments:
