                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6363


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/05/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Rwanda                                Project ID: P126440
Project Name: Third Rural Sector Support Project
Task Team Leader: Loraine Ronchi
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 9,         Estimated Board Date: January 18, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTAR                           Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Irrigation and drainage
(30%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%)
Theme: Other rural development (35%);Rural services and infrastructure (33%);Water
resource management (17%);Rural policies and institutions (15%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             70.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 0.00
                                                                           0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
In line with the overall APL objective and according to the programmatic phasing the Project
Development Objectives (PDOs) for RSSP3 are to:

  1. Increase the agricultural productivity of the marshlands and hillsides in the sub-watersheds
targeted for development in an environmentally sustainable manner; and to

 2. Strengthen the sustainable participation of women and men beneficiaries in market-based
value chains.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The long term programmatic objective of the RSSP APL series is to help the GoR achieve is
strategic goal of unlocking rural growth in order to increase incomes and reduce poverty. The
series, at its inception, envisioned the first phase to be about building the capacity needed to
support the adoption of sustainable intensification technologies in developed marshlands and
surrounding hillsides. The emphasis of the second phase was to broaden and deepen the support
provided, in order to accelerate intensification and commercialization. The third phase was
envisioned to extend and build on successful growth-stimulating RSSP activities, while
emphasizing diversification of economic activities to increase and stabilize rural incomes.

  In keeping with the preceding phase, RSSP 3 will have three components, whose contents are
adapted to reflect (i) the evolving overall vision for the Program; (ii) technical RSSP 3 field
activities conducted by the in-country Bank team and the GoR team in February 2011 and related
consultations with the GoR team in the early part of 2011; and, most importantly, (iii) lessons
learned from RSSP 2 and from the Government#s hillside companion program, the Land
Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation (LWH). These lessons are referred to
directly in the Project description below. Given this is the third phase of the APL, the Project
description and risk discussions in this Project Concept Note (PCN) are relatively well informed,
although they will be further developed during Project preparation.

 Component 1 : Infrastructure for Marshland, Hillside and Commodity Chain Development
 Proposed Allocation: USD 40 million

  Building on the successful approaches, processes and experience of RSSP 1 and 2, the objective
of Component 1 will be to expand irrigated area of cultivated marshlands, to increase the use of
erosion-controlling and productivity enhancing sustainable land management practices on
associated hillsides, and to finance up and downstream economic infrastructure needs articulated
by women and men in their communities. The component will be divided between three sub-
components, (i) Marshland rehabilitation and development; (ii) Sustainable land management on
hillsides; and (iii) Rural investments for economic infrastructure. For the first sub-component,
the Project will articulate clear selection criteria, including cost per ha, for marshlands to be
developed. Envisioned resources imply approximately 4,100 ha of marshlands rehabilitated or
developed for irrigation, although the number will vary by nature of marshlands selected. A
number of marshlands will be identified during preparation for which RSSP 2 safeguard
instruments will be duly updated and related assessments prepared. The remaining hectares will
be identified during implementation and safeguard frameworks updated during Project
preparation. For the second subcomponent, an approximate 12,300 ha of sustainable hillside
land management associated with selected marshlands is envisioned. Since the (improved)
hillside strategy of RSSP 2, GoR, through the IDA-financed LWH, has piloted and developed a
very effective watershed approach for sustainable land management practices on hillsides. For its
hillside work, RSSP 3 will adopt lessons learned, not only from RSSP 2, but from the best
practice experience of the LWH pilots. This will also permit the harmonization of overlapping
indicators between the two operations. Lessons learned about the third sub-component (formerly
in Component 2 of RSSP 2) indicated (1) Project resources were insufficient to meet the basic
demand from women and men in Project areas for economic infrastructure, including post
harvest facilities, feeder road improvements, etc. and (2) there was insufficient follow up with
communities on how the investment could be used to generate further revenue for further
investments. Accordingly, this sub component will be better resourced and then explicitly linked
with capacity activities of Component 2 below. The Project may also consider extra-community
economic infrastructures such as rural bulk markets.
 Component 2: Capacity for Marshland, Hillside and Commodity Chain Development
 Proposed Allocation: USD 23 million

  11. In RSSP 2, the key areas covered by Component 2 (formerly called "strengthening
commodity chains") included strengthening farmer organizations and cooperatives (e.g. good
governance and basic operating capacity); extension and training activities to improve
production and productivity of farming systems in the marshland and hillsides (e.g. demo plots,
soil fertility enhancements, promotion of improved inputs, and IPM); and knowledge generation
and dissemination. These activities are critical to maintaining the achievements of RSSP beyond
the life of the APL series, and so the design of Component 2 in RSSP 3 pays particular attention
to three key lessons documented in the MTR, Aide Memoires and Implementation Status and
Results Reports (ISRs) for RSSP 2 with respect to this component. The first lesson is that
Component 2 activities were clearly under-resourced in RSSP 2. The Project attempted to
correct for this post-MTR, with some success. RSSP 3 will improve the resource allocation to
these activities. The second key lesson was that there was little link between the infrastructure
activities of the Project and its capacity building activities. Component 2 for RSSP 3 will
therefore also include formation of Water User Associations (WUAs), formerly found in
Component 1 of RSSP 2. In a related point, the third lesson from RSSP 2 concerns a lack of
market-based follow up on economic infrastructures financed by the Project. RSSP3s
Component 2 will therefore have a subcomponent explicitly for commodity chain diversification
activities. This subcomponent would finance activities that support strategic business planning
for cooperatives and for profitable community use of Project-financed investments; market
linkages and market demand analysis; value added innovations linked to markets; micro and
small business formation support for input production/ landed and landless women and men
community-members in Project areas, including in the management of economic infrastructure.
As compared to RSSP 2, greater attention will be paid to supporting cooperatives for long-term
autonomous provision of services, investment in infrastructure and marketing of goods. While
this is in line with the evolving focus of the third phase towards greater diversification and
market orientation, cooperative readiness for this orientation will vary. As such, similar to RSSP
2, the Project will finance capacity building diagnostic for all cooperatives to be supported under
the Project. These will be a mix of RSSP 2 cooperatives that require ongoing support due to the
timing of works in RSSP 2, and group formation and cooperative support for new marshland and
hillside areas. While the full gamut of cooperative support and support to women and men for
value chain diversification activities will be provided at each site, the cooperative diagnostic will
determine the emphasis or focus. It is, for example, expected that RSSP 2 Cooperatives will be
ready for more strategic business support immediately, whilst new RSSP 3 cooperatives will
require sequential emphasis on basic support followed by strategic business skill-building.
Capacity support for women and men to participate along the value chain will be provided from
Project start across all sites.

 Component 3: Project Coordination and Support
 Proposed Allocation: USD 7 million

 12. In keeping with the commitment of DPs in the agricultural sector of Rwanda, RSSP 3
will not create a new PIU, but rather will merge the RSSP 2 implementation team with that of the
LWH implementation team. When the LWH Project was designed (see LWH PAD), it was done
in order to contribute to the Ministrys One-PIU, in which each PSTA program had its own PIU
under an implementation superstructure (under the Permanent Secretary). The LWH Project
finances the first of these four PIUs for Government, the PSTA Program 1 Implementation
Team, whose first task is the implementation of LWH. As part of the LWH scale-up under the
Global Agricultural Food Security Program (GAFSP), the procurement and financial
management units of the LWH were merged with the more experienced ones of RSSP 2 in order
to further the Banks support to streamlined implementation in MINAGRI. The proposed RSSP 3
implementation structure is therefore an incremental continuation of that commitment. For
RSSP 3, the LWH and RSSP 2 team merger will form one implementation unit embedded in the
Ministrys structure, undertaking the majority of the Governments intensification activities (i.e.
RSSP and LWH activities). The implementation capacity of LWH recently received a thorough
assessment as part of the preparation for its the GAFSP scale-up and a similar assessment will
take priority during preparation with the RSSP 2 implementation team to ensure sufficient
implementation capacity for the merged implementation unit.

D. Project location (if known)
The Project will work in selected marshlands and hillsides throughout the national territory.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Through Phases 1 and 2 of RSSP, the Project Support and Coordination Unit (PSCU) has trained
environmental and social specialists to address safeguards requirements. The PSCU works in
close collaboration with the Rwanda Environmental Management Authority to ensure meeting
Bank requirements also satisfies national requirements.

  During Phase 2, notable progress has been achieved in the implementation of safeguards
policies, and the PSCU has made enormous strides in building capacity in-house to handle these
vital functions. Project management and staff have taken up the challenge laid down during the
last year implementation support mission to better integrate the marshlands and hillsides
development activities, and thanks in part to the adoption of a more holistic approach, the Project
has started to deliver significant results on the ground.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
     The approach for hillside activities in the Project promote erosion control and prevent
encroachment on steeper slope areas through improved yields from good soil stewardship.
Marshland and hillside development creates the risk of loss of habitats and ecosystem services,
as well as water quality and environmental health consequences from enhanced or expanded
irrigated agriculture. Consequently, to enhance environmental planning of marshland and hillside
developments in Phases 1 and 2, an overall Environmental Assessment (EA) and Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs) for all RSSP subprojects already undertaken have been prepared.
Because at this stage of project preparation, the sites of future sub-projects have not been
confirmed, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for RSSP
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No         TBD
II will be updated and will be implemented for all project sites, focusing on the ways and means
for avoiding development of important marshlands, and minimizing marshland reductions and
the ecological services they provide. The subsequent EMPs will be developed during upon
selection of individual subprojects.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                         X
    Marshland habitats may be affected by the development of irrigated agriculture. This issue is
central to the EA/EMP work discussed under OP4.01 above.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                             X
    The Pest Management Plan disclosed for the RSSP 2 will be updated to cover RSSP 3 focus
on wider range of crops. The updated PMP will be publicly disclosed prior to project appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                              X
    Presence of physical cultural resources in the sub-project locations will be assessed during
project preparation. Should potential sites be identified, the policy will be triggered and
appropriate assessment will be incorporated into project EA instruments. Chance finds
procedures will be included in sub-project EMPs.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    Marshland and hillside developments involve land acquisition for small dams, reservoirs,
borrow areas, roads, canals, etc. Because at this stage of project preparation, sites of future sub-
projects has not been confirmed, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for RSSP II
will be updated and will be implemented for all project sites. Where and if needed, a
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared and implemented before the start of the
concerned sub-project, upon selection of individual subprojects.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                           X
    RSSP dams are located on flat broad marshlands. No RSSP dam has surpassed 9 metres.
Although the Project therefore neither envisions "construction of a large dam (15 m and higher)
or a high hazard dam" nor "is dependent upon an existing dam" the Project will asess potential
sites during preparation to determine the need to trigger this policy and will prepare either small
dam safety guidelines, and/or dam safety plans/dam safety panel in accordance with OP4.37.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                      X
    Riparian notification will be issued by the Government of Rwanda or by the World Bank, on
behalf of the Government of Rwanda, at the request of the Government of Rwanda.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   09/30/2011
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   As mentioned above, an EA, RPF and an IPMP are being prepared for Phase 3. All will be
   completed, cleared by the Bank and disclosed prior to project appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Loraine Ronchi                                              06/29/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       06/29/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks                                      06/29/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
