                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6522


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/21/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Rwanda                               Project ID: P127105
Project Name: Rwanda - Governance & Competitiveness TA Project
Task Team Leader: Lucy M. Fye
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 19,         Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTFE                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General industry and trade sector (40%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
(30%);Agricultural extension and research (30%)
Theme: International financial standards and systems (60%);Infrastructure services for
private sector development (20%);Other Financial Sector Development (10%);Other
Private Sector Development (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              5.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                        0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project objective is to improve public sector capacity to achieve private sector development
and growth objectives in targeted sectors (tea, horticulture and tourism).

  The program will provide specialized technical assistance to: (i) strengthen and streamline
governance and institutional development issues in selected public and private institutions; and
(ii) Promote investment in the value chains of selected export sectors (tea, horticulture and
tourism).

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The operation will consist of two closely related components. The first will support public sector
capacity building activities in the SCBI priority sectors for export growth of agriculture, private
sector investment and energy. The second will focus on specific interventions in five targeted
and related export sector value chains (tea, horticulture and tourism). The aim is for activities in
the first component to have a direct impact on the second. The project has chosen to focus in
particular constraints in the value chains experienced by the private sector rather than all of the
critical bottlenecks to complement and build on other development partners and World Bank
projects. The entry point for the project is similar to that of the growth pole (such that focus is in
the sources of growth) based on the following elements: (i) identified prospects and existing
private investment, enterprise and market development opportunities and associated public
private partnerships in the short and medium-term (interest and needs expressed by private
sector); (ii) specific economic growth potential (competitive advantages and employment rates),
and (iii) infrastructure, regulatory and other public policy and capacity gaps that represent
bottlenecks for the realization of the countrys growth potential.

 Component 1: Support to the Strategic Capacity Building Initiative Sectors (SCBI) ($2.0
million)
 The Strategic Capacity Building Initiative is focused on the high priority sectors for Rwanda#s
competitiveness and export growth. This component will provide scope for the World Bank to
provide flexible and responsive Technical Assistance support to the Public Sector Capacity
Building Secretariat and other parts of the Government as it enhances the approach, thus
complementing the financing for the SCBI through the third WB budget support series and
helping to leverage additional support and partnerships. The component will also encourage a
stronger focus on longer term capacity building needs in these growth sectors, to ensure that the
short-term Technical Assistance inputs and additional national staffing envisaged under the
SCBI Year One plans in the RDB, EWSA, MINIRENA, and the Agriculture sector can be
sustained for long term impact on Rwanda#s exports and private sector development.

 Component 2: Improving the Competitiveness of Key Value Chains (US$3.0 million)

 This component will provide technical assistance and capacity building activities in the
following export sectors:
 #      Tea sector: Support to the tea sector will be based on the 2008 Tea Sector Strategy and
the recent near completion of privatization of the tea estates. The project intervention in this
sector is limited to identification of export markets. Production and processing levels of the value
chain is outside the scope of this project. In this regard, the subcomponent does not have any
environmental or social impacts.

  #     Horticulture - Fruits and vegetables: The sector is mostly dominated by small farmers and
small cooperatives. The project will base its support on the November 2010 Agribusiness
Investors Forum Action Plan. Through technical assistance, the project will support GoR to
further analyze and tackle the identified constraints (e.g. transportation (freight and cost). The
TA will not include the provision of farm equipment, fertilizer, pesticides or other farm inputs. It
is only expected to promote growth in the sector through the provision of strategic frameworks.

 #      Tourism sector: the sector needs new value chains to identify new tourist and eco-tourism
attraction/opportunities in Rwanda. The project will support the development of the Meeting
Incentives Conference and Exhibition Strategy (MICE) and the Kivu Belt Tourism Master Plan.
The project will further assist GoR to identify how to exploit these opportunities and assist in
their promotion for investments including the use of PPPs.
D. Project location (if known)
Rwanda

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Rwanda Environmental Management Agency is responsible for environmental issues of the
country.
 The project is comprised of TA only. There will be no investments in the components and thus
no risk of adverse environmental impact as a direct result of project implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                                      X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/29/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Not applicable.




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                   Ms Lucy M. Fye                                         10/21/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                               10/24/2011
   Comments: Later should project involved land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or
   social impacts, consult ASPEN.
 Sector Manager:                     Mr Michael J. Fuchs                                    10/21/2011
   Comments:
