                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             CONCEPT/APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                             70543

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/23/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Samoa                           Project ID: P128756
                                         Additional Project ID (if any): N/A
Project Name: Samoa City Development Strategy Programme
Task Team Leader: Federico Silva
Estimated Approval Date: 7 April 2011    Estimated Completion Date: 2013
Managing Unit: FEUCA                     Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector: Urban
Theme: Technical Assistance

Other financing amounts by source: Cities Alliance MDTF US$ 237,000

Environmental Category: Category C
Simplified Processing             Simple [X]                     Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project     Yes [ ]                        No [X]


B. Project Objectives:

The overall objective of the project is to prepare a city development strategy (CDS) for the
greater Apia area with a focus on climate change risks. The strategy will define the strategic
development thrusts and options for socio-economic and infrastructural development city-wide.
Concurrently, this process will strengthen Samoa’s urban management institutional framework
so it can better create more inclusive, participative, productive, liveable and sustainable towns. It
is expected that by taking such action the outputs will collectively make a positive contribution
to the social, economic and environmental quality of life of urban dwellers; and, at a broader
level, contribute to Samoa’s achievement of the MDGs through 5 support components.
C. Project Description:

The project consists of the following components:

Component 1. Assessment, Analysis and Strategy. The component includes community
assessments, urban profiles and vulnerability studies of the focus area. It develops the Vision for
the development of the targeted areas, reflecting their comparative advantages (through SWOT
analysis) and longer-term development including a strategy for addressing hardship(s) and
climate change.

Deliverables:
    Urban Profiling of Apia and other identified urban centers in the focus area;
    Vulnerability Assessment with reference to climate change risks in greater Apia;
    Participatory SWOT Analysis;
    CDS Vision and Prioritized Strategies for greater Apia.

Component 2. Supporting Infrastructure Investment Programme for Priority Projects. The
component aims at identifying priorities and potential funding sources for infrastructure
development to meet the long-term development objectives of greater Apia. Any follow-on
infrastructure investments will undergo individual safeguard due diligence process.

Deliverables:
    Investment Plan identifying investment priorities, approximate costing, and potential
       sources of funding.

Component 3. Institutional Strengthening. This component aims at assessing the needs of
local and national institutions including those identified in Planning and Urban Management
Agency’s (PUMA) Capacity Building Plan, 2008-2011 and contributing to needs assessment for
the next training cycle. The component will also develop a capacity action plan through a
stakeholder participatory “learning by doing? approach.

Deliverables:
    Reports Training of trainers (ToT) events in relevant local institutions;
    Capacity action plan for institutional strengthening

Component 4. Policy Learning and Knowledge Sharing. This component aims at the
dissemination of some of the major project deliverables (the City Profile, CDS vision, and
Investment Plan) to initiate a dialogue for policy reform at the national level on CDS and its
relevance to planning and development. The component also includes documentation and sharing
of the implementation process and the lessons learned.

Deliverables:
    Policy proposition papers on the relevance of CDS as a planning tool;
    Report on the Policy Learning Dialogue with PUMA, relevant Ministries, on the
       significance of the CDS experience;
    Documentation of the CDS implementation and experiences;
    Knowledge Sharing Plan to disseminate CDS main outputs (diagnosis, vision, investment
     program) and support transfer of good practices to other cities.

Component 5. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). This component establishes an M&E
framework for monitoring the follow up process of implementation of the CDS, and evaluating
its achievements and the eventual outcomes.

Deliverables:
    An M&E Framework developed by PUMA for long terms assessment of CDS’ impact.

All project’s activities and deliverables are of analytic nature. Project activities will not involve
any direct buying of equipment and/or building/construction and no World Bank parallel,
associated or follow on investments are expected, which include physical work. Other follow up
investment are currently non-secured.
The project’s environmental and social impacts will be negligible and will not produce any
irreversible environmental or social impacts that could trigger safeguards policies. On the
contrary, part of the deliverables includes a vulnerability assessment which will highlight
resiliency in the greater Apia with regard to climate change and social issues.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

Samoa has a national population of 195,234 persons (2006) of which 40% is urban with most of
its population living in the capital Apia and the adjoining northwest slopes of Upolu Island. The
Apia urban area grew to 38,836 people in 2001. Adding two administrative districts to east and
west of the core Apia urban area gives a population of 60,872 or 35 per cent of the 2001 national
population. If all of the north west of the main island of Upolu is taken into account, then this
population, including Apia, increases to 52 per cent (2001) of the total population of Samoa
(Sagapolutele et al, 2003).The rapidly increasing population in these areas is exerting pressure on
all aspects of urban infrastructure, land use and development, including the provision of social
services.
Furthermore, with more than 80% of the country’s economic activity and population
concentrated in coastal areas (including its capital Apia), it is extremely vulnerable to natural
hazards and the adverse impacts of climate change on often fragile ecosystems. Urban coastal
areas are prone to erosion, flooding and landslides and other natural disasters such as cyclones.
The vulnerabilities of these areas are exacerbated as Samoa is experiencing higher temperatures,
rising sea level, declining marine resources and losses of flora and fauna.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
This is s Recipient Executed (RE) grant. The grant recipient is the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme, UN-Habitat. UN-Habitat is the United Nations agency for human
settlements. It is mandated by the UN General Assembly to promote socially and
environmentally sustainable towns and cities with the goal of providing adequate shelter for all.
UN Habitat has been a recipient of a significant number of Cities Alliance grants and with the
World Bank were its founding members. UN-Habitat is also currently a member of the Cities
Alliance Executive Committee. Mr. Chris Radford, UN-Habitat, will manage project
implementation.
Federico Silva, Junior Professional Officer, FEUCA, from the World Bank will supervise
implementation.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist:

Not Applicable: The project activities are analytical in nature and will have negligible
environmental and social impact. The project has been classified as OP/BP 4.01 “Category C?
and therefore no Environmental and Social Management Plan is required.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                 Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                          X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                        X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                 X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A


IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Federico Silva                                                 08/23/2011
    Approved by:
    Cities Alliance Safeguards Focal               Phyllis Kibui                                                  11/03/2011
    Point or Regional Safeguards
    Coordinator:
      Comments:
    Program Manager:                               William Cobbett                                                11/04/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
