INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA3140
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:    July 30, 2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:                Samoa             Project ID:           P145545
Project Name:           Enhanced Road Access Project
Task Team Leader:       James A. Reichert
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 25, 2013   Estimated Board Date: October 15, 2013
Managing Unit:           EASNS            Lending Instrument:   Emergency Recovery
Grant
Sector(s):              Rural and Inter-urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme(s):               Natural Disaster Management (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00  Yes
(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Project Financing Data (in USD million)
Total Project Cost:   33.00                Total Bank Financing:  20.00
Total Co-financing:   13.00                Financing Gap:        0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association, including US$5 million from           20.00
the Crisis Response Window.
Government of Australia                                                      13.00
Total:                 33.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
Is this a Transferred   No
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective is to restore key road sector assets damaged by extreme weather events and
enhance the climate resilience of critical roads and bridges in Samoa.
3. Project Description
The ERAP would help to repair roads and bridges damaged by Tropical Cyclone Evan (TCE), and
upgrade, rehabilitate and/or reconstruct existing road sector assets to higher standards to strengthen


﻿their resilience to climate change and extreme weather events. Improvements to roads are expected to
include raising low spots, installing appropriate drainage systems, sealing shoulders, and providing
sidewalks, bus shelters and road markings to improve safety. For bridges, the Government would like
to reconstruct several to higher standards, while for other locations with ford crossings, which are
highly prone to flooding, they would like to construct permanent bridges. While the majority of
improvements are expected to take place within existing rights-of-way, some widening and/or slightly
new alignments are expected.
Funding will also be provided to support institutional and regulatory reforms in how road sector assets
are managed and maintained, and to strengthen local capacity to manage the sector. Attention would
be given to: (i) revising construction standards for road maintenance and construction to reflect
measures to strengthen climate resilience; (ii) updating legal and regulatory arrangements for
enforcing axle load limits, which would support the Bank's Development Program Operation; (iii)
strengthening the Land Transport Authority's (LTA) technical capacity to effectively plan and manage
the sector, and (iv) responding to existing or emerging priority issues that could have an impact on the
Government's ability to create more climate resilient road sector assets.
The ERAP would also finance costs to support project management.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The Islands of Upolu and Savai'i in Samoa. There are no known critical natural habitats or
endangered species in the vicinity of possible project sites and the sites are not located within legally
defined Protected Areas.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gerardo F. Parco, Environment Issues ( EASPS )
Victoria Florian S. Lazaro, Social Issues ( EASPS)
6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered?         Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01     Yes     The ERAP will rehabilitate existing road
sector assets on the Islands of Upolu and
Savai'i that were damaged during TCE, and
upgrade key roads and bridges to more
climate resilient standards. The impacts
from these construction-related activities are
typical and include noise, dust, solid waste
generation and the temporary obstruction of
traffic flows.
There is a possibility that a new road will be
opened at one location, which will be
limited to less than two km in total length.
The team visited the general site of this
possible new road opening and based upon
that visit impacts on natural habitats are not
envisaged (see more details under Natural
Habitats).


﻿Increased demand for materials from local
quarries may also have negative impacts,
such as over abstraction or increased illegal
quarrying activities.
An Environmental and Social Screening and
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) will be
used by the Government of Samoa (GoS) to
determine the environmental and social
impacts associated with this emergency
operation, including negative impacts on
quarry operation. The ESSAF provides
pragmatic operational guidelines and
procedures to the GoS to eliminate, reduce
and/or mitigate risks, including ensuring
that sources of quarry materials are legal
and are practicing proper quarry
management. The GoS has a set of Codes
of Environmental Practice (COEPs) which
provide guidance on these operational
procedures. The COEPs also provide
guidance and define regulations for quarry
operations. These COEPs are included as
part of the ESSAF.
Natural,Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No       Proposed activities under the project, such
as widening of existing roads and
rehabilitation of bridges, are not expected to
impact natural habitats since these are
existing assets. The possible new road
opening is not expected to affect natural
habitats due to the limited civil works
activity, which will be less than two km in
length. The location for the new road
opening would be in the general area of a
proposed permanent bridge over the
Mali'oli'o River on Savai'i. An inspection
of the site revealed that the site is not
located in or near a critical natural habitat or
primary forest. The site has secondary
growth forest, which is not dense, but this
site will be avoided, where possible.
Consultations with MNRE and local
communities confirmed that no critical or
non-critical natural habitats are in the likely
alignment of the possible new road opening.
There will be no natural habitats (critical or
non-critical) that would be affected by the
activities of the project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No       Proposed activities under the project are not


﻿expected to impact forests, since the road
assets to be improved already exist. The
possible new road opening could affect
forests, but this is small in scale due to the
limited length of the new opening (two kim).
Pest Management OP 4.09                 No      There will be no use of pesticides in this
project.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  No      There is no indication that-the project sites
are in areas with physical cultural resources.
However, chance find procedures are part of
the GoS's COEPs, which are part of the
ESSAF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           Yes     The project triggers OP 4.10 on Indigenous
Peoples as the vast majority of the
inhabitants in Samoa are considered
indigenous. When Indigenous Peoples are
the sole or the overwhelming majority of
direct project beneficiaries - as in the case
of this project -the elements of an IPP are
included in the overall project design, and a
separate IPP is not required. In such cases,
the Project Appraisal Document includes a
brief summary of how the project has
directly included the elements of an IPP into
the project design. Specific attention was
paid to the OP 4.10 policy paragraph 6 on
project preparation (including B and C).
Comsultations during project preparation
have allowed the borrower to establish
broad community support through free and
prior informed consultation with residents
of the Islands of Upolu and Savai'i. The
project followed traditional
practices/protocol in allowing the extended
families to arrive at a consensus to select the
best location for the possible permanent
bridge over the Mali'oli'o River, rather than
resolving it in the presence of government
officers. In this way, the matai's support
on use of their customary land was achieved
in a manner respectful of their traditional
culture and decision making process.
A social assessment will be completed and
further consultation will take place, as
needed, during project implementation in
accordance with the ESSAF.


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12    Yes     The rehabilitation of existing road assets
and possible opening of a new road raise the
possibility of involuntary resettlement.
However, the impact is expected to be low.
It appears that only the construction of new
approaches and about two km of new road
associated with the new Mali'oli'o Bridge
would require provision of easements.
Some road widening activities are also
possible under the ERAP and may require
land acquisition. To mitigate potential
displacement, the previously approved Land
Acquisition and Resettlement Framework
(LARF) for the World Bank-funded
Enhancing the Climate Resilience of the
West Coast Road and Second Infrastructure
Asset Management, Phase 2 (SIAM-2)
Project projects has been adapted to this
project and included as part of the ESSAF.
The use of the LARF during
implementation of SIAM-2 has facilitated
fair and timely payment of compensation.
A decision to put in trust payments for land
not yet paid because of difficulties
encountered by affected families in
designating authorized recipients was
widely accepted by those concerned. Such
provisions are included in the present LARF
and part of the ESSAF.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37              No                   not applicable
Projects on International Waterways    No                   not applicable
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No                   not applicable
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The ERAP will rehabilitate existing roads and bridges on the Islands of Upolu and Savai'i destroyed
or damaged during TCE. The impacts from these construction-related activities are typical and
include noise, dust, solid waste generation and the temporary obstruction of traffic flows. The
possible new road opening at one location would be limited to less than two km in total length.
Increased demand for materials from local quarries may also have negative impacts, such as over
abstraction or increased illegal quarrying activities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:


﻿The project activities such as repair of roads and bridges and the construction of new bridges will
generally have positive impacts; including faster and unimpeded travel for the local population.
Better access to basic services such as schools and hospitals will also be realized with improved roads
and bridges, particularly for women, the elderly and very young, especially during the rainy season.
Negative impacts are due largely to construction related dctivities. These are temporary and can be
mitigated through proper implementation of the EMP and following the COEP.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Land Transportation Authority (LTA), which is the main implementing agency for this emergency
operation, has successfully implemented previous Bank road projects, and its capacity to implement
safeguards procedures is adequate.
An ESSAF has been prepared and adopted by the LTA for this operation. The ESSAF will be used by
GoS to screen and determine the environmental and social impacts associated with this emergency
operation, including ensuring that sources of quarry materials are from legal sources and are adopting
proper quarry management. The ESSAF provides pragmatic operational guidelines and procedures to
the GoS to eliminate, reduce and/or mitigate risks. The GoS has a set of Codes of Environmental
Practice (COEPs) which provide guidance on these operational procedures. The COEPs also provide
guidance and define regulations for quarry operations. These COEPs are included as part of the
ESSAF.
The implementing agency (LTA) is generally aware of the Bank's safeguards requirements. The
consulting firm to be hired to support project implementation will also have staff that will be
responsible for implementing and monitoring the ESSAF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of this project are the communities in Upolu and Savai'i who use the road
system to access basic services such as schools, hospitals and markets. Potential project affected
persons are owners of land along the roads which may need to be widened and those in the path of
new road openings. As stated earlier, potential new road openings will be limited in scope.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                         June 24, 2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                      July 30, 2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure                                             June 24, 2013
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the tank                                         June 24, 2013


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                                        July 30, 2013
"In country" Disclosure                                              June 24, 2013
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               n/a
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            n/a
"In country" Disclosure                                                   n/a
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X ]  No [ ]  NA I I
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as  Yes I I  No 1XI  NA I I
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?                                              USF
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process, Yes I XI  No I I  NA I I
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or  Yes 1XI  No C I NA I 1
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]  No C I NA [ I
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public  Yes [X]  No I I  NA [ I
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes lX]  No [ I NA I I
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in  Yes IX ]  No I ]  NA I I
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include  Yes [X]  No I J  NA [ I
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with  Yes (X]  No I ]  NA I 1
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


﻿II. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:           Name: James A. Reichert
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leon                    Date: 3d/a? L//
Sector Manager:             Name: Michel Kerf \                  Date: J( / 8       .


