                                                                                             80789



                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                           Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        August 22, 20 13
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Samoa                Project ID:                  Pl45938
 Project Name:                Agriculture and Fisheries Cyclone Response Project
 Task Team Leader:            Mona Sur
 Estimated Appraisal Date: August 23, 2013         Estimated Board Date: October 15,2013
 Managing Unit:               EASNS                Lending Instrument: · IPF
 Sector(s):                   Crops (50%), Animal Production and Fishing (30%), General
                              Agriculture (20%)
 Theme(s):                    Other rural development (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD miUion)
 Total Project Cost:       5.12                       Total Bank Financing:      5.00
 Total Co-financing:       0.00                       Financing Gap:             0.12
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.12
     International Development Association, Crisis Response Window.                                5.00


                                                                       Total:                      5.12
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The development objective of the project is to provide recovery assistance to cyclone- affected farmers
 and fishers through voucher and grant schemes with the aim of restoring their lost production capacity,
 and to enhance preparedness ofthe agricultural sector to better respond to future disasters.



 3. Project Description
This project is part of the Government of Samoa's post-disaster response to Cyclone Evan which hit
the Island of Upolu in December, 2012. Damage and losses due to the cyclone were estimated to
amount to approximately US$210 million- or about 30% of Samoa's annual GDP.

Damage to agriculture as a result of high winds and flooding was especially severe, and made up the
bulk of longer-term economic losses. The cyclone caused an estimated US$33 million in damage and
losses to the agriculture, livestock and fisheries sectors. These losses were equivalent to 30 percent of
total agriculture sector GDP (crops, livestock, and fisheries) for 2013. About 75 percent of the
agricultural area in Upolu was either severely or moderately affected, and the crop subsector was
hardest hit both in damages and losses. Almost the entire banana and breadfruit crops were lost in the ·
worst affected areas, and coconut plantations sustained significant damage in the form of nut ·loss.
Crop losses were high because the cyclone occurred during the peak production season for fruit trees
and the off-season vegetable.harvest. Destruction to root crops was less so, although the quality of taro
was affected. Much farm equipment, along with farm buildings, private farm roads, and farm vehicles
was damaged or destroyed. While there were no reports of widespread flood and erosion damage to
agricultural land, flash flooding in some localized areas on Upolu wiped out or heavily damaged a
 number of farms. Some livestock producers reported the death of animals and destruction of farm
 infrastructure, and widespread damage to fences due to fallen trees. Commercial fruit, vegetable, and
 livestock farms sustained significant damage due to the cyclone. In the commercial and artisanal
fisheries sector, boats, canoes, and fishing gear were damaged or destroyed, and some fresh water
 aquaculture farms also sustained damage.

The project will assist farmers and fishers in the severely and moderately cyclone-affected areas
repair/replace damaged and lost farm assets, thereby enabling them to restore production capacities. It
will also provide support to the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries {MAP) to repair and replace its
damaged infrastructure and facilities and strengthen the agricultural sector's capacity for disaster
preparedness and response.

Project activities would be grouped into four components: (a) Cyclone Recovery for Subsistence
Farmers and Fishers; (b) Cyclone Recovery for Commercial Farmers and Fishers;(c) Restoration of
MAP Facilities and Strengthening the Agricultural Sector's Capacity for Disaster Preparedness and
Response; and (d) Project Coordination and Management.

Component 1: Cyclone Recovery for Subsistence Farmers and Fishers. The objective of this
component would be to restore the production capacity of cyclone affected subsistence farmers and
fishers. The component would comprise of:

        (a) Vouchers for subsistence farmers: Vouchers would be issued to project beneficiaries for
            procuring a range of eligible farm items including, inter alia, planting material and
            breeding livestock, fertilizer, farm tools and construction materials from any registered
            supplier participating in the project. Beneficiary households in areas severely affected by
            the cyclone would receive a higher value of vouchers thati those in moderately affected
            areas.

        (b) Vouchers for subsistence fishers: Vouchers would be issued to eligible fisher households
            in the same severely and moderately affected areas for procuring a range of agreed items,
            including, inter alia, cast nets, goggles, spears and canoe repair materials. Vouchers would.
            be issued for fishing equipment only in villages with Community Based Fisheries
            Management Plans. Fishing households in villages without these management plans
            would be issued with vouchers for agricultural items only, precluding use of project funds
           for purchase of fishing gear.

Component 2: Cyclone Recovery for Commercial Farmers and Fishers. The objective of this
component would be to restore the production capacity of cyclone affected commercial farmers and
fishers. The component would comprise of:

       (a) Recovery grants for commercial farmers: Commercial farmers in severely and
           moderated affected areas whose farm equipment or infrastructure was lost or damaged due
           to the cyclone would be eligible for recovery grants. These grants could be used to
           procure materials and inputs including, inter alia, plastic and shade houses, irrigation
           equipment, construction material, livestock and livestock housing. This would be done
           through a 70 percent grant, up to a grant ceiling of US$ 4,200 per farmer, following grant
           program guidelines developed for the project. Project support would be limited to
           regaining lost capacity only, and not to expand operations.

       (b) Recovery grants for commercial aquaculturlsts: Commercial farmers involved in
           aquaculture (Tilapia farming) in the cyclone affected areas who have damaged or lost
           equipment or infrastructure would be eligible for support under the project. Only
           enterprises fully operational prior to the cyclone would be eligible for financing through a
           70 percent grant, up to a grant ceiling of US$ 4,200 per farmer. Project support would be
           limited to regaining lost capacity only, and not to expand operations. To be eligible for a
           recovery grant, ponds/tanks improperly sited from an environmental point of view would
           have to be resituated on the farm.

Component 3: Restoration of MAF Facilities and Strengthening the Agricultural Sector's
Capacity for Disaster Preparedness and Response. The objective of this component would be to
support the repair of essential MAF facilities that were damaged during the cyclone, establish systems
for the regular collection and updating of agricultural production information, develop a standard
methodology for collection and analysis of damage and loss data for the agricultural sector and
strengthen capacities of both farmers and sector institutions in disaster preparedness and response.

        (a) Repair of damaged MAF facilities: Facilities and equipment owned by MAF's Crop
            Division (CD), Animal Production and Health Division (APHD) and Fisheries Division
            (FD) that were destroyed or damaged in the cyclone would be repaired or replaced. This
            would include repair of the boundary fence, plastic tunnels and shade houses at the CD
            headquarters in Nu'u; chainsaws for fence clearance; replacing veterinary drug supplies
            used in the immediate post cyclone period; replacement of lost marker buoys that
            delineate fish and shellfish sanctuaries; repair of the Aquaculture workshops and FD's
            research vessel; replacement of giant clams in fish reserves and of lost fish aggregating
            devises.

        (b) Strengthening the agricultural sector's capacity for disaster preparedness and
            response: The project would support Technical Assistance to strengthen the capacity of
            the sector to respond more effectively to future natural disasters, through training
            programs to assist farmers improve preparedness and protect their assets when extreme
            events are forecast; establish improved systems for the regular collection and updating of
            agricultural production information; enhancing MAF's ability to assess damages and
            losses following a natural disaster and target support io those most affected; develop
            systems for assessing the biological and ecosystem impact of natural calamities on
            fisheries and designing effective rehabilitation programs; and procurement of a boat trailer
             to facilitate removal of boats in Apia when extr.eme weather events are forecast.

 Component 4: Project Coordination and Management. This component will support effective
 implementation and management of the project through:

         (a) Staff and technical assistance: engagement of incremental staff (consultants) needed to
             coordinate and implement the project effectively, including a full-time Project Manager;
             up to two financial management officers; three project officers; and short-term advisers in
             project management, information technology, procurement, financial management and
             environment and social safeguards. Additional support on procurement and safeguards
             would be provided by the Project Coordination Group for the Samoa Agricultural
             Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP).

         (b) Equipment and operating costs: This would include procurement of up to two vehicles for
             the project and provision of adequate work facilities and operating expenditure (including
             vehicle hire where necessary) for MAF and MWCSD to maximize operational
             effectiveness.

         (c) Monitoring and evaluation: designing an MIS system for the voucher and recovery grant
             programs and enhancing MAP's M&E systems to track implementation· progress and
             results.


 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
 (if known)                                                             '
. The Project would be implemented over a period of two years covering the whole country, although
  direct assistance to beneficiaries would be confined to those living on Upolu in the areas designated as
  severely or moderately affected by Cyclone Evan in the Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA)
  undertaken by the Government of Samoa. The project will target all subsistence and commercial
  farmers in the severely and moderate affected districts of Upolu. The agricultural areas in Upolu are
  concentrated on the coastal plains and rolling slopes which extends up to 300 meters above sea level,
  with most of the high intensity agricultural production occurring below 75 meters above sea level.
  Upolu still has substantial forest areas with a total area of about 50,000 hectares of primary and
  secondary forests but these are found only in the higher elevations.



 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Jonas Garcia Bautista, Consultant

    6. Safeguard                   Explanation (Optional)
    Policies            Trieeered?
    Environmental       Yes        Environmental Assessment is triggered as some of the project
    Assessment                     activities would involve civil works such as the
    OP/BP 4.01                     repair/rehabilitation of damaged farm infrastructure and
                                   damaged government facilities.
    Natural Habitats    Yes        This policy is triggered because the recovery grants under
    OP/BP4.04                      Component 2 would involve relocation of2 to 3 poorly situated
                                   tilaoia oonds. The relocation sites of. these oonds will be
                          carefully screened to avoid sites that would encroach or
                          adversely affect any natural habitats as defined in OP 4.04, or
                          any sensitive environments. Pond designs will also be
                          screened to minimize accidental release oftilapia species into
                          the receiving streams. All other project activities are unlikely to
                          affect any critical or non-critical natural habitats as they will be
                          undertaken within their existing sites. The project will also
                          contribute to the preservation of natural habitats through the
                          restoration ofMAF's fish sanctuary/reserve markers lost during
                          the cyclone.
Forests OP/BP       No    The project will not affect any forests as all construction
4.36                      activities will be confined within the existing or original
                          infrastructure sites and farms.
Pest Management     Yes   Pest Management is triggered due to the potential use of
OP4.09                    pesticides and weedicides by MAF in rehabilitating its farms.
                          While the project will not finance pesticides for beneficiaries of
                          the voucher program or recovery grants there is a possibility
                          that project activities may lead to increased use of pesticides by
                          farmers. 'The client has developed an Integrated Pest
                          Management (!PM) Plan as part of the ESMF for the Samoa
                          Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP)
                          following the standards and requirements set forth in OP4.09.
                          The SACEP !PM Plan will also be used for the AFCRP. The
                          project will include measures to strengthen the institutional
                          capacity for Implementing !PM in pr9ject areas. Moreover, the
                          eligible items under the vouchers program have been
                          pre-screened to exclude chemical pesticides. Recipients of the
                          voucher program will also receive leafiets on good agricultural
                           practices including safe handling of pesticides and training will
                           be provided on a voluntary basis.
Physical Cultural   No     Physical Cultural Resources is not triggered. The project and its
Resources OP/              sub-projects are not anticipated to impact Physical and Cultural
BP4.11                     Resources.

Indigenous          Yes   Indigenous Peoples is triggered. The inhabitants in Samoa are
Peoples OP/BP             indigenous to the islands with customs and traditions that have
4.10                      largely remained intact and which are reflected in their current
                          political and economic institutions such the village system and
                          the traditional land ownership system based on customary laws.
                          A social assessment has been conducted and prior informed
                          consultation has been undertaken throughout the cyclone
                          affected areas. There is no need to prepare a separate
                          Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) as the project itself serves as the
                          IPP.
Involuntary         No    There will be no land acquisition, destruction of assets, and
Resettlement              displacement of dwellings or restriction of access to livelihoods
OP/BP                     under this project. All civil works supported under the project
4.12                      would be confined within existing or original infrastructure
                          sites and all rehabilitation activities, including relocation of
                          damaged fish ponds within_l)rivate farm~Lwill be carefully
                                       screened for these impacts.
  Safety of Dams       No              The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of
  OP/BP 4.37                           any dams as defined under this policy. No action is required
                                       under this policy.
  Projects on          No              Not applicable for Samoa
  International
  Waterways
  OP/BP 7.50

  Projects in          No              Not applicable for Samoa
  Disputed Areas
  OP/BP 7.60



II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKev Srifeguartl Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Results of the social assessment indicate that Samoan society is very hierarchical. Given this, the
selection of beneficiaries for the voucher program and the recovery grants could be vulnerable to
nepotism or political favouritism. The selection process adopted by the project has taken this into
consideration and adequate measures are in place. Other than this, there are no potential community
impacts as the project will only provide grants to individual households.

The Project will not have any large scale and/or irreversible impacts. The Project activities would
mostly involve procurement of farm inputs, materials, tools and small equipment by individual
farmers. The few infrastructure restoration works to be funded would be in vel)' limited in scale and
would not create additional environmental footprints. Commercial farm recovel)' grants will have a
ceiling of about $4,200 per farm while the rehabilitation of MAF facilities would involve only minor
works.

The recent Fruit and Vegetable Baseline survey conducted by MAF under SACEP indicates significant
use of pesticides by farmers in Upolu. The project will not fund any purchase of chemical pesticides
and instead will promote the adoption of!PM among the beneficiary fanners by distributing pamphlets
on IPM among the beneficiaries of the voucher program and conducting trainings.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
There will be no anticipated future activities in the project area other than agriculture. The indirect
impact of the project would be positive and beneficial.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Alternative designs (i.e. paper vouchers and electronic vouchers) have been considered for Component
I to enable the Project to, among others, improve tracking and restrict purchases to prescribed items
only thereby ensuring that the vouchers are not used to purchase undesirable items such as chemical
pesticides. Alternative systems of identifYing eligible beneficiaries have also been considered to
ensure transparency while maintaining cultural appropriateness.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Social and Environmental Assessments conducted by the borrower for the Agriculture
Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP) provided inputs to the project design. The Ministry of
Agriculture and Fisheries has also conducted free and prior informed consultations in the cyclone
affected areas to determine farmers' needs and to comply with the requirements of OP 4.10. The
consultations have helped the borrower design a more transparent process of identifYing eligible
beneficiaries, including the adoption of a definition of what constitutes a household and the
appointment of the village verification committee composed of representatives of women, youth and
the village mayor and utilizing the village councils in validating the lists of eligible households. The
grievance redress mechanism of SACEP has been adopted for the project and included in the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).

Other measures undertaken by the borrower include the pre-screening of eligible items to be purchased
under the voucher program to exclude environmentally hazardous items such as chemical pesticides
and gillnets. The ESMF has been prepared based on the Social and Environmental Assessments. The
framework provides detailed procedures for safeguards screening, review and approval of recovery
grant proposals as well as compliance monitoring during their implementation. The review and
clearing of social and environmental safeguards of project activities would be handled by the existing
Environmental and Social Management Officer (ESMO) of SACEP to be supported Project Officers
hired under the project and MAF extension staff assigned in project area. The ESMO and the
Extension Officers are already familiar with the World Bank Safeguards requirements and have
undergone training on the screening and safeguards preparation process under SACEP. The Project
Officers, once recruited, will also be trained. The number of recovery grant proposals that would need
environmental screening and review is small (about 50) and is not expected to significantly impact on
ESMO's and Extension Officers' current workloads. An experienced Safeguards Advisor will also be
hired by the project and will provide inputs on a part-time basis.

5, Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main stakeholders of this project are the farmers and fishers in the cyclone affected areas.
Consultations have been conducted by Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries in the cyclone affected
areas. The MAF has been conducting IEC in the villages on safeguards under the SACEP. The same
arrangements will be adopted for this project.


B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/AudiUManagement Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        August 20, 2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                     August 22, 2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure                                                       August 22, 201.3
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         n!a
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      n!a
"In country" Disclosure                                                             n!a
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         n!a
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      n!a
"In country" Disclosure                                                             n!a
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators a/the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01- Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [XI     No [ 1      NA I 1
OP/BP 4.10 -Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [ 1   No [X]      NA [ 1
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 -Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ I     No [X]      NA [ I
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [ I   No [X]      NA [ 1
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure orin formation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X]     No [ 1 NA I 1
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [X]   No [ 1 NA [ I
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [X]   No [ 1 NA [ 1
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in    Yes [X]   No [ 1 NA [ 1
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include    Yes [X]   No[ 1 NA [ I
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [X]   No[ l    NA I l
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Mona Sur
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard W~<-LJ      ")_         Date: fn•a.·.,..~{:lll13
Sector Manager:                Name: Michel Kerf \      .A,.A            Date: A~(~J -z i!/z,,;,
                                                     ---                          J
