                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                               Report No.: AC6317


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/01/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Senegal                               Project ID: P125565
Project Name: Support to the Electricity Emergency Plan Project
Task Team Leader: Stephan Claude Frederic Garnier
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 17,          Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTEG                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            80.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               8.00
                                                                         8.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed project development objective is to reduce SENELEC#s technical and commercial
losses by rehabilitating/upgrading transmission and distribution grids and installation of smart
meters, in selected zones.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project whose cost is estimated at about US$ 88 million (IDA: US$ 80 million)
will have the following components:

  Component 1: Transmission and distribution: (around US$45 million)
  This component includes the upgrading, rehabilitation and replacement of new transmission
lines and substations, the upgrading of the distribution network from 6.6 kV to 30 kV, the
construction of new transformers, network protection and control, the extension and
densification of the distribution network.
  Although the envelope is limited to about US$45 million, a larger volume of investment has
been identified and a full feasibility study will be carried out during project preparation, together
with associated environment impact assessments. The final choice will be made based on several
criteria, particularly economic attractiveness and urgency.
 Overall, the current choice is dictated by the priorities established by SENELEC into its
Distribution and Transmission Investment Program for the 2011/2014 period. This program
results from the Transmission and Distribution Master Plans recently financed under the
Electricity Sector Efficiency Enhancement Project supported by IDA, which ended December 31
2010. The cost of this Program is estimated at approximately 150 billion CFA francs (or about
US$350 million).

 Component 2. Electronic and Pre-paid Meters Program: (around US$35 million)
 The policy of installing either pre-paid or electronic meters (for large customers) for all
SENELEC#s consumers has been adopted by the government after all other attempts at reducing
losses and securing SENELEC#s revenue have failed. The metering program will be deployed
in phases with due regard to meter standardization and their interface with the customer
management system. The component proposed to Bank financing is only the first phase of the
program. Other meter acquisition and installation will be financed through own resources and by
other donors yet to be identified. The introduction of electronic and pre-paid meters will
necessitate a revision of the current tariff level and structure.
 Through this component it is also proposed to finance the installation of a new customer
management system. The current system has been in operation since 1994 and is now obsolete.
This situation also causes difficulties for obtaining support in case of malfunction or breakdown
of equipment or software that are no longer manufactured or serviced. The acquisition of a
modern customer management system will therefore: (i) replace the current system that has
become obsolete both technically and operationally; (ii) encompass all commercial processes and
re-orienting the customer information system on the client; (iii) improve sales and cost recovery
for low and medium voltage customers through better customer management, billing and cash
receipts; and (iv) bring flexibility to allow for adjustment in the future to deal with tariff changes,
incentives for energy efficiency and the promotion of renewable energy.

 Component 3. Institutional Support: (around US$8 million)
 By addressing, through a set of coherent measures, the main causes of the crisis in the
electricity sub-sector, the plan is positioned in the short term. However, it is necessary to
conduct, in parallel, comprehensive analytical work on the strategic outlook in the medium and
long term. (Indeed, the sector’s problems are largely due to poor planning and realization of
investments). Therefore, the proposed operation plans to support the GOS in these prospective
analytical works. Among the studies to be undertaken: (i) energy mix: medium and long term
diversification into coal, gas, renewable energy and regional integration, and (ii) private sector
participation, sector governance and SENELEC restructuring.
 This component will also support the coordination/implementation organization of the project,
through the financing of specific expertise to the SPE, APIX and SENELEC and operational
costs. The French Development Agency (AFD) will also support the SPE with funding of about
1 million Euros.
 A Monitoring and Evaluation system is under preparation and should allow the SPE to monitor
the results of the Takkal plan (and therefore of the proposed project) and take the necessary
corrective actions as necessary. This component proposes to support the implementation of the
system and to support activities: (i) to monitor and assess the impacts of the activities supported
by the project and (ii) to carry out project related external audits by auditors acceptable to IDA.
 Finally, a communication strategy to mitigate the opposition to the introduction of prepaid
meters will be developed under this component.

D. Project location (if known)
Transmission projects
 - Upgrading/modernization of HV substation
 # Construction of a 90 kV substation in the SF6 at #Cap des Biches#
 # Replacement of the 30 kV Thiona substation
 - Upgrading/rehabilitation of HV lines
 # 90 kV Cap des Biches-Thiona-Tobène
 # Replacement of the line Hann- CDB 1

 Distribution projects
 -      Upgrading to higher voltage
 #      Switching from 6,6 kV to 30 kV at 194 substations and 100 km in Dakar (Downtown,
Water Treatment Plant and Bel Air)
 -      Network Extensions and Densification in Dakar
 #      Construction of 70 km MV, 185 km LV, 82049 connections and 164 transformers
 -      Improvement in network operation
 #      Remote operation of 30 substations of the HV network in Dakar
 - Rehabilitation and replacement of distribution lines
 # Replacement of the line Ourossogui Oréfondé 70 km
 - Interconnection of secondary centers
 # Construction of a new line Keur Mbaye-Koungheul
 # Construction of a new line Koungheul # Koumpentoum
 # Construction of a new line Kaymor #Nganda

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The project implementation unit (APIX) has experience handling environmental and social
safeguards according Bank rules and procedures. The environmental and social safeguards
capacity will be re-assessed during project preparation and confirmed or strengthened as
necessary to meet Bank requirements.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
   Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    From an environmental and social safeguard point of view, the proposed project is a
Category B project. That is, the environmental and social impacts of the project, for the most
part, are projected to be minimal, site-specific and manageable to an acceptable level. An ESIA
will be prepared before appraisal. The Involuntary Resettlement safeguards policy may have to
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No                                         TBD
be triggered as some households may be in the vicinity of the transmission lines.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                                        X
    The Involuntary Resettlement safeguards policy may have to be triggered as some
households may be in the vicinity of the transmission lines.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                        X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/14/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   11/03/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Preparation of an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment:Draft: September 14, 2011
     Final: September 25, 2011
     Disclosure In-Country and Infoshop: October 4, 2011

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Stephan Claude Frederic Garnier                             08/30/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       08/30/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Varadarajan Atur                                            08/30/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
