                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6248


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/02/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Senegal                              Project ID: P124018
Project Name: Senegal - Agribusiness Development Project
Task Team Leader: Vincent Palmade
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 25, 2012       Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTFW                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (50%);General finance sector (50%)
Theme: Other Financial Sector Development (50%);Other Private Sector Development
(50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           80.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                        0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to promote growth and employment
through increased productive private investments in the selected agribusiness value chains in the
St. Louis region.

 This will be done through the provision of physical public goods (e.g. irrigation in the Ngalam
Valley and around Lac de Guiers) as well as institutional public goods and related technical
assistance as to provide opportunities to private investors (including smallholders) all along the
selected value chains.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project design builds on similar work done by the Bank with growth pole and value-chain
approaches in other countries as well as a number of studies carried out on the agribusiness
sector in Senegal. The project will concentrate implementation of its activities on one growth
pole to maximize impact and reduce complexity.
  In response to the demand of the authorities, and in keeping with the priorities defined in the
Accelerated Growth Strategy to support the Government's growth agenda, the project will focus
its activities in the St Louis region (particularly the Ngalam Valley and around the Lac de
Guiers) which has been identified as among the best areas for agribusiness, horticulture in
particular, in Senegal. Developing the competitiveness of the main value chains in this pole will
also benefit from what already exists from past Government and private sector investments - it
will also leverage and complement the PDMAS and MCA projects which are developing 2,500
hectares in the Middle Valley and 3,000 hectares in the Ngalam Valley respectively (see map
page 21). The final choice of the specific locations (we expect about 10,000 ha to be developed
with the support of the project) will be determined based on land made available by Rural
Communities and investor demand.

 The Ngalam Valley and Lac de Guiers in the St. Louis region have several attractive features
and advantages that the project can leverage and build on including:

 (i) Strong demand from private sector as agro-ecological conditions are highly suitable for
horticulture (cooler climate due to marine breeze in the Ngalam Valley, sandy soils in both
zones, easy access to water around the Lac de Guiers).The region has potential beyond
horticulture (e.g. dairy, meat processing and fisheries);

 (ii) High potential for irrigation throughout the year;

 (iii) Sizable stock of land (10,000-15,000 ha) available in the Ngalam Valley, more than 40,000
ha around Lac de Guiers;

 (iv) Fair road linkage with Dakar with the national road passing through Gandong-Rao-Fass-
Mpal and the roads around the Lac de Guiers being rehabilitated (with the support of the EU and
MCA); and

 (v) A modern agro processing facility - "Agropole" - constructed in 2007. It has classification
chains already in place for onions, sweet potato and melon, storage and cold-chain chambers,
packaging facilities, as well as a slaughterhouse. The facility has been poorly utilized because it
was disconnected from the main production areas (an issue which will be addressed by the
project).

  The project is proposed for six years and to be financed with US$80 million IDA credit that
will leverage Government, other donors and private sector resources. The interventions of the
project will be focused on removing specific constraints standing in the way of the main
opportunities. The adoption of a growth pole's approach will also foster the realization of
synergies within and across value chains (product lines) and locations - e.g. the sharing of
physical and institutional infrastructure. The project will help put in place the conditions
necessary to attract strategic private investors in the development of agri-business in a way that it
ensures inclusive participation of smallholders and SMEs through local sourcing, contract
farming or any other relevant scheme. The aim being to leverage to the maximum strategic
private investors with respect to their access to high value markets, technology, skills and
financing capacity. The Principles for Responsible Agro-investments will be applied at design to
better leverage smallholders/large-scale-growers participation. Project activities will be funded
through a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) via the following two technical components and one
administrative component:

 COMPONENT 1: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE TO SUPPORT AGRIBUSINESS IN THE
NGALAM VALLEY AND AROUND LAC DE GUIERS (US$60 MILLION)

 To address the biggest constraint faced by private investors (lack of secured access to
developed land), the project will contribute to the financing of critical public infrastructure
(mostly primary and secondary irrigation systems) in the Ngalam Valley and around Lac de
Guiers as to make around 10,000 hectares of prime land available for private investors who will
be expected to contribute to the financing (Senegal has a good PPP framework). These
investments will be determined based on investor demand and the needs of the Rural
Communities.

  The project will provide technical assistance to Rural Communities in the two zones to help
them identify, on the basis of a resource and land user right mapping, the land to be developed
(e.g. irrigated and connected via access roads) with the support of the project. The project will
leverage and extend the technical assistance being provided through the PACR project (French
Cooperation) to help Rural Communities develop detailed inventories of user rights (Rural
Communities are responsible for allocating land user rights in Senegal - see Appendix II) and
design local master plans for future development. This will be done through an inclusive and
transparent process (Presidents of Rural Communities are elected officials in Senegal) to ensure
that future public and private investments yield the greatest possible benefits to be shared across
all members of the Rural Communities. Such a process will start during project preparation and
will lead to the creation of a continuously updated consolidated database of land available for
private investors.

 The project will provide technical assistance to APIX (the investment promotion agency) to
help it identify, engage and facilitate investments by world class strategic investors in the growth
pole. This will include engaging potential investors to assess their demand, specific
requirements and possible contributions to infrastructure development (to be started during
project preparation), which will carry benefit beyond their venture (e.g. irrigation canals and
roads which would also benefit smallholders in the Rural Community). In the cases of large land
areas, international tenders might be relied upon to maximize benefits to the Rural Communities.
Support provided under the project will be guided by the principles for responsible agro-
investments. The project will monitor the outcome and implementation of the contracts between
these investors and the Rural Communities to ensure that the interest of the later is fully
preserved.

 The project will contribute to the financing of irrigation investments in the priority areas chosen
by the Rural Communities and the strategic investors. As mentioned above, the project will seek
to maximize private sector participation for such investments. It should be noted that large canals
are already being financed by private investors around the Lac de Guiers. It is expected that the
project will provide significant support to tertiary irrigation investments by smallholders who
have difficulties to access finance for such investments. The project will support the increase
provision of water into the Ngalam Valley leveraging the MCA project (see Appendix 3). A
preliminary master plan for the irrigation of land around the Lac de Guiers has been completed
as part of the on-going PDMAS project. Based on this master plan and past experience (e.g.
PDMAS), the project could develop an area of about 10,000 hectares, leveraging private sector
participation - the master plan study for the Lac de Guiers shows internal economic rates of
returns in excess of 30%.

 The project will contribute to the financing of the rehabilitation/construction of tertiary and
access roads within and around the two selected zones to expand and connect production areas
with transformation centers - in particular the "Agropole" of Fas. The government, with the
support of the European Union and the MCA, is rehabilitating the primary and secondary roads
within and around the two selected zones.

 Other public infrastructure investments which might be supported by the project include the
extension of the runway at the St Louis airport (which would benefit both the export of high
value agriculture produces as well as the development of other industries such as tourism) and
the development of wind and solar energy (as cheaper alternatives to the fuel powering the water
pumps).

 COMPONENT 2: INSTITUTIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE TO SUPPORT THE PRIVATE SECTOR (US$15 MILLION)

 To address the other critical constraints (lack of marketing and commercialization
infrastructure, difficulties to access finance, weak professional organizations and weak technical
skills of smallholders), the project will provide technical assistance to the private sector and key
supporting institutions all along the main value chains.

 The project will provide technical assistance to the following key supporting institutions:

 - As discussed earlier, the Rural Communities in the two selected zones and APIX (including
the development of its St Louis Agency) to facilitate strategic private investments and maximize
their benefits to the Rural Communities. With that aim, support will also be provided to the
DASP and DGID, respectively the PPP and Land Directorates of the Ministry of Finance.

 - Business associations ("interprofessions") to improve coordination among actors along the
main value chains - e.g. facilitating out-grower schemes, investments in key specialized
infrastructure along the value chains (e.g. warehouses and cold storage at the port) and policy
advocacy to improve the business environment.

  - Fondation Origine Sénégal (the public private partnership created with the support of the
PDMAS project) and Minister of Commerce, which are responsible for promoting the adoption
of high quality standards to enable exports. The project will support in particular the
development of metrology and testing infrastructure as well as the development of a proactive
trade information system - e.g. "Products ID Cards" featuring detailed market information,
recipes for product development, protocols for compliance with standards, relevant equipment,
technical information for industrial process plant development and layout, skills profiles, etc.
 - ANCAR (the recently revamped agriculture extension services) and the Horticulture
Directorate of the Ministry of Agriculture to improve the technical skills of smallholders in the
Rural Communities supported by the project.

 - ISRA (agriculture research) and research departments of Universities to promote applied
research (including on post harvest topics such as packaging) in partnership with the private
sector and world class international institutes.

 - The Gaston Berger University of St Louis which is developing several agribusiness curricula
and other specialized vocational training institutes.

 The project will provide technical assistance to the private sector through a matching grant (the
Agribusiness Competitiveness Fund) managed by a competitively recruited team and which will
operate following best practice governance principles to be specified during project preparation.
The fund will co-finance: (i) business and technical skill development for SMEs (including
smallholders), (ii) the purchase of business development services, (iii) feasibility studies for new
products, (iv) testing of new varieties, (v) quality certification, (vi) the setting up of agribusiness
desks at selected financial institutions, (vii) development of agribusiness insurance products and
(viii) the development of business plans and loan applications.

 COMPONENT 3: PROJECT COORDINATION AND MONITORING (US$5 MILLION)

 A Steering Committee presided by the Minister of Agriculture will be responsible for the
preparation and implementation of the project. The Steering Committee will include other key
ministries (e.g. Ministry of Industry and Ministry of Transport) as well as representatives of the
private sector and the St. Louis Region.

 The Project will be managed on a day-to-day basis through a Project Coordination Unit (PCU),
initially housed within the PDMAS which has developed strong technical and project
management capabilities. Financing to be provided for the PCU may include: equipment;
consultant compensation; operating costs; organizational and systems development; training,
capacity building; and technical assistance.

D. Project location (if known)
St. Louis Region around the NGalam Valley and Lac de Guiers.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Borrower has the experience and capacity to deal with safeguard issues. The Bank has
worked closely with the Borrower in implementing another project with major environmental
and social impacts (the Dakar Diamniadio Toll Highway). The Bank is also supporting the
Government in strengthening its capacity for environmental and social management, especially
in the area of infrastructure.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTEG)
   Mr Amadou Konare (AFTFW)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                            Yes       No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
     As the exact location, scale and substance of sub-projects envisioned in this project are
unknown at this stage, the project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), which spells out the mechanisms, procedures and institutional
arrangements for screening (including standard methods for preparing, reviewing, approving and
disclosing specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and
Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)), implementing
and monitoring sub-projects. The ESMF will discuss the potential impacts, including the
cumulative effects of project activities in the intervention areas (the Lac de Guiers and the
Ngalam Catchments and on downstream resources), when added to other past, present and
reasonably foreseeable future actions. These include, but are not limited to (i) physical resources
(hydrology) and terrestrial and aquatic biological resources, both fauna and flora and their
ecological functions/services, (ii) fisheries, (iii) land use patterns and management in the
intervention areas; (iv) population dynamics in and around project intervention area; (v) water
use patterns, quality and management etc. The ESMF will be disclosed in-country and at Bank
InfoShop prior to appraisal, upon review and clearance by the Bank. The project will also
prepare a social assessment that will inform the development of project activities, as sites and
works are identified.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
     Though the potential project intervention areas are not viewed as critical natural habitats,
natural habitats may be affected by planned project activities, resulting from development of
irrigation perimeters, large abstraction of water from Lac de Guiers and other water ways, etc.
Should this policy be triggered, impacts on natural habitats and their required mitigation
measures will be discussed in the context of the ESMF.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
     Though procurement of pesticides is not envisaged under the project, planned agricultural
intensification activities, through irrigation and horticulture development, will most likely result
in the increased use and consequently proper management of pesticides and other agrochemicals
on the part of the farming communities. The project will prepare a Pest Management Plan
(PMP), derived from existing PMPs, in particular those prepared under PDMAS, PASAOP &
WAAPP 1-A. The PMP will discuss vector management issues and include a mitigation plan
and the requisite institutional arrangements to implement and monitor the plan. Upon review and
clearance by the Bank. The PMP / VMP (Vector Management Plan) will be disclosed in-country
and at Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
     Though it is unknown at this stage which sites of the project intervention area may contain
physical cultural resources, it will be prudent to use caution when implementing the productive
investments. This is predicated on the recognition that Senegal, as a country, is viewed by the
international community as rich cultural heritage area. In addition, with the prospect of the
acquisition and development of vast areas for irrigation, where land resources will be cleared and
may be flooded or remain flooded for an extended period, it would be important that dispositions
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD
be taken to ensure that impacts on Physical Cultural Resources are assessed are integrated into
the design screening, impacts assessment, specific Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) /
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) preparation and definition, implementation and
monitoring of mitigation plan. The analysis of the risks/impacts on PCR and mitigation measures
commensurate to those impacts, including proper handling of chance finds, shall be done, in
accordance with national and Bank policies and procedures.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
     Though the specific sites and social impacts of envisioned physical investments are not yet
known, there is great potential for the triggering of OP 4.12 in light of planned investments in
irrigation development, rehabilitation of access road and other critical infrastructures, the
Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which outlines the mechanisms
and procedures for compensating for land acquisition, loss of economic activities and/or
livelihoods on the part of Project Affected People (PAPs). The RPF will also detail the
institutional arrangements for implementing and monitoring the framework, including grievance
mechanisms, in event of discontent/dissatisfaction in addressing the needs of persons who will be
affected by loss of economic activities, access to resources, land acquisition and/or involuntary
resettlement. The RPF will be disclosed in-country and at InfoShop prior to appraisal, upon
review and clearance by the Bank. The project will also include an analysis of land tenure issues
in Senegal and how such issues will be addressed and managed in the context of the project.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                           X
     Since the project success will depend on the proper functioning of the Diama Dam, the
Government will prepare a Dam Safety Inspection, assorted with and emergency preparedness
plan. The Dam safety inspection will be submitted to ASPEN for review and clearance prior to
appraisal.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                      X
     Project activities will involve investments to secure waters from the Ngalam. These waters
are tributaries of the Senegal River, a shared international waterways, that run through several
countries in the region. A letter of notification to the Senegal River Basin Commission will be
issued by the Government, in compliance with this policy, prior to appraisal.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 02/23/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Safeguard related studies will be undertaken during project preparation starting in October
   2011. Upon review and clearance by the Bank, the Pest Management Plan (PMP) / Vector
   Management Plan (VMP), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) and the Environmental
   and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be disclosed in-country and at the Bank
   InfoShop prior to appraisal. The project will also prepare a social assessment that will inform
   the development of project activities, as sites and works are identified.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Vincent Palmade                                             11/02/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       11/02/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Paul Noumba Um                                              11/02/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
