                                                                                                              79322


                            UITEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                     CO:-.ICEPT STAGE

Report No.:

Da te ISDS Prepared/Updated:

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: SENEGAL                                  I Project ID: P!43605
                                                     I Additional Projec1 lD (ifany):
Project Name: Taiba Ndiayc Power Project
Task Team Leader: Demctrios Papathanasiou
F.stimated Appraisal Date: April 30. 2013            I Estimated Board Date: October 12, 20 13
Managing Unit: AFTEG                                 I Lending Instrument: Partial Risk Guarantee
Sector:                    Power (100%)                                                             '
Theme:                     lnfi-astructurc services for private sector development (100%)
                          Financing sources                              I         Amount
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):                                                                          40
Other financing amounts by source:
          Private sector and Debt Financiers                                                 160
          Total:                                                                             200
Environmental Cat~Ol)': A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                    Simple fxl                  Repeater []
Is this a transferred eroject            Yes []                     No [x]

R. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCNJ:
The project development objective is to improve reliability and securi:y of power supply in Senegal.
C. P roject Description [from section 3 of PCNJ:
The proposed project forms part ofSENELEC's emergency response plan for the e lectricity sector. Taiba
Ndiaye would address shor1-tem1 power shortages at a reduced cost compared to currently used diesel
generation. It would also improve overall system reliability due to added capacity and physical location
within SENELEC's network. It appears to be the project, which can most rapidly be brought online to
alleviate power shortages, as it involves a relatively experienced sponsor and IFC as a potential financier
and co-developer through Infra Ventures.
Taiba Ndiayc will be developed as an IPP selling power to SENELEC under a 15-year Power Purchase
Agreement (PPA). The overall project consists of a new power plant. with an installed capacity of
87.5MW (70 MW guaranteed availability), to be located in Taiba Ndiayc, about 90km north east from
Dakar. It will involve: (i) the construction and installation of 5 X 18 V48/60- SOOrpm gensets running on
heavy fuel oil (HFO) that could be in the future converted to operate on natural gas, along with a steam
recuperation turbine (adding about 7MW and allowing for a maximum efficiency} --on a (Build, Own,
and Operated (BOO)J basis-- which will include the design, finance, supply, erection, commissioning,
operation, and maintenance of the plan t for a 15 year term; (i i) grid interconnecting 220kV substation;
and {iii) fuel storage facilities.
The project will be developed by Tobene Power SA (TP), a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPY), incorporated
in December 201 1 under the laws of Senegal. It will be owned [90 percent] by Melee PowerGen Services
S .A. (MPG), a subsidiary ofMatelec Group of Lebanon, and [10] percent by IFC lnfraVentures. MPG is
growing as a south-south investor in the Africa region. Their most recent project is the Thika Power
project in Kenya, for which the World Bank provided a Partial Risk Guarantee (PRO) and closed its
financial in August 2012. The Taiba Ndiaye project design and structure is similar to Thika. Prior to
T hika, MPG was the developer of the Kounounc Power project (65 MW) in Senegal.
MPG and MAN Diesel and Turbo SE (MAN) of Germany will form a consortium to enter into an EPC
Contract with TP. MAN will be responsible for the basic design and will provide the power engiRes and
steam turbine, while MPG will be responsible for the civil works and electrical installation. MAN will
provide supervision for the installation of key components and conduct the plant commissioning under
the EPC. This will be the second time the two parties work together as a consortium on a power project
(after Thika IPP in Kenya). For the operation and maintenance of the projecL the SPV will enter into the
following agreements: ( I) a Maintenance and Coordination of the Operation of a Power Plant (bct\vecn
TP and MAN Diesel & Turbo France SAS); (2) a Spare Parts Supply (between TP and MAN Diesel &
Turbo France SAS). MPG will be in charge of the local manpo~er that will be trained by and v.ork under
the supervision of MAN. It is expected that TP will enter into a Fuel Supply Agreement with Societe
Africaine de Raffinage (SAR) the only -privately owned- oil refinery in Senegal. The company has
negotiated a Power Purchasing Agreement (PPA) with SENELEC.
The project's total cost is expected to be around [US$160 million], to be structured on a limited recourse
basis with a target debt to equity ratio of (75:25] -the financing structure is under development. MPG
has approached lFC as a lender to provide senior A loan, while IFC is also a joint developer through IFC
lnfraVentures. Other project lenders may be: the AfDB, EAlF, FMO, and Bank Ouest Africaine de
Dcveloppernent (BOAD).
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of environmental
and social risks and impacts (if known):
The Power Plant's site (4.5 ha) is located in the rural commune of Taiba Ndiaye in the Province of
Tivaouane. The area hosts typical Sahel ian vegetation on a flat topography with no water body around;
but, the threat to underground water resources in the vicinity of the project site may be questionable.

E. Borrower' s Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:
Senegal has one of the soundest environmental institutional and regulatory frameworks among the West
African countries. The regulatory framework clearly spells out the environmental permitting procedure
and the obligations of project developers as regard the implementation of the environmental and social
management plan (ESMP). The Directorate of Environmental Assessment and Control (" 'Direclion des
Evaluations Environnementoles et du Co111r6/e" - DEEC) has the ovemll responsibility of enforcing the
environmental assessment procedure through the approval ESlAs and the monitoring of Environmental
and Social Management Plans (ESMPs); this institution is considered to have adequate capacity and some
experiences in the processing of the safeguard instruments of Bank funded - projects. Nevertheless, the
project will be owned and operated by a private sector which experience and capacity in environmental
management, of such infrastructure, are not known yet. Furthermore, the environmental management of
this type of infrastructure becomes critical only after the construction, if sound environmental
norms/standards and survey capacity were not in place. Therefore, an in-depth analysis of the national
environmental auditing regulatory framework and procedure will be carried out during the project
preparation to ensure that the operation phase adverse externalities will be under control during
implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specia lists on the Team:
Maman-Sani lssa. Sr. Environmental Specialist, AFTN 2
Demba Balde, Salamata Bal; Sr. Social Development Specialists



                                                   2
 H. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

 Performance Standards (please explain wlzv)                                  Yes          No           TBD
 PS 1: Assessment and Management of F.nvironmental and                         X
 Social Risks and Impacts
 The power plant is of substantial production capacity (8?MW) and will be located in a place close to
 residential areas. The main foreseen environmental and social adverse risks and effects are related to: (i)
 noise over the acceptable standards for residential areas; (ii) air pollution and contribution to greenhouse
 gas emission from the plant smokes; (iii) liquid waste (used oil) generation inducing the pollution of
 surrounding area and underground water; (iv) occupational health and safety risks in case employees are
 not equipped with appropriate protective materials; (v) explosion and any other machinery accidental
 risks; etc. Yet, due to its nature and scale (medium-big size power plant). the project is classified
 Environmental category A and as Classified Industrial Infrastructure Type I, under the national
 environmental legislation (Law 2001-0 I of January 15, 200 I). The Bank Group classification at this stage
 is also category A and, the IFC performance standards I, 2, 3 and 4 apply. Especially the ongoing
 environmental and social impacts assessment (ESAI), launched on August 27, 2012, will have to come
 out with accurate propositions for: (i) nuisances (air pollution and noises) prevention and control: (ii) an
 emergency preparedness plan; (iii) a sound environmental and social management system (ESMS) to be
 set in by the owner/operator; (iv) the strengthening of the national capacity on environmental norms and
 standards in the sector.
 PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                            X
 The developer will be employing various categories of direct workers (temporary. permanent) and
 contracted workers throughout the lifecycle of the project. Therefore, the establishment of internal rules to
 comply with any eligible legislation related to labor and working conditions and rights should of
 imponant. The ESMS will recommend guidance to incorporate in the environmental and social action
 elan (ESAP) to be endorsed b~ the developer.
 PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                            X
 The project development and operation will generate some externalities which can result in acute
 pollution if mishandled: production of wastewater, used oil and sludge; emission of greenhouse gases;
 noises. Also. the permanent transportation, storage and treatment of quantities of heavy fuel oil (HFO), as
 well as the handling of any other hazardous materials may be source of risks which need to be monitored.
 The ESIA will propose pollution prevention mechanisms and actions us part of the F:SMS.
_PS 4: Co~n i ~ Hcaltb, Safety, and Security                                   x
 Regarding the nature of the project inputs, the suspected sources or risks are related to accidental spill of
 oil or polluted water, accidental fire occurrence during operation, and work accidents causing severe hann
 to workers. Occupational health issues may also be of concern. Thus, in addition to an Emergency
 Preparedness and Response guidelines to be endorsed under the ESAP, the ESMS will further provide
 safety measures to implement during the construction.
 PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                           X
 The project site is declared to be a property of the SENELEC and will be sold to the project developer;
 but. the environmental assessment will have to bring out the evidence (undjsputed title detained by
 SENELEC). and conclude that the site is currently not in IL<>e or occupied by a tierce-party.
 PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                                            X
 Management of Living Natural Resources
 There is no vegetation coverage in the project site location. The current land occupation picture shows
 human settlements and degraded land in the surrounding areas.
r!:S 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                                  X
 There are no indigenous people livinn. in the project area
 PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                                                 X
 There is no infonnation mentioning the Taiba Ndiaye zone to be part of an ancient kingdom or city likely

                                                      3
Performance Standards (please explain why)                            I Yes I No I TBD
to host archeological artifacts/wealth or cultural heritage. Public consultation during the ESIA reponing
process may raise the existence of sacred sites or resources and, should this happen, the IFC Performance
standard 8 will apply and recommendations proffered in the ESMS.

Ill SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be disclosed
   and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: July 2013

B. For Category Cor Category Fl projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for preparing the
       PAD-stage ISDS: Not applicable

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage lSDS:
   The specific studies and their timing2 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: An Environmental
   and Social Impact Assessment is currently underway by an international consultant, expected to be
   completed in early January 2013.

IV. APPROVALS

    Sioned and submitJed bv:


    Regional Safeguards
    Coordinator:
      Com ments:
    Sector Manager:                                 Mcike van Ginnekcn
      Comments:




I   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires I hat safc:guard-relatcc.l documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the lnfoShop and (ii) in-country. nt publicly ncccssible locations and in 3 form and language thnt arc accessible to potentially
all"ectcd persons.
2 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requ ires that safeguard-related documents he disclosed before appraisal (i) ut the

lnfoShop and (ii) in-country. at puhlicly accessible locations and in a form and language that arc ace~siblc to poicntinlly affected
persons.



                                                                   4
