                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/24/2011                                    Report No.: AC6316
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Sierra Leone                        Project ID: P119355
Project Name: Decentralized Service Delivery Program II
Task Team Leader: Qaiser M. Khan
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 3, 2011 Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTSP                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (30%);Sub-national government administration
(25%);General education sector (15%);General water, sanitation and flood protection
sector (15%);General public administration sector (15%)
Theme: Social safety nets (34%);Decentralization (33%);Other human development
(33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             26.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                          105.00
         EC: European Commission                                       6.57
         Financing Gap                                                12.43
                                                                     124.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
This is the second phase of an APL. The program objective remains to support
decentralized delivery of basic services in Sierra Leone. The development objective of
Phase II of the program is to: (a) strengthen the Recipient's capacity to manage
decentralized services; (b) improve availability and predictability of funding for LCs
Councils; and (c) strengthen the Recipient's intergovernmental fiscal transfer system.
During this phase, the program will focus more explicitly on translating institutional and
organizational capacity into better service outcomes with continued focus on refining the
grants system and mitigating cross-cutting constraints.

3. Project Description
The second Phase of the APL will build on the success of the first phase and will be
similar to it with some minor differences in the capacity building component which have
become necessary due to imminent closing of the Institutional Reform and Capacity
Building Project (IRCBP) requiring some necessary activities under IRCBP to be
included in the new project such as monitoring of local council performance in a
transparent manner. Phase II will have the following components: (1) Grants to LCs to
supplement the central budget transfers to LCs adding some results based elements to the
phase I program; (2) Capacity development and technical assistance to strengthen LCs'
and MDAs capacity to perform their core functions and central government capacity to
provide adequate strategic guidance and oversight to LCs; (3) Results and social
accountability ; and (4) Program management. Component 1 will finance grants to Local
Councils in five sectors: health and sanitation, education, water supply, solid waste
management, and social assistance services for the disabled and other vulnerable groups.
These activities may involve maintenance and rehabilitation, construction of water supply
systems (wells, boreholes, pipes), purchase of equipment and materials, and supervision.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The program will be implemented in all 19 Local Councils in Sierra Leone.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Moses Yao Duphey (AFTEN)
   Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is rated as Category B. The activities envisioned under Component 1 (Grants
to Local Councils) may cover maintenance, rehabilitation, and operation of infrastructure,
purchase of equipment and materials and supervision. The project does not envisage any
significant environmental impacts. There may be environmental safeguard issues related
to maintenance and rehabilitation of boreholes or latrines. The impacts on land use are
unlikely to be large in scale.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term impacts are expected under the program. Indirect impacts are difficult to
determine given that sub-projects are unknown. However, for component 1, which
involves grants for some construction and rehabilitation, particularly for boreholes,
latrines, and piped water systems and some minor repairs of buildings, etc, there may be
potential minor environmental impacts. These may include soil loss, erosion and
siltration from construction and construction debris. The ESMF describes, in detail, the
process put in place to ensure that checklists are developed and implemented and that a
sound monitoring and reporting framework are in place. The National Environment
Protection Board will be responsible for clearing the environmental and social screening
forms and checklists.

 Some of the sub-projects under Component 1 will result in the involuntary acquisition
of land and/or the destruction of economic crops and physical assets. It is anticipated that
land acquisition will be minimal and that the impacts on livelihoods will be minor (both
in terms of the scale of impacts and the number of people impacted).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Involuntary resettlement and the destruction of physical and economic assets will be
avoided and minimized wherever possible. The screening tool (in the ESMF) will allow
sub-project proponents to choose alternative sites to minimize significant negative
environmental and social impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has prepared an ESMF and RPF to address safeguard issues. A framework
approach has been adopted because the specific sub-projects to be financed will not be
known until the project implementation phase.

 The ESMF includes an environmental and social screening form which will be used to
screen all sub-projects to be financed under Component 1.

 On involuntary resettlement, the borrower developed a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF). The RPF which will provide measures to mitigate negative impacts (income
impacts, loss of economic crops, loss of land, etc.) as per the requirements of OP 4.12.

 In addition, the borrower has recognized the potential for women to be susceptible to
exclusion from community decision-making processes (as part of the sub-project
identification process). In an effort to address this risk, the borrower is preparing
guidelines to promote inclusion at the community level. These guidelines will be
integrated into the Operations Manual. The participation of women will be monitored
through the inclusion of a relevant indicator in the results framework.
  The borrower has garnered experience working on Bank safeguard policies (specifically
the preparation and implementation of an ESMF) through the first phase of DSDP.
However, the borrower's experience implementing an RPF is limited and close support
from the World Bank team during supervision will be necessary.

 To strengthen capacity, the borrower will hire an Environmental and Social Specialist
(ESS) who will be located in the Local Government Finance Division. The ESS will
have experience on both environmental issues and social development and will be
charged with monitoring the implementation of the ESMF and RPF, providing capacity
development for relevant project staff, and reporting on the implementation of the
safeguards instruments. In addition, the capacity of relevant staff at the Local
Government Finance Department (which will have a role in monitoring and supervising
all subprojects under Component 1), Local Councils and Ward Committee members to
identify and address environmental and social safeguards issues will be strengthened
through periodic training. An Environmental and Social Officer (ESO) who will be
responsible for ensuring that LCs comply with and implement sub-projects in accordance
with provisions in the RPF and the ESMF will also be appointed to the LCs. It is
anticipated that the ESO's would be recruited by the first quarter of 2012. In the event
that they are not recruited, the tasks of an ESO will be incorporated into the role of the
Development Planning Officers (DPOs) in the LCs.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders will be the Local Councils, communities, Ministry of Finance and
Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government and key line ministries. During
the preparation of the ESMF and the RPF there were consultations with relevant
stakeholders (May 2011). These consultations focused on experiences from the DSDP
and possible adjustments that could be made to these in preparation for DSDP II. Among
the issues noted by participants during the consultations were the lack of capacity, on the
Local Councils, to manage environmental issues and concerns about land acquisition. In
response, four measures should be highlighted: firstly, the design of DSDP II includes an
Environmental and Social Officer on the LC. Secondly, the RPF will be disclosed in
Freetown and at the LC level. Thirdly, training will be provided to relevant officers and
staff on the LC (such as the Development Planning Officer). Lastly, the screening tool
will require descriptions of land use changes on sub-project sites.

 The ESMF and the RPF have been disclosed prior to appraisal. Where possible,
announcements of the availability of disclosed documents will be made in the media
including newspapers and radio.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          09/21/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/30/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/29/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/17/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/30/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/29/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Qaiser M. Khan                            10/13/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Moses Yao Duphey                          09/30/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa                   09/30/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     10/13/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz                   10/13/2011
  Comments:
