                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6315


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/15/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Sierra Leone                        Project ID: P119355
Project Name: Decentralized Service Delivery Program II
Task Team Leader: Qaiser M. Khan
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20,      Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTSP                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (30%);Sub-national government administration
(25%);General education sector (15%);General water, sanitation and flood protection
sector (15%);General public administration sector (15%)
Theme: Social safety nets (34%);Decentralization (33%);Other human development
(33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             30.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           105.00
        UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 7.60
        EC: European Commission                                         6.40
        Financing Gap                                                   1.00
                                                                     120.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
This is the second phase of an APL. The program objective remains to support decentralized
delivery of basic services in Sierra Leone. The development objective of Phase II of the program
is: (a) to strengthen Government capacity to manage decentralized services; (b) to improve the
availability and predictability of Local Councils’ (LCs’) funding; and (c) to strengthen the
intergovernmental fiscal transfer system.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The second Phase of the APL will build on the success of the first phase and will be similar to it
with some minor differences in the capacity building component which have become necessary
due to imminent closing of the IRCBP project requiring some necessary activities under IRCBP
to be included in the new project such as monitoring of Local Council performance in a
transparent manner. Thus, Phase II will include a separate performance monitoring component
which is currently part of capacity building. Components will include: (1) grants to LCs to
supplement the central budget transfers to LCs, adding some results based elements to Phase I;
(2) capacity development and technical assistance to strengthen LCs’ capacity to perform their
core functions and central government capacity to provide adequate strategic guidance and
oversight to LCs; (3) results and social accountability; and (4) program management. The main
difference from the first phase will be the increased focused on results and social accountability.

 The project will provide: (i) predictable and incremental results-based financing to LCs,
ensuring that they have resources to finance expenditures needed to operate existing basic
service infrastructure (as per devolved functions to local councils) at a satisfactory level; (ii)
capacity development support to LCs to enable them to better plan, budget and monitor service
delivery in key sectors with an emphasis on accountability mechanisms; and (iii) technical
assistance to central ministries/agencies to support their regulatory and quality assurance role.

D. Project location (if known)
The program will be implemented in all 19 councils in Sierra Leone.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Government of Sierra Leone has a long experience with World Bank safeguard policies,
notably under National Social Action Project (NSAP) which is now closed and under the
Decentralized Service Delivery Program Phase I (DSDP I). The institutional arrangements used
for DSDP I will be used to implement and monitor DSDP II. In addition, training programs on
safeguards will be included in the overall capacity building program at the local government
level to enable the Local Councils to better plan, budget, and monitor service delivery in key
sectors with an emphasis on monitoring impact and accountability mechanisms.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Moses Yao Duphey (AFTEN)
   Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
    The program will finance expenditures of Local Councils for their devolved responsibilities.
The devolved functions (to date) span over health, education, agriculture, social assistance, rural
water and sanitation and waste management. Sub-projects activities envisioned under
Component 1 (LC grants) include maintenance, minor rehabilitation, operation of infrastructure,
purchase of equipment and material and supervision. These activities may result in non-
substantial environmental impacts. The Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) from DSDP I is being reviewed and will be updated for use under DSDP II. The revised
ESMF will address any weaknesses that are identified during the review.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No         TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    It is not envisioned that DSDP II will finance any activities that will result in the impacts
envisioned in OP 4.12. However, given the demand driven nature of the sub-projects such
impacts may emerge. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared.
Specifically, the RPF for the Youth Employment Support Project, which financed sub-projects of
a similar scale, will be revised and updated for use in DSDP II.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 07/15/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The implementation of the DSDP I ESMF will be reviewed in June 2011. A DSDP II ESMF
   based on this review will be prepared and made available for Bank approval prior to
   appraisal in September.

        The Youth Employment Support Project RPF will be reviewed in June 2011. A DSDP II
       RPF based on this review will be prepared and made available for Bank approval prior to
       appraisal in September.

        Both the ESMF and RPF revisions and preparation will include in-depth consultations with
       relevant stakeholders at the local and national levels. These consultations will be undertaken
       in June 2011. Consultation reports will be submitted to the Bank for review prior to
       appraisal.


1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
    The DSDP II ESMF and RPF will be disclosed prior to appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Qaiser M. Khan                05/25/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi         06/14/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Setareh Razmara               05/26/2011
   Comments: The ISDS is cleared.
