                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: 88871


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          21 August 2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Solomon Islands                      Project ID: P147005
                                              Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Community Governance and Grievance Management Project
Task Team Leader: Daniel Evans
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 2014          Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: LEGJR                          Lending Instrument: Small grant
Sector: Social Development
Theme: Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: AusAID (EAP J4P Trust Fund) US$ 1.73 million
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing                Simple [X ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project        Yes [ ]                   No [X ]


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:

The development objective of the project is to establish durable arrangements, through
Community Officers (COs), to assist communities to manage those conflicts that undermine
community security, development and social cohesion.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:

Component 1: Government Institutional Development and Support

This component will facilitate the embedding of COs in the government administration at the
central and provincial levels. The sustainability of COs will depend largely on the extent to
which their selection, terms and conditions, training, reporting, remuneration, resourcing and
monitoring are governed by, and are incorporated into, existing government systems and
processes. To this end, both technical and financial assistance will be provided to build the
capacity of the implementing agency and the relevant agencies of provincial government. It is
envisaged that project management, planning and coordination will take place at the central
level, led by the implementing agency, while COs will be engaged (and remunerated) by
provincial governments. Accordingly, COs will formally accountable to provincial governments.
Activities to be carried out under this component may include:

      Developing the appropriate cooperation agreements (MoUs or the like) amongst state
       agencies at national and sub-national level, including the Royal Solomon Islands Police
       Force (RSIPF). Such agreements may include cost sharing, utilizing common resources,
       counterpart interactions and joint training/awareness activities. Ministries likely to be
       involved in the project include the Ministry of Women, Youth and Children’s Affairs, the
       Ministry of Justice and Legal Affairs, the Ministry of Rural Development, the Ministry of
       Mines, Energy and Rural Electrification and the Ministry of Public Service.

      Developing standard shared-information and reporting procedures at the provincial and
       central-level amongst key stakeholders.

      Providing guidance to provinces about the selection, identification and recruitment of
       COs (including guidance on gender issues) in accordance with government processes and
       domestic legal requirements.

      Establishing administrative processes around the supervision, accountability and
       incentivizing of COs.

It is envisaged that various small, one-off investments (such as communication resources,
uniforms and office equipment) will be procured under this component.

Component 2: Knowledge and Skill Support for Community Officers

Depending on the particular context, COs will operate at the intersection of several local
authorities and higher level administrative, justice and political authorities. The implementing
agency will need to ensure that provincial government staff and police are assisted to ensure that
COs are trained in understanding the competencies, jurisdictions and likely challenges this will
present, how these will impact on different categories of dispute, and to systematically document
and share experiences on a regional and national scale.

Activities under this component will include training and ongoing mentoring and supervision for
COs which will possibly include:

      Practical mediation and conflict resolution skills in relation to gender, youth and family
       issues (including responding to domestic violence complaints).

      Knowledge of regulatory procedures relating to land and natural resource developments
       and transactions.

      Understanding the operation of donor and NGO projects, CDFs, line ministry functions
       and provincial and local governance arrangements
      Developing means for sharing lessons learnt across the provinces included in the project,
       for example by inter-provincial visits and meetings.

Component 3: Local-level Analysis, Agreement Making and Awareness

This component will involve preparing and implementing agreements or guidelines to assist COs
and local authorities in each locality to come to a common understanding about their respective
roles and responsibilities. The key will be to tailor this process to the particular context in which
the CO will operate. Under this component, agreements will be reached with local authorities on
the scope of CO responsibilities, and the mechanisms and expectations according to which the
CO is expected to perform. This will be done through:

      Examining the prevalence and typical trajectories of different categories of disputation
       and conflict in the locality.

      Surveying the existing mechanisms through which these conflicts are managed, and the
       perceived effectiveness and legitimacy of these mechanisms (e.g., churches, chiefs,
       NGOs and other institutions) and determining where COs fit within this landscape.

      Developing appropriate information and education campaigns (radio, print, community
       meetings, public announcements) for host communities and locally deployed police and
       government officials to communicate agreements reached.

      Establishing and integrating appropriate social accountability mechanisms in each
       locality in relation to CO performance.

Component 4: Project Management, Evaluation and Policy Development

This component will include both the capabilities needed to implement the project, and to
evaluate progress in respect of the four intermediate results and the project’s impact at the PDO
level. Project implementation will increase the activities and transactions managed by the
implementing agency, including planning, budgeting, administration, payments, oversight,
dispute resolution and reporting, in accordance with the grant agreement. Following preliminary
discussions with the implementing agency, it is intended that a project management unit will be
established to augment its implementation and management capacity. This will be incorporated
within the Governance Division of the implementing agency.

A feature of the project will be supporting learning and evidence based policy dialogue on
critical issues relating to local governance. The Bank team will provide enhanced, hands-on
implementation support and will work with the implementing agency to support evidence-based
policy dialogue. This will likely include analyzing how COs are faring in respect of local
mediation and linkage with higher authorities, and reviewing and/or proposing collateral
institutional reforms that may impact positively or negatively on the COs’ performance and
sustainability. These latter may for example include ongoing dialogue regarding decentralization
(province, sub-province, constituency, local government), or reforms relating to mining, logging
or marine resource developments.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

Rural Solomon Islands. Specific provincial locations currently unknown.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

The Solomon Islands Government is currently implementing several grants which trigger a
number of safeguards policies. The Ministry of Provincial Government and Institutional
Strengthening (MPGIS) will be the implementing agency for this project. The MPGIS has
limited capacity in financial, procurement and project management, and, accordingly, additional
support for project implementation will be required. It has no prior experience with safeguard
policies and, therefore, limited capacity.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Beverley Ann McLean (Consultant); Social Specialist (LEGJR)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                   Yes           No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
This policy is triggered because this is the umbrella policy that guides the triggering of the other
environmental and social safeguards policies. No separate instrument will be prepared or
disclosed. The key messages of this policy on environmental assessment will be incorporated
into the design of the project. This includes awareness creation on the basic policy principles and
the training to the COs and other change agents in Solomon Islands for purposes of promoting
environmental sustainability of development interventions.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
The policy is triggered. Rural Solomon Islands has the presence of IPs. Since the overwhelming
majority of project beneficiaries would fall under OP 4.10 definition of indigenous peoples, no
stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Plan is required. However a simple social assessment (SA)
proportional to both the positive and negative impacts of this project will be prepared and
disclosed and its elements will be integrated into the design of the project.
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                         Yes              No             TBD



Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
The policy will be triggered. The project will provide support to establish arrangements, through
Community Officers (COs), and assist communities to manage conflicts that undermine
community security, development and social cohesion. One key area of conflict is land disputes
over tenure and ownership. Since the project will not support activities that will directly acquire
land or restrict access to designated protected areas like parks, no stand-alone Resettlement Plan
or Policy Framework will be prepared or disclosed. Instead, key messages of OP/BP 4.12 will be
incorporated into the design of the project including any relevant project training and awareness
events, training of COs in dispute handling, etc., and in particular, this will include training
around the economic, social and environmental risks of unmitigated involuntary resettlement.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                            X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                     X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                                              X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared:

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS:

January 2014

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

       The social assessment should be completed prior to appraisal.




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Daniel Evans             21 August 2013
 Approved by:                       Daniel Evans             21 August 2013
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Peter Leonard            21 August 2013
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Christina Biebesheimer   21 August 2013
   Comments:
