                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                      Report No.: 112264


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/17/2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Proj cct Data

Country: Solomon Islands                        ProiectlD:P129375
Project Name: INCREASING RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE AND
NATURAL HAZARDS
Task Team Leader: Emilia Battaglini
GEF Focal Area: Climate change                  Global Sunolemental ID:
Estimated Aooraisal Date: NIA                   Estimated   Board Date: NIA
Managing Unit: EASNS                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: General airriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%); Flood protection(60%)
Theme: Climate change (50%); Natural Disaster Management (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):               0
IDA Amount (US$m.):                0
GEF Amount (US$m.):                0
PCF Amount (US$m.):                0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                  2.73


B. Project Objectives
The development objectives of the proposed project are tluee fo ld: (i) to integrate DRR/CCA
across sectors; (ii) to improve climate and disaster risk information and communication; and (iii)
to increase the resilience ofrural communities in Solomon Islands to climate change and natural
hazards.

Key indicators are:
   1. DRR/CCA included in the nationaJ development plan of Solomon Islands and DRR/CCA
       incorporated into planning and operations in at Least two provinces.
    2. A geographic information system supporting decision-making in DRR/CCA is
       institutionalized.
    3. Community resilience to climate change and natural hazards demonstrated through
       community-led investments.
C. Project Description

The proposed project is designed to support the strategic directions pursued by the Government
of Solomon Islands. The different components are:

Component A: Coo1·dination between Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk
Reduction Institutions (US$ 50,000)
Under this component a series of targeted consultative workshops and related activities will be
organized to enhance coordination between the climate change adaptation and disaster risk
reduction (CCA and DRR) communities in order to facilitate the integration of climate change
and disaster risk reduction in national and provincial policies, planning and operations. The
themes of the activities will be (i) Consolidating the national framework for CCA and DRR (ii)
mainstreaming of the National Disaster Risk Management Plan into sectors and into the planning
and budgetary process, and (iii) integration of DRR and CCA at the provincial level. Activities
will target policymakers, planners and civil society representatives at the national and provincial
levels. Agencies expected to participate in workshops and other related activities are: National
Disaster Management Office (NDMO), Climate Change Division (CCD), Health, Education,
Agriculture, Lands, Water Resources, Geohazards, Rural Development, Infrastructure
Development, Provincial Govenunent, Development Planning & Aid Coordination, Finance and
Treasury, Red Cross and other civil society organizations. This component will be implemented
mainly through the provision of consulting services.

Component B: Information and Communication (US$ 1,129,800)
Activities under this component include (i) creating a framework for the establishment of - or
connection of existing- geographic information systems, including data sharing arrangements;
(ii) compiling, collecting and collating relevant geospatial and time-series data for (flood) risk
assessment in consolidated risk information system; under this component, an inventory of
infrastructure assets exposed to floods as well as structural and non-structural interventions
required for better flood management will be prepared. (iii) undertaking quantitative climate
change effects and natural hazard risk assessments Jinked with economic/social impact
assessment to support implementation activities; and (iv) procurement and installation of
emergency and data communication systems to suppo1t disaster preparedness and response
including possibly V-Sat stations for provincial headquarters, satellite phones and HF radio/e-
mail systems. This component will be implemented through a combination of technical
assistance and procurement of goods and equipment.

Component C: Pilot Investments (US$ 1,220,000)
(i) Community-led investments: Activities under this component cover adaptation and disaster
risk reduction investments in up to two Provinces. Identification, selection and project design of
investments will be based on the flood risk assessment conducted under component B and
participatory planning at community and provincial level within the framework of the Bank-
financed Rural Development Project (RDP) for Solomon Islands. Pilots may include
strengthening of rural water supply systems, promoting disaster·resilient building design and
land use planning, promoting flood-tolerant crop varieties and land-use practices and small-scale
irrigation for improved food security. The project will utilize the well established RDP
governance and implementation structure to provide sub-grants to the communities. Eligibility
criteria, fiduciary and safeguards requirements will be detailed in a Pilot Operations Manual
which will be prepared during the first year of project implementation. (ii) Flood Protection Pilot
Projects: These pilots will be implemented to test protective measures against river and coastal
flooding in the project provinces. Activities may include pilot investments of benefit to multiple
communities such as sandbags.

Component D: Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation (US$ 330,200)
This component covers project coordination, procurement, accounting, environmental and social
safeguards and monitoring and evaluation activities. The project will be implemented by the
Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Disaster Management and Meteorology (MECDM).
A Project Coordination Committee (PCC) will be established to provide oversight. The PCC
composition is to include representation from the Ministries of Finance and Treasury,
Agriculture and Livestock, Provincial Government and Institutional Strengthening, Health and
Medical Services, Fisheries and Marine Resources, Women, Youth and Children Affairs, Lands,
Housing and Survey, Police, National Security and Correctional Services, Education and Human
Resource Development, Infrastructure Development, Environment, Climate Change and Disaster
Management.

Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) activities will be undertaken on a regular basis through the
Project Management Unit. An M&E specialist will undertake a review of the M&E reporting and
conclusions at mid-term and at the end of the project. The review will be based on reviewing
project outputs, structured interviews with key government officials, selected Bank and donor
partner mission team members, contracted firms and individuals, and.observation of field teams
in operation..

D. Project location (if known)
Technical assistance and capacity building components will be nation-wide while pilot
investments will focus on selected communities in up to two of the nine provinces.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The main counterpart for the proposed project is Ministry of Environment, Climate Change,
Disaster Management and Meteorology (MECDM) through its National Disaster Management
Office (NDMO) and Climate Change Division (CCD). Activities at provincial level will involve
working with the Rural Development Program (RDP) team housed in the Ministry of
Development Planning and Aid Coordination (tvIDPAC) with presence in the Provinces. The
project team will work closely with local government and communities.

The PHRD grant will undertake pilot activities. Experience and lessons from the pilots will,
among other things, support and inform the preparation of a Bank-financed project on
Community Resilience to Climate and Disaster Risk in Solomon islands (CRISP, Pl 12613)
which is currently under preparation and will aim to scale up and replicate, the investments
piloted under the PHRD grant.

Capacity building activities will include building the knowledge base and skills of MECDM as
the implementing agency, to incorporate safeguards measures in the various project activities.
The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) covers the pilot investments.
Experience gained during the implementation of the EStvfP will guide the preparation of the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for CRISP.

The ESMP contains procedures to address potential environmental impacts of the small civil
works which includes an Environmental Code of Practice (ECoP) to cover the different project
types. In most cases, it is anticipated that any land acquisition will be minor and is likely to be
communal land and since the land will be used for the good of the community it is likely it will
be voluntarily donated. Any land requirements will be made through well documented voluntary
land donations. The project will keep records of voluntary land donations and include 'no
involuntary land acquisition" and 'activities involving involuntary resettlement' on a negative
list.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mr Knut Opsal (Senior Social Scientist); Ms. Maya Villaluz (Senior Operations Officer)

Il. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No         TBD
Envh'onmentnl Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               x
    Examples of conununity-focused investments might include relocation of water storage tanks
and community buildings such as voluntary resettlement of schools, community balls, etc., minor
drainage improvements, and food security measures. Some targeted public works investments
may also be undertaken such as upgrading of public utility buildings, drainage improvements,
water resources management interventions where these reduce cunent risk or adapt to future
climate conditions. As most of the proposed investments are rehabilitation and small in scale,
any potential adverse environmental impacts are expected to be minor, temporary, localized,
limited to the construction phase and easy to mitigate.
   The project has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) that
includes mitigation and monitoring measures to ensure environmentaJ due diligence embodied in
an Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) covering different tvoolOQV oforoiects.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    x
    Since the investment activities will focus on existing or new small civil works, there will be
no activities in protected areas nor will lead to the conversion of natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             x
                   The project activities \\~II not lead to triggering of this policy.
Pest Manal!ement (OP 4.09)                                                       x
    The project will not lead to any activities that will require managing pests.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         x
    The project will not impact Physical Cultural Resources. The EStvfP \vill include provisions
for chance find procedures.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No          TBD
Iodieenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       x
     Since majority of the beneficiaries can be considered as communities of indigenous people,
a stand-alone JPP (Indigenous Peoples Plan) is not required. Instead, and in accordance with
OP4.l 0, the elements of an IP Plan will be integrated into the Project design. These shall include
the following:
        • Free, prior, and informed consultation (FPIC) leading to broad community suppo1t
           conducted during project preparation. Consultations materials should be translated to
           local languages and disclosed locally to ensure that there is widespread understanding
           oftbe project, its objectives and timeline;
        • A culturally appropriate grievance redress mechanism, which should be explained
           during the FPIC consultation;
Involuntarv Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             x
    The policy is not triggered since the project will not acquire land involuntarily. Any land
requirements will be made through \\rell documented voluntary land donations to avoid future
claims by other stakeholders. The project will keep detailed records of all voluntary land
donations and include "no involuntary land acquisition" on a negative list.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       x
    No dams are involved.
Proiects on International Watenvavs (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           x
    The oroiect does not involve international waterwavs.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           x
    The project does not involve disputed areas.


Envfronmeutal Category: C

ill. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: No QER has been carried out for this PHRD grant. However, the QER
    planned for the associated CRISP project will draw on the experiences of the PHRD grant
    during the implementation of the pilot investments.

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
    NIA

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and theirtiming 1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.


1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appro.isal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible localions and in a fonn and language thnl are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS



                                                    ~
Sig11etl a11d submitted by:
Task Team Leader:
                                   Ms Emilia Batta lini                 September 17, 2012
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
                                   Mr Panneer Selvaru Lakshminarayana
  Comments:
Sector Manaeer:                                            ~ J.uv
                                   Ms. Mona Sur (Acting)                Sep1ember 18, 2012
  Comments:
