                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/08/2011                                    Report No.: AC6568
1. Basic Project Data
Country: South Sudan                         Project ID: P129000
Project Name: South Sudan Rural Roads Project (SSRRP)
Task Team Leader: Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mitiku
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 14,        Estimated Board Date: March 6, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTTR                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (85%);General agriculture, fishing
and forestry sector (15%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (75%);Trade facilitation and market access
(15%);Decentralization (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         Special Financing                                              0.00
         South Sudan Transition Trust Fund                             38.00
                                                                       38.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [X]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance all season road connectivity to
agricultural services for rural communities in high agricultural potential areas. The PDO
will be achieved by: (i) improving access to high agricultural potential areas; and (ii)
enhancing the capacity of participating states, and relevant national government
institutions to manage rural transport infrastructure.

 The proposed rural roads project contributes to the overarching goal of increasing
agricultural production, ensuring food security, and making agricultural products of
South Sudan competitive in the local and regional market. The project is designed as an
integral part of agricultural development initiatives in South Sudan.
3. Project Description
The project contains a package of roads proposed for rehabilitation, and spot
improvement and maintenance. Institutional development is a core intervention of the
proposed project. The project will have three components:

 Component 1 – Rehabilitation and Upgrading of Selected Rural Roads Targeting High
Agricultural Potential Areas (US$22.5 million):
 This component will finance the upgrading and/or rehabilitation of selected rural roads
opening up high agricultural potential areas. The objective is to rehabilitate about 150
km of roads targeting areas identified by the agriculture sector for having high
productivity for production of cereals, much needed to ensure food security. This
component caters for the rehabilitation/upgrading of selected rural roads, provision of
supervision services, and revising the draft Environment and Social Screening
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) for the transport sector, and preparing Environment
and Social Impact Assessments/Management Plans (ESIAs/ESMPs), Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) and Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) as required for roads to be
rehabilitated and maintained under the project.

 Component 2 – Maintenance and Spot Improvement of Selected Rural Roads (US$12
million):

 This component will cater for the maintenance and spot improvement of a total of about
300km of rural roads. It is further split into four sub-components:

 2.1. Mechanized maintenance and spot improvement of about 180 kilometers of select
rural roads.

 2.2. Supervision of maintenance and spot improvement works for Part 2.1 of the
Project.

 2.3. Labor intensive maintenance and spot improvement of about 120 kilometers of
select rural roads.

 2.4. Supervision of maintenance and spot improvement works for Part 2.3 of the
Project.

 Component 3 – State and National Institutions Development US$3.5 million):

  This component will support institutional development initiatives at pilot states and
national levels to enhance the capacity for rural infrastructure management. This
component constitutes three sub-components: Sub-Component One, which includes: (i)
provision of Technical Assistance (TA) and IT equipment to pilot states; (ii) preparation
of business plans for the pilot states; Sub Component Two, including: (i) establishing
Planning Department for MRB ; (ii) preparation of Roads Sector Development Program;
(iii) support to establishment of a Road Maintenance Fund; and (iv) Strategic Studies
emerging during implementation; and Sub- Component Three, including: (i) training to
the Project Management Team (PMT) and states staff; (ii)TAs to the PMT, (iii) provision
of technical, social and financial audit firm (Audit Agent –AA); (iv) Procure Desktops
and install NAVISION Accounting System including training of staff in the Ministry;
and (v) operational costs for the PMT.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project will focus on feeder roads in South Sudan. The project targets feeder roads
helping to open up high agricultural potential areas and improve agricultural marketing
and service delivery focusing on the green belt area. The roads to be rehabilitated or
upgraded, totaling about 150 km, will be selected from a list, including: Magwi - Pageri-
Ame junction to Pageri section (35 km - Eastern Equatoria); Maloupech - Thiet (25 km -
Lakes); Magwi - Labone (70.3 km - Eastern Equatoria); Amadi - Tali (50 km - Western
Equatoria); and Tali -Yirol (51.6 km - Lakes).

  The roads to be spot improved and maintained, about 300 km, will be selected from a
list, including: Yei - New Lasu (45 km - Central Equatoria State); Marid - Ras Olo (71.4
km - Western Equatoria); Marial Bai - Nyinboli (40 km - Northern Bahr El Gazal);
Kuajok - Luonyaker (55 km - Warrab); Wau - Njaliamb # Ngaku - Halima - Busera (60
km - Western Bahr El Gazal); Madrab - Awerial (70 km - Lakes); Maridi - Kozi - Mvolo
(157 km Western Equatoria); Morobo - Payume - Gimunu (30 km- Central Equatoria);
and Street 14 - Wulu River (90 km, Lakes and Warrab).

 The pilot states to be incorporated under the institutional development component,
named as pilot states, include: Eastern Equatoria, Western Equatoria, Lakes and Western
Bahr El Gazal.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
   Mr Bedilu Amare Reta (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project is categorized under environmental category B for environmental
safeguards. There will be no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will not undertake construction of new roads, as all roads under the project
will either be rehabilitated only and require spot maintenance. The proposed roads will be
selected and prioritized based on the screening process that will identify the ones that will
generate the least environmental and social impacts. The government, with the support of
short term Environment and Social Safeguards Specialists, will complete the
environmental and social screening process by the end of February 2012. The draft
Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) required
under OP 8.00 has been prepared for this operation and is included as an annex to the
project paper. Additional material on potential adverse impacts and associated mitigation
measures will be included in the ESSAF, as necessary, during project
implementation.Appropriate safeguards documents will be prepared as required during
implementation (e.g. Environmental and Social Management Plans, Resettlement Action
Plans, Indigenous Peoples Plan). The ESSAF presents a description of the project#s
objective, scope, scale and nature. It describes the subproject typologies and the set of
Bank OPs triggered along with the environmental and social safeguard screening
mechanism and associated mitigation measures for each type of project investment based
on the type of road, safeguards screening, institutional capacity and monitoring results of
the Borrower#s application of the agreed safeguards framework. The ESSAF also
presents the process followed for public consultation and document disclosure.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term risks or impacts are anticipated

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Roads crossing or passing close to protected areas were dropped from the list of potential
roads to be rehabilitated to avoid and minimize adverse impacts of the project. The
operation is for rehabilitation of existing roads and no alternative was conceived.
However, studies have been carried out to ensure that the most sustainable technical
option has been chosen with respect to the project resources.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
(a) The client will revise the draft Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment
Framework (ESSAF) to be used as the framework document for conducting ESIAs,
RAPs and IPPs as well as to guide safeguards monitoring work throughout
implementation. The draft ESSAF is an update of the 2008 sector specific ESMF
developed for Sudan before independence. This framework will be further revised and
prepared for use during implementation as well as disclosed in country and at the
Infoshop no later than three months post effectiveness.

 (b) Specific Environment and Social Impact Assessment sand Management Plans
(ESIAs and ESMPs), and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)as required, will be prepared
for each road section selected for financing by this project. If the project involves
Indigenous Peoples, the project will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP).

 (c) After completion of all reports (ESIA/ESMP/RAP/IPP), the output of these studies
will be disclosed to the public in country and at the Infoshop.

  (d) MRB, the implementing institution, has established an Environment and Social
Management Unit (ESMU). However, the ESMU has only one Environmental Expert.
Under the South Sudan Road Maintenance Project, MRB will engage Social Safeguards
Specialist to strengthen the safeguards capacity of the Ministry by December 2011. This
will help to strengthen the Environment and Social Safeguards management capacity of
MBR. Further, the project will have provision for engaging an Environment and Social
Specialist Consultant (Technical Assistants) to support the ESMU and provide training to
its staff. The states are expected to nominate two focal persons for environmental and
social management, among the staff of the state Ministry of Physical Infrastructure. As
part of the institutional development component there will be a provision for training the
staff of the four pilot states in the areas of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
and Management. The proposed project has a provision for strengthening the unit
responsible for transport projects under the Ministry of Environment (MOE). The MRB
will ensure that all road construction activity applies a best practice standard and
conducts environmental and social screening to identify potential negative environmental
and social impacts.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders will be: Ministry of Roads and Bridges, Ministry of Environment,
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Ministry of Animal Resources and Fisheries, The
communities residing around the project area, NGOs, donors, regional and local
leadership.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      No
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     03/30/2012
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/30/2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  03/30/2012
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                 03/30/2012
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/30/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/30/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/30/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/30/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/30/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/30/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
This is an emergency project and documents will be disclosed no later than three months
after effectiveness.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          No
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  No
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        No
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   No
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              No
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        No
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mitiku             12/07/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Bedilu Amare Reta                         12/06/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Yasmin Tayyab                             12/06/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     12/07/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Supee Teravaninthorn                      12/07/2011
  Comments:
