                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/21/2011                                    Report No.: AC6596
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P081771                 Original Project Name: E-Lanka
                                             Development
Country: Sri Lanka                           Project ID: P128702
Project Name: SL: E-Srilanka Development Project Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Henry K Bagazonzya
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14,       Estimated Board Date: January 31, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: SASFP                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Information technology (40%);Central government administration
(30%);General public administration sector (15%);Payments, settlements, and remittance
systems (10%);Law and justice (5%)
Theme: e-Government (40%);Administrative and civil service reform (30%);Rural
services and infrastructure (20%);Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             11
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO), which is same as the parent project
(P081771), is to enhance growth and equity through: (i) improved access and use of
information and communication; (ii) access to and use of public services on-line by
businesses and citizens; and (iii) enhanced competitiveness of the private sector and in
particular of knowledge industry and SMEs.

 The objective will be achieved by (i) establishing an effective, citizen-centered and
business-friendly government; (ii) empowering the rural poor, disadvantaged groups,
women, and youth through increased and affordable access to information and
communication tools; (iii) developing leadership and skills in ICT; and (iv) creating
employment in the ICT industry and ICT-enabled services, and enhancing the
competitiveness of user industries and services.
3. Project Description
The Additional Financing is being proposed to ensure that activities with the highest
impact for preparation of the next stage of ICT development in Sri Lanka can be
completed during the next 18 months. Therefore, the main focus will be on completing
and scaling up activities that can link the existing platforms and systems to ensure that
Government Ministries and agencies are connected at the national, regional and district
levels and enhance the project#s impact and development effectiveness. It is also to
ensure that citizens have access to services; including training and information from these
developments and that an effort is put into improving the competitiveness of the country
in ICT.

 Component 1: Re-engineering Government(US$ 3.75 million).This will focus on 3 main
activity areas: namely; Lanka Government Network (LGN III) & Training, Lanka Gate
and E-Services which will scale up, rollout and improve access to citizens to government
e-services resulting in efficiency improvements in service delivery.

 Lanka Government Network (LGN III) & Training: (US$ 2.21) The Lanka Government
Network has been completed and links internally 476 government entities. However,
North and East could not be connected during project implementation due to the conflict.
Additional financing will connect North and East to the already established government
network. This is critical for achieving connectivity and improving ICT literacy
throughout the whole government sector and inclusiveness in terms of efficient provision
of services to all citizens. ICT training will be provided to all staff involved in the above
process in order for them to use the established infrastructure efficiently and effectively,
while providing services to the citizens. Out of the nearly 1200 public sector
organizations only around 50% have ICT officers trained under the Project requiring the
remaining 50% to be trained and appointed as Chief Innovation Officers to have the
public sector ready for the next stage of re-engineering the government.

  Lanka Gate (US$ 0.63 million): ICTA developed a middleware infrastructure that
connects software components, people and applications. This allows secure electronic
transactions to be conducted online. Additional financing will support improving the
management structure for the platform, security framework, inter-operability and
incremental hardware requirements, so that more services can be supported. In order to
enhance the service delivery mechanism, additional service delivery channels (mobile,
IPTV) will also be incorporated in the Country Portal.

  E-Services (US$ 0.91 million): Additional financing will assist in establishing 50 more
sustainable high impact e-services that would leverage the existing ICT infrastructure
(Lanka Government Network, Lanka Gate and Telecenters and main e-Gov-applications
like e-Civil Registry, e-Pensions etc. to reach citizens at divisional secretariat
level/village level.

 Component 2: Integrated communication (US$ 0.96 million).An integrated
communication strategy will be developed and implemented at national, district and at
village levels. This is intended to create awareness at all these levels about on line
services offered by the government. The strategy and its implementation will also look in
to improving coordination between government agencies, donors and service providers
with the purpose of improving efficiency and access to ICT enabled services. The other
function is to effectively communicate the need for adherence to standards when
developing ICT applications

 Component 3: Common enabling environment for the above activities (US$ 1.59
million): Further enhancement of a common enabling environment in terms of policy,
compatibility, standards, regulations under Electronic Transactions Law, preparation of,
new laws etc. which are common to activities above to ensure the effective functioning of
the systems, including developing leadership and specialized expertise to maintain and
sustain such systems. This component will further look in to enhancement of current laws
and development of new laws to enable the private sector to grow and to ensure
competition and a level playing field. The component will support the expansion of local
language compatibility with widely used software packages. Chief Innovation
(Information) Officer (CIO) will be further trained implementation of government ICT
policy and effective delivery of on line services to citizens and businesses. Cyber security
and data protection will be another area which the component will support.

 Component 4: Telecentres and e-society (US$ 2.39 million). The component will
support the establishment of extra 40 telecentres in the Nothern province (underserved
due to conflict).It will also support the rolling out of e-services through these centres and
the development of 1-2 high impact services in collaboration with the private sector.

 Component 5: Improving IT/ITES sector competitiveness (US$ 1.31 million)To
improve location readiness Index for ICT/ITES industry in terms of Knowledge
processing and ICT services. Activities under this component will include (i)
development of skills certification program for IT/ITES.(ii) provision of industry
statistics and information on industry needs(iii) Train the Trainer(ToT) Program in
selected certifications, and (iv) marketing and promotion of the industry.

 Component 6: Incremental Operating Cost (US$ 1.00 million): This component will
support costs associated with project management including rent, utilities services etc.

 The implementation arrangements remain the same for this additional financing. There
are no unresolved fiduciary, environmental, social or safeguard issues; and all the legal
covenants have been complied with. There is no outstanding audit report, nor ineligible
expenditures. All disbursement conditions have been met.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented throughout the whole country with some focus on the
North and East provinces of the country.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no environmental and social issues associated with the project. It is mainly
focused on to ensure that citizens have access to services; including training and
information from these developments and that an effort is put into improving the
competitiveness of the country in ICT. Within this context, the project does not envisage
financing construction/renovation/rehabilitation types of activities. Therefore, there will
not be any involvement of land acquisition/involuntary resettlement or restrictions of
access to resources and livelihoods.

 It should be noted the Information Infrastructure Network, which had the possibility of
creating environmental and social issues in the parent project has been removed from the
project activities, as it has been financed by the Government of Sri Lanka and private
sector.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not applicable

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since there will not be any environmental and social issues associated with the project
activities, the preparation of safeguards documents (e.g. environmental impact
assessments, resettlement action plans, etc.) are therefore not required.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Henry K Bagazonzya                        11/11/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Darshani De Silva                         11/11/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Mr Sanjay Srivastava                        11/21/2011
  Comments: Cleared. Please refer to email dated Nov.16, 2011.
Sector Manager:                      Mr Ivan Rossignol                           12/21/2011
  Comments: Cleared.
