                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                             APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/06/2012                                        Report No.: AC6760
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Sri Lanka                           Project ID: P123632
Project Name: ‘Diri Sawiya’ Assisting PWD through Cash Transfers and Training
Task Team Leader: Jessica Leigh Leino
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: September 14, 2012
Managing Unit: SASSP                         Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Global Food Crisis Response Program                           2.59
                                                                       2.59
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the grant is to provide targeted cash transfers and training for persons
with disabilities in nine Northern districts in Sri Lanka as part of Government of Sri
Lanka's effort to improve the livelihoods of disabled persons.

3. Project Description
The project includes two main components, one of which will provide targeted cash
transfers to persons with disabilities, and a second one which will pilot vocational
training and skills development for disabled persons. These efforts will also help to
coordinate administration, beneficiary selection, and program integration and monitoring
for persons with disabilities in the nine selected districts, including the existing disability
allowance program and vocational training opportunities for persons with disabilities
administered by the Ministry of Social Services (MoSS). The project funding is expected
to directly support over 3,300 beneficiary households with disabled persons.

 Component 1: Cash allowances for vulnerable persons with disabilities will provide a
cash allowance to persons with disabilities in nine Northern districts. Approximately
3,060 beneficiaries are expected to be reached with project funding and will receive an
allowance of Rs. 3,000 (USD 24) per month. The allowances will be targeted to the most
vulnerable households with severely disabled members who are living below the poverty
line. Beneficiaries will be selected using a scorecard methodology that prioritizes
households for inclusion in the disability allowance program based on criteria including
the income of the household, the severity of disability, the number of other working-age
adults in the household, and the number of dependents. The project would also provide
an opportunity to continue the dialogue with the MoSS on improving the administration
and monitoring of programs for vulnerable groups, including the disabled, with
diagnostic and analytical work provided through Bank executed Technical Assistance.

  Component 2: Vocational training and skills development pilot program will finance
pilot vocational training and skills development programs for about 300 disabled persons
ages 18 to 35 from vulnerable households. During their participation in trainings,
beneficiaries will receive an allowance. Courses will be based on existing Vocational
Training Modules and offerings will be finalized after a market analysis is conducted.
This component will select beneficiaries through an application process and will fund
training through a variety of public and private training providers. The project will work
with all training partners to develop standards and guidelines for supporting trainees in
accessing the labor market and building self-employment opportunities. The project will
also provide training on disability issues for local government officials.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project funding is expected to target beneficiaries in nine districts in the Northern,
North-Central and North-Western Provinces. The proposed districts are Kilinochchi,
Mullaitivu, Mannar, Vavuniya, Jaffna, Puttalam, Anuradhapura, Pollonaruwa, and
Trincomalee.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Mohamed Ghani Razaak (SASDS)
   Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                      X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project finances cash allowances and training for persons with disabilities. The
project does not envisage any large scale, significant or irreversible environmental
impacts. The project is not expected to trigger any environmental or social safeguard
policies. Thus no major negative social impacts are expected to ensue from the project
activities. The expected social development outcomes are rather salutary and aimed at a
number of positive social impacts among persons with disabilities and their families
living in rural and conflict affected areas. It will assist socially marginalized persons with
disabilities to reintegrate in the mainstream society with new skills and dignity.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term and indirect adverse environmental and social impacts are anticipated due
to project activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are persons with disabilities and their families residing in the nine
districts where the project will be operational, as well as staff of the Ministry of Social
Services and local officials who will be working on disability programs. The project has
been prepared in consultation with NGOs representing disabled persons and government
officials/agencies.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                    Ms Jessica Leigh Leino    08/21/2012
Environmental Specialist:            Mr Mohamed Ghani Razaak   08/21/2012
Social Development Specialist        Ms Darshani De Silva      08/21/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Mr Sanjay Srivastava      09/06/2012
  Comments: Cleared. Please refer to email dated 8/9/2012.
Sector Manager:                      Mr Pablo Gottret          08/24/2012
  Comments:
