                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/07/2012                                     Report No.: 74865
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Sri Lanka                             Project ID: P113488
Project Name: Sri Lanka - Transforming the School Education System as the Foundation
of a Knowledge Hub
Task Team Leader: Harsha Aturupane
Co-Task Team Leader: Deepa Sankar
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 3, 2011 Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2011
Managing Unit: SASED                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Secondary education (70%);Primary education (30%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (70%);Education for all (30%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):                      0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):                    100.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):                       0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):                       0.00
Other financing amounts by source (US$m.):
AusAID (US$m):                           38.00
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                  0.00
                                                           0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple [x ]        Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [x]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The project development objective is to enhance equitable access and quality of primary
and secondary education to provide a foundation for the knowledge-based economic and
social development of the country.

3. Project Description

The project components are aligned with the themes of the ESDFP II.

The Foundation: The Rolling Education Sector Plan

The foundation of the ESDFP II is the rolling five-year education sector development
plan. The TSEP will assist the education sector plan. The plan describes the key
outcomes and results to be achieved under the program, and the strategies to achieve
these outcomes and results. The plan also contains an annual implementation plan
(including a procurement plan). The operational arrangements to support the plan are
contained in an Operations Manual. The plan specifies national standards for educational
spaces and assets. The plan sets targets, under the capital budget, for higher-order spaces
and assets, such as language laboratories, ICT facilities, science laboratories, multi-
purpose rooms, activity rooms, and library resource centers. The education sector plan
also sets targets under the capital budget for essential facilities, such as classrooms, water
supply and sanitation. In addition, the education sector plan has targets for higher-order
processes, such as teacher development and the strengthening of the leadership and
management skills of school principals, under the recurrent budget. Further, the education
sector plan sets targets for repair, maintenance and replacements of physical facilities and
equipment. The target values for allocation vary from province to province, based on the
specific needs of the provinces and their levels of economic and education development.
The education sector plan also seeks to strengthen the efficiency of plan implementation
by supporting activities such as timely procurement planning and monitoring, and sound
land use planning in school construction. The education sector plan will be reviewed and
updated every year based on past implementation experience and in the light of new
information, and policy needs and priorities.

Theme One: Promoting Equitable Access to Primary and Secondary Education

The central objective of this theme is to increase the proportion of children and youth in
the age group 6-16 years completing primary education, and secondary education at least
up to grade 11. There are several demand and supply side strategies to achieve this
objective.

Demand side incentives consist of tuition free primary and secondary education in
government schools; a set of free textbooks and school uniforms for children from grades
1-11; the appointment of school attendance committees in each local school community
to promote school enrolment and attendance; and school health and nutrition programs,
including meals for children from poor communities and sanitation facilities to promote
attendance, especially among girls. The supply side measures include ensuring that a
good quality primary school is available within easy reach of all primary school aged
children, and that a good quality secondary school offering science, arts and management
curriculum streams are available within reasonable travelling distance for all students. In
this context, the GOSL ESDFP II plans to upgrade and develop about 4,000 primary
schools and about 1,000 secondary schools during 2012-2016. Each secondary school
will be linked to about 4 primary schools, so that children from these primary schools
will be able to attend a good secondary school when they complete primary education. In
addition, non-formal education programs and special education programs will be
available for students with special needs who require these alternative types of education.

Theme Two: Improving the Quality of Education

A strategic initiative under this theme is the development of a system for the regular and
continuing assessment of cognitive skills. These National Assessments of Learning
Outcomes will feed back into policy and program development, especially in the context
of the rolling education sector development plan of the central Ministry and the
Provinces. The Faculty of Education of the University of Colombo has established a
National Education Research and Evaluation Centre (NEREC) which will conduct
national assessments of learning outcomes. The TSEP will assist the government to
strengthen the quality of national assessments to international standards. The project will
also help Sri Lanka to participate in international assessments such as TIMSS and PISA.
The information and feedback from these national and international assessments will be
used by policy makers and technocrats in key areas such as curriculum development, pre-
service teacher education, continuing teacher development, and in the production of
educational material including textbooks. The learning assessments will also provide
feedback for Provincial Councils on the performance of the education systems in the
provinces.

The TSEP will pay special attention to the promotion of learning in subjects that are of
central importance for the labor market, such as English, IT, science, mathematics, and
commerce and management. Primary education, which is a necessary foundation for
good quality secondary education, will also be important. In addition, the TSEP will
support an important reform that has been introduced, the Bilingual Education program,
where a range of subjects in the secondary grade cycles are available in the English
medium. These initiatives are designed to expand the pool of secondary school
completers fluent in English, and skilled in IT, science and mathematics, that will provide
the foundation for Sri Lanka to become a knowledge hub with knowledge-based services.
The national assessments of learning outcomes will cover these key subjects including
English, science, mathematics and first language, as well as students following the
Bilingual Education program, to provide feedback and further ideas for development, to
policy makers and education technocrats.

Soft skills, such as habits of industry and discipline, the ability to work in teams, good
communication, creative thinking, problem solving, and leadership, will also be
promoted, including through extra-curricular activities such as cultural events, the arts,
games and sports, and co-curricular activities such as project work and activity based
learning.

The ESDFP II recognizes the importance of teachers for the delivery of quality education
services. The TSEP will specially support an innovative policy measure, School-based
Teacher Development (SBTD). Under this concept teacher development takes place
directly at the school level. SBTD involves the active participation and direct control by
school teachers, school principals, and officials in the school support network, such as in-
service advisors. The activities under SBTD typically include school-based mentoring,
peer learning, peer coaching, individual consultation, and visits to other classroom. The
international experience supports SBTD as a promising reform.

The TSEP will assist the government to improve the school curriculum to better reflect
modern international trends in curriculum practice, effectively disseminate curriculum
goals, values and aims to stakeholders, and orient the education system more strongly to
the world of work. The project will also provide strong implementation support for
curriculum upgrading to schools. The TSEP will help the National Institute of Education
(NIE) to fine tune and upgrade the primary and secondary school curricula. In primary
grades curriculum upgrading activities will include the identification of the curricula
areas that need improvement, appropriate revision of the curricula, and the provision of
training for school teachers on the new primary education curriculum. In secondary
grades, the TSEP will pay special attention to improving the mathematics and science
curricula. The areas in which the mathematics and science curricula need to be diversified
and rationalized will be identified. New curricula and syllabi for mathematics and science
in secondary grades will be developed, and teacher training and textbook production for
the new curricula will be undertaken.

The ESDFP II also seeks to ensure that students are provided with good quality
textbooks. The TSEP will support the government to resolve the problems and issues in
the textbooks (especially languages, history, mathematics, and science) including factual
errors, lack of clarity of subject matter, changes in the context of subject material after
translation, variation and inconsistencies in materials across the three languages (Sinhala,
Tamil and English), grammatical errors and typographical errors. The TSEP will support
promoting discussion and collaboration among textbook evaluation committees in
schools, writers, and resource persons, and conducting research to ascertain whether the
textbooks are aligned with syllabus guidelines and compensate for areas in which the
learning outcomes of students are weak. The TSEP will also assist GOSL to present a
positive picture ethnic and religious diversity and of multi-cultural societies through the
textbooks.

The ESDFP II also seeks to promote social cohesion through the education system, by
increasing interactions between students from different ethnic and religious communities
through educational, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities, and by using the school
curriculum to present a favourable multi-ethnic, multi-cultural societies favourably to
students. The TSEP will support this key initiative for the future social development of
Sri Lanka.

Theme Three: Strengthening Governance and Delivery of Education Services

The main ESDFP II development initiative under this theme is the establishment of a
balanced control model of school based management called the Program for School
Improvement (PSI). The TSEP will support the PSI. Under the PSI school officials such
as principals, teachers and administrators will be joined by stakeholders in the local
school community, such as parents, past pupils and well-wishers, in the management and
administration of schools. The government will provide a grant to schools to improve
education outcomes, particularly to improve student learning and for initiatives to
strengthen the "soft skills" of students, such as team work, an industrious and disciplined
work ethic, good communication skills, leadership and enterprise, that are in demand by
employers. In addition, the schools will be able to raise resources from their stakeholder
communities, such as parents, past pupils associations, and local philanthropists, to
supplement the funds received from the government to develop the schools.
This initiative will build on a successful pilot version of the PSI, which had a positive
impact on the learning outcomes of primary school students [see World Bank-FTI
(2011)]. The model of school-based management that will be supported under the project
will be an expanded version of the PSI, which will also have strategic interventions for
secondary schools. In particular, there will be greater autonomy at the school level to
manage funds, with increased spending thresholds for schools. There will also be greater
accountability. The accounts of school expenditures will be reported publicly. In addition,
at the end of each year there will be a school performance feedback form that will
describe the degree of attainment of the school's performance targets against the school
development plan for that year. The school performance feedback form will be made
available to the public, including parents and students. The information provided in this
form is expected to help improve school level planning and implementation, and
strengthen accountability to stakeholders. Initiatives such as the Child Friendly Schools
(CFS) program will be brought under the PSI framework.

The TSEP will also support GOSL to strengthen the capacity of the education
management system, particularly the provincial and sub-provincial systems at the zone
and division levels. Special emphasis will be given to strengthening the capacity of
divisions and zone to provide academic support to schools. In addition, the planning,
budgeting, administration and monitoring skills of zones will be strengthened. The
central role of school principals is also recognized by policy makers. The TSEP will help
build the leadership and management capacities of school principals. This is particularly
important, given the additional roles that school principals will have to play, as the PSI is
expanded and greater responsibility and power is devolved to schools.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The project will be implemented nationwide and is expected to cover approximately
9,700 schools. It will be implemented in all nine provinces.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Darshani De Silva (Environmental Specialist)
   RazaaK Ghani (Social Development Consultant)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
impacts:

The ISDS has been updated to reflect the new financing received by the AusAID. The
new funds have been provided to continue the activities proposed by the parent project,
i.e the overall design and components of the project has not changed. The Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared in lieu of the project-specific
Environmental Assessment has been updated to reflect the AusAID funds. The amended
ESMF has also been disclosed to public by the client on January 8, 2012 and in Infoshop
on December 18, 2012.

Environmental issues and impacts:

Of the three components that make the project, it is under Theme 1: Promoting Equity of
Access to Basic and Secondary education that will involve providing good quality
primary and secondary schools, provision of school infrastructure such as water,
sanitation, laboratory and other school upgrading that will be required to improve the
quality of education. It is at this level that the application of environmental safeguards
will be relevant.

Considering the scope of the program, it is unlikely that there will be any significant
environmental impacts as a result of the program activities. Since it is possible that the
program will finance the construction of new school buildings, renovations of existing
school buildings or extensions to existing school buildings, there may be the potential for
environmental impacts. Particularly in the North and Eastern Provinces where there may
be a need for construction of new school buildings where damage to existing buildings is
extensive and beyond repair. Thus, debris clearing will be required and will need to
follow strict environmental guidelines in terms of clearance, removal and disposal.
As the exact locations of new school buildings is not known at this stage, and there may
be new construction in new locations; it will trigger some level of environmental impacts
on the selected sites. Possible environmental impacts of the projects would be
construction related impacts, which will trigger OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment
and will be categorized as an environment category B project. Under OP 4.01 on
Environmental Assessment, the requirement to carry out an Environmental Assessment
as part of project preparation can be waived, but for sub-projects with potential adverse
impacts, particularly new construction on new sites, a limited or full-scale environmental
assessment will be done during project implementation and prior to disbursement of
funds for that particular activity.

Considering the scattered nature of construction anticipated under the project, it is not
expected that there will be significant accumulated environmental damage due to project
activities. However site specific environmental and social impacts will occur such as
clearing of site of vegetation/ soil or debris, resource extraction such as sand, soil and
timber, waste generation, noise and dust. In addition, there will be impacts related to
transport of construction material, labour camps, health and safety risks. Once buildings
are completed, operational impacts such as waste generation, disposal of hazardous
chemicals from science laboratories if not properly managed can cause harm to
waterways and surrounding built and natural environment.

On site impacts that will require mitigation measures include the need to obtain resources
such as sand, soil and timber for construction from authorized locations that are licensed
by relevant GOSL authorities. Proper disposal of waste from construction and labour
camps, management of traffic during school hours, ensure safety and risk plans are in
place, and minimize noise and dust generation during school hours. Other on site
mitigation impacts that need to be followed include, locating sanitation facilities away
from ground water sources to minimize contamination and ensuring that dug wells for
drinking water meet National standards. Schools that require science laboratories will
need to follow guidelines in design to ensure that all safety precautions are taken to
provide secure storage for hazardous chemicals and develop a safety and procedure
manual. Schools will need to ensure that chemicals are not washed down drain pipes and
that a plan for proper disposal of laboratory waste is developed. Building construction
and renovation will adhere to the existing building and other applicable codes of practice
in Sri Lanka. Construction that needs to be decommissioned needs to be done in a manner
that minimizes the contamination of waterways, spread of dust and hazardous materials,
and does not pose a risk to students. Thus filling of de-commissioned latrine pits or water
wells that are not being used, proper disposal of waste, landscaping and turfing will be
required.

Social issues and impacts:

Land acquisition will not be financed under the project. Any new construction,
renovation or refurbishment of physical facilities will only take place on existing school
lands. However, in a few unanticipated cases extra land may be needed, and in this case
construction is expected to take place only on public land. All sub-projects will be
screened for land status documentation and the presence of encroachers, competing
claims or other encumbrances.

No involuntary resettlement exceeding more than 200 people for any sub-project will be
funded under the project. In case of minor involuntary resettlement from any sub-project
site, and Abbreviated Resettlement Plan will be prepared, compliant with OP 4.12 and
NIRP, with compensation for assets, livelihood restoration and resettlement.

Since there is no significant intervention in land acquisition or infrastructure
development, the project will not trigger social safeguards policies of the World Bank.
Indeed, the TSEP has the potential to generate substantial positive social benefits. Some
of the anticipated positive social impacts are as follows:

(a) The Promotion of Social Cohesion among Different Ethnic Group. The project will
    support a number of activities that will promote mutual understanding and respect for
    diversity among education communities from different ethnic and religious
    backgrounds.

(b) Gender Equity. The gender dimension of education is extremely important from an
    equity perspective. Sri Lanka has been successful in achieving gender parity in
    primary education, while in secondary education there are slightly more female
    students than male students. Overall, there are about 1,985,000 girls and around
    1,947,000 boys enrolled in students’ general education. The project’s impact,
    therefore, will be distributed equitably between girls and boys.

(c) Regional Equity. There are several measures favorable to regional equity in the
    education and higher education sectors, as well as under the project’s interventions.
    As seen in Annex Seven (Economic Analysis) of the Project Appraisal Document
    there is a high degree of regional equity in access to primary and secondary
    education. The project will increase regional equity by providing additional support to
    the provinces with weaker education outcomes. The TSEP targets, if achieved
    successfully, will reduce regional disparities in key outcomes such as the survival rate
    of students through Grade 11, and access to good quality primary and secondary
    education.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the project area:

Most construction work will be done on existing school premises in urban and semi-
urban settings with only a few instances where new sites may be considered.
Construction activities are not anticipated to cause major environmental and social
impacts considering that these will not be permitted in environmentally sensitive areas
such as wetlands or marshes and any activities that may affect the nearby communities.
No long-term environmental and social impacts are anticipated due to project activities.
For any large scale sub-projects, EIAs/IEEs will be mandatory in accordance with the
National Environmental Act and associated regulations, hence the impacts will be
addressed through the EIA/IEEs studies in the future. Once project sites are known, based
on the type of construction work to be carried out, an Environmental and Social Analysis
will be done, therefore, indirect and/or long term impacts, if any, will be addressed at this
stage. Environmental Management Plans will be developed based on the type of
construction work to be conducted, in order to ensure that impacts to the environment are
minimized and any indirect social impacts are avoided.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or
minimize adverse impacts.

Theme 1 of the project, which will trigger the application of environmental and social
safeguards, is aimed at providing access to education for all children and youth aged 6-16
years to complete 11 years of education. This will involve strengthening the quality of
secondary and primary schools especially in lagging regions. Given the importance of
improving the education system in the country, the only alternative that has been taken
into consideration is improving the existing education institutions as opposed to building
new institutions. Largely on-site mitigable environmental impacts are anticipated from
the project activities/ Consideration of alternative options on the basis of environmental
and social concerns will be done on a case by case basis once site locations are known for
construction activities.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
described.

At this point in time, exact locations and building size are unknown. However, once site
locations and type of construction required for each school is known by the Ministry of
Education (MOE) and Provincial Ministries of Education, each selected school will be
required to complete an environmental checklist and submit building plans. Therefore,
the burrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF), based on the ESMF of Education Sector Development Grant (ESDG) concluded
recently and taking lessons learned from implementing the ESDG ESMF.

At the Provincial level environmental and social checklists will be prepared by the
School Development Committee (SDC) with guidance from the Divisional Engineer,
Zonal Education office or School Works Department. Based on the completed checklist
and type of construction work required, the provincial engineers will be responsible
prepare an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and if necessary Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP). At the National level, the MOE will be responsible for the preparation of
checklists, EMPs and RAPs. The project has provisions to hire consultants to prepare
safeguards documents necessary for implementation. All building construction and
renovations will adhere to the existing building and other applicable codes of practice in
Sri Lanka. Building contractors will be required to adhere to Institute for Construction
Training and Development (ICTAD) specified codes of practice that will be included in
building contracts prior to construction work commence.
The MOE and Finance Commission (FC) will submit to IDA for review and clearance
from each of the National Level and Provinces their first five Environmental Checklists,
EMPs and RAPs (where applicable) for each seven categories of construction work
identified in the ESMF, except for new schools that will be built prior to funding of civil
works. For all new schools to be constructed on new sites (which is unlikely within the
current scope of the project), the MOE or FC will submit all Environmental Checklists,
EMPs including site clearance from the Central Environmental Authority or responsible
agency and RAPs (where applicable) followed by clearance from IDA. The first
contractual documents related to all categories of construction work detailed in the ESMF
will be submitted to IDA for review and clearance.

The MOE will be responsible to ensure the implementation and monitoring of the ESMF
in national schools and other central government education agencies. The PCs will be
responsible to ensure the implementation and monitoring of the ESMF in provincial
schools and other provincial education agencies, under the supervision of the FC. The
overall ESDFP II activities will be monitored by the CEA, which has staff located in
Divisional Secretariats in the country as per the requirements of NEA. The MOE and
Provincial Education Ministries will identify qualified staff to ensure environmental and
social safeguards compliance as per the ESMF including facilitating and guiding the
preparation of checklists, EMPs and EIAs, ensure bid documents and contractual
agreements have relevant clauses and sections on environmental and social requirements,
ensure constructions designs are in compliance with the ESMF, monitor the
implementation of EMPs and RAPs, maintaining documentation and reporting to the
MOE and/or FC on a regular basis.

An Environmental Management Supervision Compliance Table that systematically
records the monitoring of EMP implementation during the construction period will be
maintained by the MOE and Ministries of Provincial Education. Consolidated
environmental compliance reports will be submitted to IDA on a bi-annual basis together
with the Environmental Management Supervision Compliance Tables by the MOE and
FC.

Grievance Redressal Mechanism: The project will adopt a grievance redressal mechanism
(GRM) that will be transparent, objective and unbiased and will take both grievances
environmental and social into consideration. The GRM will operate at two levels. The
procedure at the first level will seek to resolve an issue quickly, amicably, and
transparently out of courts in order to facilitate activities to move forward. The School
Development Committees (SDCs) will act as the first tier of responding to grievances
that may arise due to school level development activities. The SDCs have representatives
from the schools, and from the local communities. The local community representatives
will be impartial third parties in the grievance procedure. The next tier of the GRM will
be more official, and involve the relevant legal agencies. Environment related grievances
could be made to the Central Environment Authority, which has officials at district level.
Complaints related to social issues could be brought to the notice of the legal authorities.
Grievances will all be entered in a dedicated database, regularly updated with date of
receipt of grievance, type of grievance, date of resolution, and information of rejection or
acceptance of grievance. The GRM will be regularly be monitored, as it provides
important feedback on the functioning of the project. The GRM will be available for
review by the MOE and the FC, and IDA implementation review missions and other
interested persons and entities.

The policy and regulatory framework in Sri Lanka provides an adequate basis for the
mitigation of potential adverse environmental impacts from development projects. The
Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) established the Central Environmental Authority
(CEA) in 1982 as the environmental regulatory agency instituted under the National
Environmental Act (NEA). Under the NEA, all development projects that fall into a
prescribed category is required to go through a comprehensive environmental screening
and planning process (EIA/IEE). The CEA has almost two decades of experience in
implementing the EIA system and has gathered the necessary technical expertise to
appraise development proposals for environmental sustainability. However, it is not
anticipated that the proposed sub-projects under this project will fall into the prescribed
category. In the event that sub-projects do fall into the prescribed category or are located
near environmentally sensitive areas, then a full scale EIA will be required to obtain
clearance from the CEA and IDA prior to commencing any activities on these sites.

Although the OP 4.12 has not been triggered, in case of less than 200 Project Affected
People (PAPs), the an abbreviated Resettlement Framework has been provided in the
ESMF, which the TSEP will follow in order to restore housing and issue economic
compensation for loss of land and livelihood through a consultative and mutually
agreeable process where applicable.

As part of project monitoring and evaluation a Social Safeguards Audit will be carried
out for the annual review of the project each year. This audit should seek to benchmark
the implementation of social safeguards processes over the year, including the need for
and extent of land acquisitions and cultural properties. The consultant should visit
selected schools (sample) and meet beneficiary student population and participating
community groups to identify the social impacts and the inclusion of beneficiary groups
in the project implantation.

In terms of the capacity of the MOE, FC and Provincial Education Ministries, sufficient
capacity has already been built through the implementation of the ESDG. Adequate
knowledge regarding World Bank procedures already exists, and further training will be
provided to strengthen existing capacity. It is also acknowledged that with staff turnover
new staff who will be involved in the TSEP will need training. Therefore, to ensure that
new staff are adequately equipped, training programs will be planned and conducted
during project implementation as required. Where temporary expertise is necessary to
handle any safeguards issues due to the project that cannot be dealt by the existing project
staff, the implementing agencies will recruit consultants to assist to resolve such issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders will include a) local population in surrounding area, b) school teachers,
students, school development committees (SDCs) involved in identifying school
requirements, c) administrators/regulators at the district/divisional/provincial level
required to obtain permits and approvals, d) any other national level agency under whose
jurisdiction project activities may fall (E.g. Urban Development Authority, Coast
Conservation Department, National Water Supply and Drainage Board, Local Authorities
such as Municipal, Urban Councils and Pradeshiya Sabhas etc.).

The Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for this project has
been shared by the MOE and FC with concerned non-governmental organizations, civil
society and potential affectees. The details of the consultations have been provided as
part of the ESMF. ESMF has been re-disclosed on January 8, 2013 and has been made
available at the World Bank’s InfoShop on December 18, 2012. The ESMF has been
translated to Tamil and Sinhala and has been distributed to all participating institutions.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  12/14/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/08/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               12/18/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
  credit/loan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                             Date
Task Team Leader:                                Harsha Aturupane                01/08/2013
Environmental Specialist:                        Darshani De Silva               01/08/2013
Social Development Specialist                    Razaak Ghani                    01/08/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development
Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards                            Sanjay Srivastava                  01/14.2013
Coordinator:
  Comments: Cleared by the RSA
Sector Manager:                                Amit Dar                           01/08/2013
  Comments: Cleared
