                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                         Report No.: 84220

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         21-Jan-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    Sri Lanka             Project ID:              P146314
 Project Name:               Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)
 Task Team Leader:           Marc Forni
 Estimated Board Date:       27-Mar-2014
 Managing Unit:              SASDC
 Sector(s):                  General finance sector (20%), General public administration sector
                             (20%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30% ),
                             Flood protection (30%)
 Theme(s):                   Natural disaster management (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00            No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       110.00                  Total Bank Financing:     110.00
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                               110.00
     Total                                                                                     110.00
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred       Yes
 project?


 2. Project Development Objective(s)

 The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce the vulnerability of exposed people
 and assets to climate risk and to improve Government’s capacity to respond effectively to disasters.
3. Project Description
The main aim is to help Sri Lanka begin a process that would build a more climate-resilient economy.
With rapid economic progress in recent times, increased assets are at risk to increasingly variable
hydrometeorological events. Ensuring disaster and climate resilient development will ensure continued
growth is sustainable.

Given the current lack of understanding of the multisectoral impacts of climate change, flood/drought
modeling and scenario analysis work is required. Once completed a large climate resilience investment
program would be identified and financed through multiple funding sources. Key line ministries would
be brought together in the assessment of risks or impacts on particular sectors and an investment road
map would be developed.

While there is a lack of understanding of comprehensive climate and disaster risk, there are urgent flood
mitigation investments required to ensure the short-term integrity of irrigation and flood control
infrastructure. Given the impacts of floods of the eastern province in recent years, urgent investment is
required to improve flood control systems.

To address long-term capital development needs and short-term flood mitigation requirements, the
project will comprise the following four components.

Component 1: Development of Basin Investment Plans (US$13 million). The objective is to identify
over US$1 billion of investments in the form of basin investment plans. These investment plans will be
informed by a robust understanding of climate risks. Government engineers and experts will be
supported to carry out comprehensive flood and drought modeling and assessment of the underlying
causes of flood and drought. These models will take into account climate risks such as expected
extremes of water scarcity and excess, increase in inter-annual and intra- seasonal variability of
monsoons, increase in duration of droughts, and depletion of ground water resources, which are all
expected to adversely affect livelihoods and human lives in the near future.

To comprehensively assess the climate risks and identify investments, the technical capacity of the
Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources Management (MIWRM) will be strengthened. In particular,
the growing Special Projects Unit (SPU) will benefit from technology transfer and technical assistance.
In the medium term, the SPU will bring in additional sectoral experts and will evolve into a Climate
Resilience Planning Unit. The analytical work will be undertaken by Government engineers, guided by
international experts as required to build capacity and to promote a similar approach across the country
in the coming years. Investments to be financed include: i) acquisition of a digital elevation model; ii)
flood and drought risk modeling; and, iii) identification of basin investment programs.

Component 2: Increasing climate resilience of infrastructure (US$90 million). The objective is to
implement urgent climate risk mitigation investments that have been identified and prioritized by the
GoSL. Investments will be made in the following areas: i) flood mitigation; ii) transport continuity; and
iii) school protection, as detailed below.

Flood risk mitigation (US$47 million): Investments will focus primarily, on rehabilitating infrastructure
damage by recent floods or particularly at risk to future floods. Approximately 60 percent of investments
can begin immediately to reduce flood risk, while 40 percent of the investments will require detailed
localized modeling to ensure interventions consider the inter-related flood risk of the project areas.
These interventions have been determined based on historical losses and field survey assessment by
Irrigation Department (ID) and Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka (MASL). Such an approach is
expected to ensure that mitigation interventions are sustainable and lead to resilient infrastructure.
Investments will not involve construction of new infrastructure, but instead critical reinforcement to
existing structures to withstand future floods. All rehabilitation works under this component are on
canals and bunds downstream of dams. The interventions will improve carrying capacity of canals and
reduce flooding due to overtopping of flood bunds but will neither improve nor undermine safety of
dams as no head-work or any part of an existing dam will be retrofitted under this project.

Transport Continuity (US$35 million): The transport investments aim to reduce direct loss to transport
infrastructure, indirect economic losses due to detours, and increase the effectiveness of post disaster
response. Rapid expansion of the road network development has led to an increase in landslides while
low bridges constructed in flood plains continue to be flooded on regular basins. To mitigate landslide
risk, investments will focus on road infrastructure on the Colombo – Ratnapura – Wellawaya –
Batticaloa, Peradeniya - Chenkaladi, Kegalle - Karawanella, Kandy - Padiyatalawa, Gampola -
Nawalapitiya, Tennekumbura - Ragala roads. A total of about 3kms of unstable, high risk road side
slopes will be augmented to improve the corridor's resilience to landslides triggered by heavy rains. To
mitigate the flood risk to low lying bridges, nine key vulnerable river crossings of total stretch of about
200m will also be strengthened. This will include raising and lengthening of bridges for sufficient water
flow capacity in place of existing narrow bridges or causeways.

School protection (US$8 million): Investments will be made to improve slope stability and drainage
capacity of 18 schools that serve about 30,000 students and have been identified as highly vulnerable to
landslides. Currently, given the high landslide risk, these schools close during heavy rainfall periods.
Improvements to slope stability will promote education continuity as schools will not need to close and
also will protect the residents of these hill slopes from potential landslides.

Component 3: Project Implementation (US$5 million). The project will be implemented through the
current Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Dam Safety and Water Resources Planning project
(DSWRPP) under the MIWRM. Given that this project more than doubles the amount of funds
executed through the PMU, resources will be required to increase staffing and provide support to
manage the project. The PMU will have an additional team of accountants, procurement and
administration staff. Additional equipment, software and logistics will be required to strengthen the
DSWRPP team. In addition, implementing agencies (IAs) will also require support to execute the
project.

Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$2 million) : These funds are
available to help government respond to adverse natural event that causes disasters. The Government
may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to partially cover emergency response and recovery
costs.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project covers Eastern, Uva, Central, North Central, North Western and Western Provinces (15
districts) that gets impacts by floods. It will also focus on nine river basins: Mahaweli river, Kelani
River, Kala Oya, Attanagalu Oya, Maha Oya, Deduru Oya, Gin Ganga, Nilwala ganga and Kirindi Oya.
These areas will cover sites from central massif in the wet and intermediate zones, lowlands of wet,
intermediate and dry zones and coastal plain.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera ( SASDS )
Darshani De Silva ( SASDI )
6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01   Yes          The project overall is environmentally
                                                   beneficial since the development
                                                   objectives of the project is to increase the
                                                   understanding of flood risk and mitigate
                                                   basin-level flood risks where ensuring
                                                   asset management and public safety,
                                                   reducing water induced hazards and
                                                   enhance the effectiveness of
                                                   infrastructure investments in the country.
                                                   However, the rehabilitation work
                                                   proposed will require environmental and
                                                   social due diligence to be in place and the
                                                   flood risk planning process.

                                                   Within this context, an Environmental
                                                   Assessment and Management
                                                   Framework (EAMF) and Social
                                                   Management Framework (SMF) will be
                                                   prepared prior to appraisal which will
                                                   outline the processes and serve as a
                                                   guideline to undertake environmental
                                                   assessments (EAs) and social
                                                   assessments (SAs) and/or environmental
                                                   management plans (EMPs) and
                                                   resettlement action plans (RAPs) as
                                                   required. Sub-project specific EAs, SAs,
                                                   EMPs and/or RAPs will be undertaken
                                                   for all activities that will be identified
                                                   prior to appraisal. Safeguards process to
                                                   be followed as per the OP/BP 10.00 will
                                                   be also included as part of the framework
                                                   for any contingent emergency response
                                                   that may likely to be supported during the
                                                   project implementation period.

                                                   The proposed SEAs will be conducted to
                                                   cover the basin investment plans that will
                                                   be developed for future investments. This
                                                   will be undertaken as a need beyond the
                                                   current project’s physical investments
                                                   that will be managed through the EAMF.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           Yes          As many of the structured to be
                                                   rehabilitated will be some extent
                                                   associated with natural habitats such as
                                                   lagoons, rivers, mangrove habitats, etc.
                                                   this policy is triggered. The due diligence
                                                   requirements will be covered under the
                                                   EAMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No    No physical investments will take place
                                               in forested areas. Investments will be in
                                               human populated locations and will be
                                               made to existing infrastructure. All
                                               activities within forest areas will be
                                               included as part of the negative list.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No    There are no planned activities that would
                                               require pest management or lead to the
                                               increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   Given the project areas consist of number
                                               of historical sites and the nature and
                                               extent of impacts of proposed repair and
                                               rehabilitation is unknown at this point of
                                               time, it is possible that ‘chance finds’ at
                                               work sites is a likely impact that would
                                               have to be managed. Therefore, all
                                               subprojects identified prior to appraisal
                                               will be assessed for likely impacts during
                                               the project preparation. It is proposed that
                                               sub-projects that may have significant
                                               negative impacts on physical cultural
                                               resources should be included in the
                                               negative list and chance find procedures
                                               applicable during implementation will be
                                               incorporated in the EAMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No    There is no indigenous population in the
                                               project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes   As per the project description, investment
                                               activities are likely to be confined only to
                                               repairs and rehabilitation to the existing
                                               structures.

                                               Although the project does not envisage
                                               major acquisition of land, some
                                               interventions have been identified as
                                               requiring possible acquisition of land. In
                                               addition to the impacts on livelihoods, it
                                               is possible that ICRP sub-projects may
                                               also adversely affect the assets of people
                                               occupying these lands. As a result, a
                                               decision has been made to trigger the
                                               involuntary resettlement policy.

                                               All subprojects identified for investment
                                               prior to appraisal will be assessed during
                                               project preparation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No    Physical investments currently identified
                                               under component 2 will not be made on
                                                                dam structures. All investments will be
                                                                made downstream of dams to improve
                                                                conveyance capacity of canals and
                                                                strengthen flood bunds and will not affect
                                                                the safety of dams in any way.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                    Sri Lanka is an island country; hence
7.50                                                            issue of international waterways is not
                                                                applicable.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               There are no disputed areas in Sri Lanka.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Safeguards

Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) - The environmental impacts of the proposed rehabilitation and
reinforcement work are not expected to be of a serious nature as the work does not involve the
construction of new structure. However, some of the project activities such as construction work are
likely to generate temporary environmental impacts that will require to be managed. Other activities
such as sourcing construction material can have significant and irreversible impacts if not properly
managed. Therefore, the project is categorized as B.

From flood mitigation point of view, two categories of the affected area are relevant for the application
of environmental safeguards. The first category includes rural areas which require physical
rehabilitation mostly to minimize damage to agricultural fields. The second category includes urban
areas which require protection from rehabilitation to minimize human life losses and damage to
infrastructure and businesses. Remedial works proposed for flood and drought mitigation would include
one or more of the following; (i) increase downstream conveyance by clearing canals; (ii) repair of flood
bunds (iii) repair of diversion structures. For school land slide hazard mitigation, the works include (i)
slope stabilization and (ii) enhancing of the landslide warning system. For roads and bridges, the works
include (i) slope stabilization and (ii) replacement of causeways.

Remedial works for flood mitigation such as flood bund rehabilitation may cause serious environmental
issues off-site where resource extraction would take place. Some of the work involved in strengthening
the bund slopes would require large amounts of sand, soil and rock to be extracted from one or more
places and brought to the construction site. The borrow areas, if not properly identified and managed
(subsequent to extraction) could have serious environmental repercussions. Selection of sites for
resource extraction should be made after careful evaluation of resource availability within the areas
concerned and in conformity with the Government regulations for designation of such sites. The project
would not support the use of any borrow material taken from sites within protected areas and forest
reserves under the Flora and Fauna Ordinance and Forest Ordinance of Sri Lanka.

The construction activities would result in removal of large quantities of topsoil and in the generation of
concrete debris and other construction wastes. In addition, wastes would be generated from worker
camps. The project should explore options for re-using material such as soil and for the careful disposal
of other waste material. Any air and water pollution at the sites would be temporary and localized,
provided that adequate precautions are taken to manage such issues. If downstream rehabilitation work
requires a temporary diversion of the flow, there might be impacts on its aquatic life in the surrounding
area. However, seasonal fluctuations in the water levels in the dry zone are a natural phenomenon to
which aquatic life is adapted.

Investment in upgrading and/or rehabilitating downstream hydraulic structures under this project would
not yield the anticipated long term benefits unless there is proper management of the watersheds in the
catchment areas. Increased pressure on upland areas above dams is a common phenomenon caused by
the resettlement of people from the inundated areas and by uncontrolled influx of people to the
watershed. On site environmental deterioration as well as a decrease in water quality and an increase in
sedimentation rates in the reservoir result from clearing forest land for agriculture, grazing pressures,
use of agricultural chemicals and illegal timber felling for commercial purposes. These will require
strategic level of assessment and coordination.

The other important issue that will likely to arise is due to new structures that will be built for landslide
mitigation and stability of those structures. Care should be given to ensure such structures are not
curtailing movement of ecologically important biodiversity and safety of such structures both during
and after construction.

Natural habitats (OP 4.04) - As many of the structures to be rehabilitated will be some extent associated
with natural habitats such as lagoons, rivers, mangrove habitats, marshes, etc. this policy is triggered.
Care should be taken to ensure adequate conservation of critical biodiversity and to ensure the
ecological functions of these areas are not negatively impacted.

Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) - Certain structures in ancient irrigation structures such as
sluices, could be of high archaeological significance. If they are replaced, old structures may need to be
preserved as ‘cultural property’. In addition, there are possibilities that rehabilitation work may be
carried out close to cultural sites. Any activities that would likely to have significant impacts to physical
cultural resources will not be financed by the project.

Social Safeguards

Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) - Selection of sites for remedial works was based on an assessment
of the nature and extent of the risk to public safety. This risk analysis considered the population,
infrastructure and agricultural area at risk in the event of a disaster.

Under Component 2 it is likely that irrigation flows might have to be stopped for prolonged periods to
conduct detailed technical investigations and rehabilitation works. This could impact livelihoods of
some downstream users adversely. The suspension of water could prevent farmers from growing paddy.
Although the farmers would have to forego paddy cultivation, they could grow other field crops, such as
maize, cowpea, green gram and ground nuts, using residual moisture and limited rainfall during the Yala
season and under rain-fed condition in Maha (wet) season. However, rainfed farming of non-paddy
crops would be an entirely new practice to some farmers, because it requires different crop husbandry
practices and probably higher wage labor inputs. Thus, despite this potential alternative cropping
possibility, it is felt that the livelihoods for the following users could be affected adversely: (i) farmers
who live down steam and draw water for cultivating paddy; and (ii) landless laborers earning wages
from agricultural operations in the command area. In addition, in a few cases, water supplies for
domestic purposes (bathing, washing, and cooking) could also be affected.

Support to roads and bridges may also displace people who may be temporarily residing on road sides or
closer to bridges, and carry out their livelihood activities. In such cases, temporary sites should be
provided for such people to continue their livelihoods.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Once the Investment Plan has been developed for the 9 selected river basins, similar type of activities
proposed under this project in much larger scale including new construction are anticipated in the future.
As per the overall project design such investment on long-term will be beneficial both environmentally
and socially, as the investment on climate resilience will reduce potential environmental risks, while
ensuring protection for the lives and livelihoods of people.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Due to relatively fast preparation period and short implementation period of the project, the sites and
interventions were specifically selected to avoid, to the greatest extent possible, any adverse impacts to
the environment and people. Therefore, only rehabilitation of existing infrastructure was selected.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The composite environmental clearance process in Sri Lanka, in principle, is consistent with World
Bank environmental policies and public disclosure requirements. The exception being the screening
criteria adopted in the process under the National Environmental Act and North Western Province
Environmental Statute, where project thresholds are used to determine the type of clearance required
and the content of public consultation. However, under Coast Conservation Act, the decision of the
environmental requirements are done indiscretion of the Director General of Coast Conservation
Department and do not require thresholds in many cases. All activities under the proposed project will
be subjected to the environmental and social clearance process regardless of the project threshold, prior
to disbursement of funds.

The Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources Management (MIWRM) has a track record in
implementing Bank projects. The Project Management Unit (PMU) currently in place for a Bank
financed project has the core staff including staff to oversee the safeguards. This PMU has been
managing the Bank financed Dam Safety and Water Resources Planning Project. This project has been
ongoing since 2009, with satisfactory compliance to social and environmental issues. Therefore, it is
anticipated that the PMU will maintain the current capacity to ensure safeguard compliance, with
provisions to include more as required. To improve the capacity of the borrower to manage safeguard
issues associated with additional lending activities, the project will mobilize additional staff and build
the capacity, systems and procedures based on the experience implementing Bank projects to meet the
national standards and World Bank requirements. Additional capacity will also be put in place within the
different implementing agencies who will be leading the technical aspects of the project, which are
closely linked to decisions on safeguards.

An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) and Social Management
Framework (SMF) have been prepared that provides the initial assessment of project activities and
mitigation measures and would also serve as a template to guide the safeguards process during the
project implementation. The EAMF and SMF will primarily include an assessment of generic issues for
policy and legislative requirements, environmental risks, mitigation measures and institutional
arrangements for conducting environmental and social assessments, EMP and RAP implementation,
monitoring and reporting. Consultations are expected to be conducted while undertaking site-specific
assessments. Physical interventions will warrant EAs and/or EMPs as they would be associated with a
number of potential environmental impacts, both on site and off site. The scope of the EA for each
project site would vary, depending on the type of intervention planned and the site characteristics. The
project plans to prepare the site-specific EAs/SAs/EMPs/RAPs for sample of interventions prior to
appraisal. The project would where necessary seek technical assistance from the Department of
Archaeology (DOA) and undertake an Archaeological Impact Assessment if historically significant
structures are to be rehabilitated. Subsequently, the DOA would make an implementation action plan, as
deemed appropriate. Chance finds would also be subject to enquiry and technical assistance from the
DOA. The chance find procedures will be included in the EAMF. All safeguards compliance
requirements needed during construction will be included as part of the contract documents. As part of
the Natural habitat policy requirements, the EAs/EMPs will ensure that the site is subjected to a review
that will identify the significance of the key habitats against the national and global significant
biodiversity.

The investment plan that will be prepared after concluding drought and flood risk modeling will be
required to undergo strategic environmental assessment to help with the planning process. All physical
activities financed under Component 2 of the project would be subjected to a subproject specific EA and
SA, and the subsequent preparation of an EMP and RAP for each intervention. Although the GOSL’s
clearance procedure is adequate fairly reliable, as many of the investments do not fall within the
regulations IDA will still review all safeguard documents prepared for all relevant activities under the
project and provide necessary concurrence for the approval of disbursements of funds.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders of the flood and drought component of the project would be (i) Users of water and
residents downstream of dams. In rural areas these would be farmers and farmer organizations and
federations, laborers earning wage from agricultural operations, and households using water for
domestic purposes; In Urban areas, the main stakeholders would be residents of flood prone areas. Key
stakeholders for the landslide mitigation component are the students, staff and the people in the vicinity
of the schools. The stakeholders for the road and bridge rehabilitation component are people with in
10km of the rehabilitated section, as well as the road users.

The project implementers include: (i) Managers or engineers at the operational level - chiefly, officers of
the ID, MASL, RDA, NBRO; (ii) Administrators and regulators such as the offices of Divisional
Secretary, Government Agents; (iii) Water resources decision makers, at the strategic level - Ministries
of Irrigation and Water Management, Agriculture, Finance and Planning, Disaster Management Centre,
and Wildlife Conservation, who formulate draft policies and programs and allocate resources; and (iv)
policy makers, political functionaries, scientific and extension agencies who play a major role in
promoting public safety and water resources development and planning. Systematic and extensive
consultations with all the key stakeholders will be conducted as part of the social assessments and a
framework for continuing consultations during implementation has also been proposed in the project.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]         No [   ]   NA [   ]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes [    ]    No [ X ] NA [     ]
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]         No [   ]   NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [ X ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [ X ]     No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include      Yes [ X ]     No [   ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with        Yes [ X ]     No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Marc S. Forni
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: NA                                       Date:
Sector Manager:                 Name: Bernice van Bronkhorst                Date: 1/23/2014
