                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                               Report No.: AC6215


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/26/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Sri Lanka                          Project ID: P124091
Project Name: SL: WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Henry K Bagazonzya
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 27, 2011     Estimated Board Date: April 29, 2011
Managing Unit: SASFP                        Lending Instrument: Learning and
                                            Innovation Loan
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (50%);General finance sector (50%)
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (50%);Other financial and private sector
development (30%);Global food crisis response (20%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                      0.00
        Global Food Crisis Response Program                           6.90
                                                                      6.90


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The main objective of the pilot project is to facilitate access to finance and quality storage by
farmers during the whole cycle of production through an electronic and negotiable financial
instrument through warehouse receipt financing.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
(a)    Establishment /renovation of 12 warehouses ---$ 3.8 million. Renovating initially of 12
warehouses in specific locations for specific crops especially in the north and east provinces that
have been under conflict. These warehouses would be located in locations that have a critical
amount of crops (grains/pulses) that need to be stored for a short period (3 months) before they
can go on the market. It is during these three months that there is a glut and when the farmers get
very low prices for these crops. This would stabilize market prices in this region, lead to
increased production for the market thus commercializing their operations and thereby ensuring
food security, increased nutrition and incomes.

 (b) Product Development (insurance and performance guarantees) -- 1.5million: Develop
together with insurance companies an insurance guarantee fund to back the ACWRS
(Agricultural Commodity Warehouse Receipt System) and develop a business plan for self-
sustainability of the ACWRS. This component will also support the development of insurance
products to mitigate weather risks and for high value livestock for farmers. The component
would pilot a number of crop and livestock products and would develop other agricultural risk
mitigation mechanism and products, etc. For warehouse receipts to be accepted by buyers,
sellers, and Banks, there must be a performance guarantee for warehouses. This guarantee
provides compensation if stored goods do not match what is specified by the receipt, either due
to negligence or fraud by the warehouse. Without such guarantees farmers and traders will be
reluctant to store crops and banks will be unwilling to accept receipts as collateral for financing.
Performance guarantees are usually in the form of insurance bonds or letters of credit

 (c) Capacity Building ,Technical Assistance and awareness Creation--$0.45 million:
 These funds will support training, capacity enhancement and TA to village organizations and
commercial operators including banks and the commodity marketing players, input suppliers,
etc. to develop beneficial partnerships to both parties. Identification of stakeholder awareness
needs, development of promotional materials, dissemination of the necessary information
through electronic and media, including promotional workshops will be done.

 (d) Monitoring and Evaluation--$ 0.25 million: This will involve the establishment of a
baseline survey, annual field based monitoring, impact assessments, etc

  (e) Project Management ---$ 0.5 million: This component will support the establishment of
warehouses, delivery of training and TA. This would include international and domestic
technical assistance, training, communications and auditing, etc. There is an already existing PIU
that is implementing the World Bank#s Small and Medium Enterprise Development facility
(SMEDeF) Project. This intervention will be managed by the same unit, since the intervention
directly contributes to the objectives of SMEDeF project and there is a direct link between the
two. The same PIU will ensure coordination and judicious use of resources.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed activities will be initially piloted in the East (Ampara) and another location, not yet
known, in other parts of the country that were affected by the conflict.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Finance and Planning, Government of Sri
Lanka, will be managed by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) set up for the Bank financed
SMEDeF project. The PIU currently has Environmental and Social Officers who will also be
responsible for safeguards compliance requirements of this project.

 Based on the current analysis, only the component (a) described above will have potentially
significant environmental issues, which will need to be mitigated. It is proposed that project will
provide finances to existing government warehouses to be renovated and subsequently leased to
private sector. PIU will be responsible to ensure environmental due diligence in renovating of
warehouses and private sector will be responsible for operationalizing them within acceptable
conditions of environment, health and safety levels required for such buildings. However, during
project preparation, the sites of the warehouses will not be known and therefore PIU will be
required to prepare a simple Environmental Management Framework that will guide the
renovation process and operationalizing of the warehouses.

 There are no social safeguards triggered under the project, which will not fund any land
acquisition or involuntary resettlement. Component (a) above only comprises the renovation of
existing warehouses or establishment of warehouses in existing government buildings. Hence, no
negative social impact is expected from this activity, and the other components do not involve
any social safeguards policies either.

 The project is categorized as category B.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS)
   Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes        No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
     The project will have potentially significant environmental issues, which will need to be
mitigated related to construction/renovation and operations and maintenance. Therefore, OP 4.01
is triggered.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
     The construction/renovation activities will be done on existing government land identified
for development and will not use natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
     The construction/renovation activities will be done on existing government land identified
for development and will not use forests.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                     X
     Since the warehouses are meant for food storage, some emphasis will have to be made to
ensure that design, operations and maintenance focus on pest management. However, it will be
decided during the appraisal based on the scale of such interventions the necessity to trigger this
OP
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
     The construction/renovation activities will be done on existing government land identified
for development and will not use sites with cultural resoruces
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
     IPs are not present in the areas proposed
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                            X
     Project will not fund any land acquisition or involuntary resettlement
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   07/01/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The simple EMF will be prepared by July 1, 2011

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Henry K Bagazonzya                                          05/24/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Sanjay Srivastava                                           06/21/2011
      Comments: cleared.
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Ivan Rossignol                                              06/24/2011
      Comments: Cleared.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
