                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/10/2011                                    Report No.: AC6404
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Sri Lanka                           Project ID: P124091
Project Name: SL: WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS FINANCING PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Henry K Bagazonzya
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 12,      Estimated Board Date: November 23, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: SASFP                         Lending Instrument: Learning and
                                             Innovation Loan
Sector: General finance sector (50%);SME Finance (25%);Microfinance (25%)
Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%);Other Financial Sector
Development (30%);Global food crisis response (20%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     0.00
         Global Food Crisis Response Program                          6.90
                                                                      6.90
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) of the pilot Warehouse Receipts
(WHR) Project is to facilitate access to finance and quality storage by farmers during the
whole cycle of production through an electronic and negotiable instrument through
warehouse receipt financing.

3. Project Description
Warehouse Receipts financing facilitates the dual purpose of providing a value chain
service to producers through warehousing, and access to credit simultaneously against
stored produce. Hence, the proposed project aims to increase agricultural productivity
and livelihoods in constrained areas of Sri Lanka by strengthening key aspects impacting
agricultural production and training and capacity building of farmers# groups and other
key stakeholders. Together these constitute a pilot approach to addressing the problem of
low productivity growth, appropriate access to financial services, and enforcement of
good agricultural practices to ensure good quality produce that can fetch good practices
after storage. Success achieved in this regard can be scaled up nationally.
 Component 1: Establishment of Warehouses (US$ 4.5 million): This component will
support the PDO by providing farmers with access to storage facilities for critical crops
over a short period of three months in select project areas in the north and east as well as
other areas of the country with surplus grain or pulses. This empowers the farmers to be
able to sell their products at a better market price by holding until off peak, while having
funds to meet their immediate debts and even to buy inputs for the next season.
Warehouses thus (a) provide establishment and maintenance of high standard, insured,
certified and supervised warehouse storage facilities, for food security, but also (b)
provide higher profits for farmers, or others storing their goods in these warehouses in
order to sell the goods during lean periods rather than during the harvest.

  Component 2: Product Development through Insurance & Performance Guarantees
  (US$ 0.80million): The second component will develop insurance products to back the
Agricultural Commodity Warehouse Receipts System (ACWRS) and to mitigate weather
risks for high value agricultural products and livestock for farmers. The component
would pilot a number of crop and livestock products and would develop other agricultural
risk mitigation mechanism and products. For warehouse receipts to be accepted by
buyers, sellers, and banks, there must also be a an insurance arrangement that provides
compensation if stored goods do not match what is specified by the receipt, either due to
negligence or fraud by the warehouse. Without such an insurance regime farmers and
traders will be reluctant to store crops and banks will be unwilling to accept receipts as
collateral for financing.

 Component 3: Capacity Building, Technical Assistance (T.A.) and Awareness Creation
(US$ 0.45 million): This component will support the PDO by supporting training and
knowledge dissemination of the warehouse receipts mechanism amongst stakeholders.
The Technical Assistance and Capacity Building elements have been designed to support
the proposed project as well as serve the larger capacity building needs of the sector and
the country in the focus areas. These funds will support training, capacity enhancement
and TA to village organizations and commercial operators including banks and the
commodity marketing players, input suppliers, etc. to develop beneficial partnerships to
both parties. Identification of stakeholder awareness needs, development of promotional
materials, dissemination of the necessary information through electronic and media,
including promotional workshops will be done.

 Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 0.25): This component will support the
carrying out of the baselines, establishment of annual field based monitoring mechanisms
and impact assessments.

 Component 5 : Project Management (US $0.50 million): This component will support
the realization of the PDO by coordinating project planning, implementation and
monitoring and evaluation, in line with the relevant fiduciary and safeguards standards.
This ensures that (i) interventions undertaken under the project are appropriately planned,
coordinated and aligned with project design and development objectives; (ii)
implementation arrangements and activities are in line with relevant fiduciary and
safeguards policies, procedures and standards; and (iii) there is due monitoring, oversight
and reporting of project implementation and the resulting outputs and outcomes. This
component will finance (i) additional staff to support the operation of the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) in Colombo; (ii) provide specialized support services relating
to key activities such as independent external M&E, external audit, financial accounting
and procurement; and (iii) fund the training of staff involved in project implementation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is open to the entire country, particularly for areas where excess agriculture
production is taking place without adequate warehouse facilities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Mohamed Ghani Razzak (WBIKE)
   Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Project will support the renovation and establishment of new warehouses focused on
North and East of Sri Lanka. The capacities of the new warehouses are yet to be
determined. The warehouse receipt system allows private companies licensed by the
GoSL to clean, dry, grade, bag and store agricultural produce for mostly small-holder
farmer groups at a fee in public warehouses. The warehouses will be located on state land
with no impacts to the public or will be purchased by the implementing agency from
private owners. The project finances will not be used for purchase of land. The MOFP
will be responsible for renovating and constructing the warehouses, the operations will be
the responsibility of the relevant private company and monitored by the MoFP. The sites
are expected to be located in the areas of agriculture productions are taking place and
within economic centers closer to the agriculture production sites.
   Since the capacities of the facilities are not known yet, the scope of the support
facilities such as the air conditioning, energy and water requirements, sanitation, disposal
of waste and fire prevention, which will be established in each site are also not known.

  Environmental Impacts:

  Adverse environmental impacts of renovation activities are minimal since these
buildings were already on site, therefore its potential impacts are construction and
occupation related. Establishing new warehouses could generate adverse environmental
impacts due to site selection, construction and operations. However, such impacts will
not be irreversible or cumulative.

   The potential environmental impacts of renovation and establishment of new
warehouses are related to site clearance and debris disposal. Disposal of waste water and
sewage will also be a problem during occupation of the buildings. In addition, storage
conditions such as sanitation, lighting, ventilation, waste, pest and employee
requirements if not properly planned and established can cause health and safety issues.
In addition, the project can also bring about issues such sourcing of material from
unsustainable sources or from sensitive ecosystems for construction, impacts on cultural
property, the land and the vicinity if suitable sites are not used and improper design for
the purpose.

  Social Impacts:

  The project is designed not to have any negative social impacts, and will not trigger
World Bank policies on social safeguards. The project overall brings positive impacts to
the farmer communities as the warehouses that will be renovated and built will provide
them better facilities to store during the whole cycle of production. The primary
beneficiaries will be predominantly small and marginal farmers, in the selected project
locations, as well as the consumers who have been subject to the price fluctuations.

  The warehouses that will be selected for renovation and land for new warehouses will
be all state owned. The project will select sites that are free from squatters or being used
by community for livelihood activities. Therefore, the project will not bring forth any
negative social impacts in relation to setting up of storage facilities.

  Safeguards Policies triggered:

  The project is categorized as category B project and it triggers the OP 4.01 #
Environmental Assessment. Given the likely size of the warehouses and scale of their
operations are small, OP 4.09 # Pest Management is not triggered. However, the
warehouse operating agency will need to ensure warehouse-specific pest management
plan will be prepared as part of the operating guideline of the warehouse. In addition, the
project will be also use standards specified under the World Bank/IFC Environment,
Health and Safety guidelines.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
New constructions will not have a large impact on raw material such as sand, gravel and
wood, although there is possibility of cumulative pressure on raw material sources due to
substantive number of infrastructure projects in the country.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not Applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
At this point of time, the warehouses to be renovated and sites for new construction have
not been identified. Therefore, the borrower has prepared an Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) that will guide the site selection, renovation and construction
processes and Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines to be adopted in
designing and managing the facilities.

  Sri Lanka has a long standing culture of implementation of Building Codes and all
buildings require approval from the Local Government Authority of the area or the Urban
Development Authority. Approval is granted based on compliance with acceptable
Building Codes. Past experience has demonstrated that enforcement of Building Codes
have been reasonably effective. New warehouse designers should be encouraged to use
green building guidelines, contractors and employees during operations phase to manage
consumption energy, water, material, etc.

   Agriculture produce warehouses must be built in a non-hazardous environment and
maintained in good condition to prevent adulteration of stored food. Employees who
work in food warehouses should observe proper hygienic guidelines and sanitation
standard operating procedures. Proper employee facilities should be in place, such as
toilets, hand washing areas, changing rooms, lunch rooms, etc to prevent contamination
of stored food. Proper protocols should be implemented for transportation, receiving and
storage of food. Given the projects will be situated in areas of agriculture production, the
likelihood of situating them on hazardous environments is very low.

   In the event that new buildings are supported under the Project, an Environmental
Assessment either in the form of Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) or
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) will be required to be undertaken and approved
by World Bank prior to completion of designs and commencement of constructions. The
project will not support land filling of low-lying land. The project will not support any
construction or material extraction for the project on designated forest reserves and
wildlife protected areas. Overall house-keeping of the site during works will ensure most
of the environmental issues that may arise due to construction activities are minimized
and managed at an acceptable level.
  Pest Management Plan will be expected to be developed and included in the
operational and maintenance plan of the operator, as part of the bidding out of the
individual warehouses.

   Any grievances that may arise due to siting and construction work will be the
responsibility of the implementing agency, where a grievance redressal mechanism that
includes, means of collecting grievances and recording, independent committee to review
and provide resolutions and mechanism to report back to the affected person will be set
up.

   The project will be implemented through the existing Project Implementation Unit
(PIU) that has been set up as part of the Small and Medium Enterprise Development
Facility financed by World Bank. The PIU has environmental and social safeguards
expertise and any safeguards issues that may arise due to project activities will be
managed by these staff. The Environmental Officer of the PIU will be responsible to
ensure the screening checklist for all renovations and new constructions are completed,
terms of references (TORs) are prepared if site-specific Environmental Assessments
(EAs) are necessary and clearance for the TORs are obtained from World Bank, assist the
PIU to suitable consultant(s) to conduct the EAs for the sites, ensure the construction
contracts includes relevant Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). All EMPS will be
also cleared by the World Bank.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the project are the financing institutions and private sector who
will be managing the warehouses. The project will provide benefits to the farmers in the
areas that the warehouses will be established. The project had conducted the extensive
formal consultation with stakeholders on July 7. The EMF has been disclosed to the
public for comments on October 14, 2011 in the Ministry of Finance and Planning
website. It will be also disclosed to the public by the World Bank through Infoshop. The
project will conduct site specific consultations with the key stakeholders and the
benefiting farmers, once the sites have been identified and finalized.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/21/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/14/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/09/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name           Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Henry K Bagazonzya           10/12/2011
Environmental Specialist:            Ms Darshani De Silva            10/12/2011
Social Development Specialist        Mr Mohamed Ghani Razzak         10/12/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava             11/07/2011
  Comments: cleared. Please see email dated 11/7/2011 for details.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ivan Rossignol                11/08/2011
  Comments: Cleared
