                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/07/2013                                    Report No.: AC6716
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Sudan                                Project ID: P128644
Project Name: Sudan Basic Education Recovery Project
Task Team Leader: Elizabeth Ninan
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 26, 2012      Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2013
Managing Unit: AFTEE                          Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                              Loan
Sector: General education sector (100%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         Education for All Supervising Entity                         76.50
                                                                      76.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the Project are to improve the learning environment in targeted areas;
increase the availability of textbooks; and strengthen education planning and
management mechanisms in Sudan.

3. Project Description
Project Components. Within the goals of the Interim Basic Education Strategy (iBES),
the following components have been proposed for financing from the Global Partnership
for Education (GPE) Fund.
 Component 1: Improving the learning environment: This component focuses on
improving the learning environment for children in target areas with a particular focus on
children in rural locations, girls and other vulnerable groups such as IDPs and nomads.
Through this component, two main interventions are proposed:
 Sub-Component 1.1: Classroom construction (US$31.2M) – The project will target
school construction interventions towards rural communities within states with lower
educational outcomes relative to other states, particularly states with low Gross
Enrollment Rate (GERs), low completion rates, and large numbers of out-of-school
children. It will also focus on states that have a relatively large percentage of its
population in rural areas and which do not receive substantial financing relative to its
needs.
  The project aims to construct 2000 classrooms to alleviate the rising student-to-
classroom ratio in the medium and long term, as enrollments continue to rise.These
classrooms will be built according to specific design standards, currently under
development by the Ministry (minimum package to include 2 classrooms, office/storage
space, latrines with washing facilities, water point, and fence). To achieve this target in
the three years, the Government will utilize a combination of conventional and
community based procurement methods. While the community based approach will
require close to a year to train communities in procurement and management of
classroom construction, international experience has shown that this type of approach
achieves: (i) cost savings; (ii) potential to scale up over time; (iii) efficiency in remote
areas; (iv) increased contribution to the local economy; (v) increased capacity at the local
level; and (vi) increased community ownership. However, given the urgent need to
sustain gains in the recovery period in spite of the fiscal crisis, classroom construction for
the first year will be undertaken through conventional procurement methods. In the
second year, classrooms will be procured through a combination of conventional and
community based approaches and by the last year of the project, community based
procurement will be the dominant method for classroom construction.
  As a first step of the component, the Project will support the (Ministry of General
Education (MOGE) to develop a national school construction strategy with design
standards that detail the minimum requirements of a "school". This will be finalized by
project effectiveness. The GPE will also finance the development of a full operations
manual for the implementation of the new school construction strategy using the
community-based approach, detailing the roles and responsibilities of all stakeholders.
Taking into account the existing constraints in the country, the community-based
implementation will be complemented by the use of a private-sector enterprises approach
(depending on their comparative advantage). Both approaches will require significant
training during the first year to build the capacity of the Federal Ministry of General
Education (FMoGE) and state education ministries to oversee and guide community
managed construction activities and of technical assistance to strengthen the procurement
capacity of the same ministries.
  Sub-Component 1.2: School Grants (US$5M) - In line with the iBES goal to reduce the
household and communities' costs incurred through parental contributions, uniforms and
other direct costs, the BERP proposes the design and launch a school grants program that
will target resources to schools in low income communities. The unfolding financial
crisis in Sudan has already resulted in inflationary pressure and there is discussion on the
introduction of fiscal austerity measures, the removal of price controls, and the disruption
of the planting season in Blue Nile and South Kordofan due to conflict in those states.
These pressures could further erode marginal livelihoods and push more people into
poverty with concurrent destabilizing effects.
  The school grants component seeks to support families in low-income communities to
ensure that parents are not overburdened with making contributions to schools during the
crisis period and there is a school environment conducive to learning. The MoGE
recognizes that there will be more operating expenses associated with the classroom
construction component and the grants component seeks to relieve some of the pressure
from parents to contribute towards these costs. The component is designed to make small
grants available rapidly to schools within the same localities targeted by the classroom
construction component, on the basis of a simple school action plan. Action plans will
include a simple situation analysis, and a proposal for expenditure of the grant on priority
items identified from a list by the school council. The grant would cover operational
expenditure on items such as learning supplies, furniture and equipment, and minor
repairs. In the first stage, schools will be able to use the grants to purchase only items on
a list that excludes new construction. Payments against the grant will be managed by an
intermediary entity contracted to manage payments and account for the expenditure of the
grants. The existence of local school bodies (education councils or PTAs) with
representation of school authorities, parents and communities in almost all schools
represents a substantial institutional asset that provides a good starting point for
introduction of a school grants system.
  The proposed school grants program to be financed from the GPE includes: (i) selection
and contracting of organizations to serve as financial intermediaries and to coordinate
capacity-building for the school grants program in each target state; (ii) orientation of
local stakeholders including the locality education officials to the program; (iii)
identification of school grant facilitators in each locality; (iv) facilitation of each school
council/PTA committee to conduct needs analysis and prepare brief action plan and
budget; (v) review and approval of the action plan by a locality grants committee that
would include locality education officials and representatives of the intermediary
organization; (vi) disbursement of the grant to school committees or direct procurement
of goods or services by the intermediary agent on the basis of the action plan and budget.
At the end of each cycle the intermediary agent will present a report on the grants
indicating outputs and accounting for expenditure. This will be presented to the locality
grants committee and to the state grants coordinator for forwarding to the project PIU.
  This means that grants to schools in respect of around 150,000 students in
approximately 750 schools will be paid over the course of the program. The grants
program will be designed in close consultation with state and locality officials, and be
implemented where appropriate with and through locality offices where school
construction is taking place to enable consolidation of administration. However,
eligibility for school grants will be open to all schools within those localities, so long as
they submit the necessary work plans/proposals and meet the eligibility criteria. The
initiative will draw on expertise of organizations working in Sudan that have experience
building capacity of school communities to manage schools and grants.
  Components 1.1 and 1.2 will be limited to target states due to the high costs associated
with construction and activities to be financed by school grants, and the limited financing
available. Further, the school grants program will be rolled out in the same localities as
the classroom construction program. A total of ten states from among the worst
performing, according to the criteria, will be targeted (Blue Nile, El Gadarif, Kassala
North Darfur, Red Sea, South Darfur, Central Darfur, Northern State, Sinnar, and North
Kordofan). During the preparation of this project the 3 Darfur states were split into 5
states with new boundaries. North Darfur remains the same as before, while South
Darfur has been split into two states (South and Central Darfur). Since data is not yet
available by the 5 new demarcated Darfur states in order to redo the scoring by the
relevant criteria below, the project will focus on 10 states now including North, South
and Central Darfur.
 Component 2: Increasing the availability of textbooks and learning materials
(US$25.8M) -
 Sub-Component 2.1: Improving the policy framework for textbooks provision- During
the first year of the project implementation, the BERP will focus on improving the
existing procedures, guidelines and practices for textbook procurement and provision,
including the textbook development, production, distribution, management and
monitoring of the use of textbooks, as well as selection of appropriate titles of textbooks
for reprint. A technical note outlining the gender and conflict-sensitive analysis review
process has been developed and following this will ensure that textbooks procured under
the BERP are both gender and conflict sensitive. The completion and endorsement of the
new textbook policy as well as the conflict-sensitive analysis of the chosen textbooks will
precede any procurement of textbooks under the project. The following years of the
project life will be focused on actual procurement and distribution of the textbooks,
associated teachers' guides and supplementary learning materials, as well as monitoring
of textbooks delivery and utilization. By the end of the project, approximately 5 million
children will have benefitted from this intervention.

  Sub-Component 2.2: Provision of textbooks and learning materials-- Given the
significant shortage of textbooks in Sudan, especially in schools affected by conflicts and
in IDP camps, the project seeks to provide approximately 9.85 million textbooks for basic
education for all schools throughout the country. It will finance reprinting of textbooks
and associated teachers' guides, distribution and delivery to schools. In addition, the
BERP financing will ensure an adequate monitoring of textbooks utilization, as well as
training for teachers on the use of the newly printed textbooks and teachers' guides.
Before any titles are reprinted, their appropriateness for reprinting will be evaluated by
the MoGE's relevant textbook experts. The procurement of titles selected for reprinting
would be subject to competitive procurement procedures that conform to the World
Bank's guidelines for textbooks procurement.

 Component 3: Strengthening the monitoring and management mechanisms of the
education system (US $14.5m): The Interim Basic Education Strategy highlights the need
to build the capacity of the MOGE and the education system as a major element to
delivering quality basic education in Sudan. Central to these efforts will be the
development of systems and practices to implement the iBES, and, further, to develop
and expand the emergency intervention into a full ESSP. In line with these objectives and
OP.BP 8.00 the GPE seeks, through systems strengthening, to preserve the gains of the
CPA period in delivering essential services, and assisting government in the crucial initial
stages of building capacity for longer-term reconstruction. As such, the BERP will focus
on the strengthening the capacity of the MoGE to collect, analyze and utilize key
information/data for planning purposes, through the following interventions: developing
and launching a National Learning Assessment; teacher Management Monitoring
System; strengthening the EMIS; developing the full Education Sector Strategic Plan
(ESSP 2012-2016); institutional strengthening, and project management and monitoring.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented in the ten states (Blue Nile, El Gadarif, Kassala North
Darfur, Red Sea, South Darfur, Central Darfur, Northern State, Sinnar, and North
Kordofan). The specific localities and target schools will be selected during negotiations.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
   Mr Bedilu Amare Reta (AFTN3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

  The environmental assessment category for this project is assigned to be Category B-
Partial assessment. Bank safeguard policies triggered are Environmental Assessment
(OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement
(OP/BP 4.12).
  Subprojects to be financed under Component 1.1 of the proposed project will have the
construction of classrooms with the minimum package having ancillary constructions
(office/storage space, latrines with washing facilities, water point, and fence)and these
activities are unlikely to generate adverse significant environmental and social effects.
The potential negative environmental and social impacts of the Project will be change in
the landscape (loss of vegetation), acquire land, noise nuisance, air pollution due to dust
formation, and safety hazard from construction' activities, inappropriate disposal of
excavated materials and construction debris, etc. However, given the anticipated small
scale of the subprojects, the negative environmental impacts are likely to be localized,
temporary, and easily mitigated through sensible construction management techniques,
and diligent management practices.
 In order to offset and/or minimize the anticipated potential social and environmental
impacts due to the implementation of the proposed subprojects and to ensure compliance
with the triggered policies, the draft Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment
Framework (ESSAF) required under OP 8.00 has been prepared for this operation and is
included as an annex to the Emergency Project Paper. The adverse impacts will be
addressed through the draft ESSAF that will be refined, finalized and disclosed within
before effectiveness of the project.

 The ESSAF presents a description of the project's objective, guiding principles and the
process followed for public consultation and document disclosure. Additional instruments
on potential adverse impacts and associated mitigation measures has also included in the
ESSAF. The ESSAF contain basic environmental and social checklists that will be used
for identification of different types sub projects and based on the outcome of the
screening process; an Environmental Management Plan will be prepared for each sub
projects resulted in significant impacts as and when required. During project
implementation, the Bank's safeguards team will work closely with government to
confirm the technical assistance and capacity building required at central, state and local
government levels and to ensure effective implementation of the ESSAF, ESMPs, RAP
and other instruments.
 The presence of physical cultural resources (e.g. graveyards, sites of religious/ritual
significance, known or unknown local structures or sites of historic or cultural
importance) within the project area may not be known at this stage. However, some class
rooms and other ancillary constructions activities may be located in the area of influence
of some sites and possibly also have an impact on previously unidentified physical
cultural resources. The draft ESSAF provide a clear procedure for identification,
protection and treatment of cultural resources and graveyards discovered. The ESSAF
includes guidance on preparing chance find procedures for contractors in bidding
documents for any construction activities supported by the project. The chance find
procedure will be clearly indicated in the ESSAF and used as instrument to minimize the
anticipated potential impacts on physical cultural resources and graveyards.

  Similarly, the social impacts will be limited as the land in rural areas is plentiful and
belongs to the communities. The project will ensure that the location of the school is
identified by the community. In the event the land acquired for the construction of the
school displaces households, or presents a loss of livelihood, assets or services
temporarily and/or permanently, the project will prepare a Resettlement Action Plan.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term risks or impacts are anticipated.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
No project alternatives are required for this emergency operation.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In order to offset/minimize the anticipated environmental and social impacts due to the
proposed project the Borrower will undertake the following actions:

 i)    FMoGE and PIU will update and finalize the project ESSAF (annex 9 of EPP)
before effectiveness and use it as an environmental and social safeguard instrument for
sound management of the environmental and social issues that may arise during
implementation;

 ii)    when needs arise, the client will conduct an environmental and social impact
assessment (ESIA) for specific activities and sensitive construction sites and develop
appropriate ESMPs and RAP as required; and

 iii)    after completion of all reports (ESIA/ESMP/RAP), the output of these studies
will be disclosed to the public in country. No disbursement on the activities covered by
the safeguards instruments will be authorized unless the safeguards instruments have
been consulted upon and disclosed in accordance with the World Bank policies.

  The existing capacity of the implementing agencies for development, management and
implementation of environmental and social safeguards instruments, like ESSAF, ESMP
and RAP is limited. The project will ensure responsibilities of implementing and
monitoring the environmental and social safeguard aspects of the Project, technical
support to the Ministry and PIU staffs in this area are addressed within the overall
monitoring and evaluation responsibilities. To do this, the project must ensure they have
safeguard expertise within the implementation team. The recruited safeguards expertise is
expected to have different tasks, i.e., in addition to conducting an environmental and
social management activities and ensuring sound implementation of ESSAF, he/she will
be responsible to develop, implement and monitor the environmental and safeguard tools
(ESIA, ESMP, etc) as required, awareness raising, providing training and capacity
building to staff both in the MoGE and PIU, conducting regular supervision and
preparing progress reports on national and bank safeguard policies compliance, As such,
he/she will be expect to serve as the focal person on environmental and social safeguard
issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include the MOGE, CSU, other line ministries, local communities in
target states, national NGOs/FBOs and DPs.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           No
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          05/30/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              12/13/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/29/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  05/30/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              12/13/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/29/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
This is an emergency project and documents will be disclosed before effectiveness.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?         Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential       N/A
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process           No
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector     N/A
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Elizabeth Ninan                           01/08/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Bedilu Amare Reta                         01/08/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Yasmin Tayyab                             01/08/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     01/31/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Sajitha Bashir                            01/29/2013
  Comments:
