                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/08/2012                                     Report No.: AC6829
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P101955                 Original Project Name: Improving
                                             Livestock Production and Marketing
                                             Project - A Pilot
Country: Sudan                               Project ID: P132798
Project Name: Improving Livestock Production and Marketing Project - A Pilot
Task Team Leader: Stephane Forman
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: September 26, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTA3                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Animal production (80%);Central government administration (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.30
         Multi-donor Trust Fund for North Sudan                        1.80
                                                                       2.10
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the proposed project is to "improve livestock production and marketing
in selected rain fed areas of Central and Eastern Sudan".

3. Project Description
The project is structured around pilot activities that address pastoral communities' priority
needs in support of livestock production and marketing. Thus, the project intends to
demonstrate different ways to deliver services and improve pastoralists' livelihoods. The
project has four main components, including:

       Component 1: Livestock development investment fund - The investment fund
provided matching grants to finance activities and technical assistance demanded by
pastoral communities for increasing productivity and sales of livestock. The selected
sub-projects have demonstrated full communities' ownership, i.e. designed and
implemented by the target communities and are economically, socially, technically and
environmentally sustainable. Examples of subprojects include water point rehabilitation,
rangeland development, restocking of small ruminants, stock route demarcation, livestock
fattening …
         Component 2: Privatization of animal health services and markets - this
component has successfully tested two pilot activities: the delegation of animal health
services such as vaccination tasks to private veterinarians and the improvement of
livestock markets and marketing.
         Component 3: Project management and studies - Given the pilot nature of the
program and implementation in four states, a Project Coordination Unit (PCU), supported
by high level Project Steering Committee (PSC), is coordinating all project activities. The
PCU is supported by two Project Implementation Units (PIUs), established in the State
Ministries of Agriculture, Animal Resources and Irrigation (SMAARI), one at Singa
(Sinnar State) and the second at El Obeid (North Kordofan). Although the project was
designed to be implemented in six localities only, it was capable to absorb the new
government restructuring (10 localities). This component financed ten technical studies to
assist in the implementation of the project activities, as well as to bridge the knowledge
gap within the sector. These studies included inter-alia: (i) development of livestock-
marketing database, (ii) design for matching grants, (iii) livestock market privatization
and development, (iv) privatization strategy for veterinary services in North Kordofan,
and (v) assessment of factors contributing to conflict among pastoral, agro-pastoral and
farmers.
         Component 4: Rehabilitation of demarcated livestock routes - This component
provided packages of basic services, using different community driven approaches, to
develop and sustain the demarcated livestock routes. Those basic services include
veterinary services, regeneration of pastures and production of feeds and concentrate,
simple agro-processing income generating activities, training of animal health workers
and livestock development workers, and rehabilitation of water points along the route
(using LDIF).

 Proposed changes: The Project Paper seeks the approval of a grant in the amount of US$
1.8 million as AF to the Improving Livestock Productivity and Marketing Project
TF090693 (P101955), revisions to indicators and targets in the results framework, and
extension of the current closing date. There are no changes proposed in the PDO, project
components and implementation arrangements. In particular:

         The AF will be used to expand the rehabilitated livestock markets with additional
structures and equipment, build new water points and consolidate livestock investment
activities through further capacity building. It will be primarily used to consolidate,
augment benefits and sustain activities to already participating beneficiaries. The grant
will cover the costs associated with: (i) further equipping the rehabilitated markets with
the construction of additional structures, such as shades, provision of reliable water
sources, electricity supply and fodder lots, (ii) provision of training on business
management and technical assistance to ensure that legislations for ownership are in
place for private or community structures, (iii) ensuring sustainability of the 28 water
points through provision of additional training for the communities and VDCs, and (iv)
building four additional water points, and regeneration of grazing areas, which will
contribute to enhancing critical access to water and fodder, particularly along key
livestock routes, raising livestock production and productivity among pastoralists.
        The additional resources will: (i) increase the total number of beneficiaries
reached by 10,000; (ii) support the 6 rehabilitate markets with additional small
infrastructure and equipment, which is expected to lead to continuous increase of animals
sold annually in these markets; and (iii) support the demarcation and rehabilitation of 60
additional kilometers (km) of livestock routes, seeding of an additional 1,400 hectares
(ha) of pasture and 400 km more of fire lines opened.
        The proposed extension of the closing date is from December 31, 2012 to June 30,
2013.

 Therefore, the AF will only focus on scaling up successful activities implemented in the
previous phase. No new activities are planned under the Additional Financing, therefore
no new safeguards policies are triggered under the AF.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Due to the size of the sector and the numerous issues at stake, the Ministry of Animal
Resources, Fisheries and Rangelands has identified two areas in Central and Eastern
Sudan to pilot activities to enhance livestock production and marketing. The livestock
systems in these areas are representative of the diversity of Sudan's livestock systems,
and of the socio economic background in which they operate.

  The pilot project is being implemented in the six selected localities of the following four
key pastoral states: (i) North Kordofan State (Gebaish, En Nuhud, Elkhewei and Abu
Zabad localities); (ii) Blue Nile (Damazin and Tadamon localities); (iii) Sinnar
(Singa/Abu Hujar locality); and (iv) White Nile State (Gabalein locality). Blue Nile State,
parts of Sinnar and White Nile States are among the poorest regions in Sudan, where
tensions and conflicts over land are recurrent. The social structure is very heterogeneous,
and the customary institutions weakened by decades of civil wars. Allocation of land for
semi-mechanized farming is believed to be the main origin of the conflicts resulting in
blocking traditional seasonal migration routes. These states are crossed by cattle from
Southern Sudan en route to terminal livestock markets in
  Khartoum State. A substantial number of sheep for export and domestic markets are
produced and traded in North Kordofan State. There is increasing pressure on land and
water due to competition between sedentary and transhumant populations, pressure
exerted by displaced populations from Darfur, and poor support services provided by
local government. As a result, rural communities in the state spend up to 60 percent of
their revenues to buy water during the dry season, and rangeland areas are diminishing.
The disease burden is heavy because the capacity of the public and private sectors to
deliver animal health services is limited.

  Localities in the four target states were selected based on the following criteria: (a)
important livestock populations (based on estimates), and (b) high frequency and
intensity of conflict between transhumant livestock producers and sedentary farmers over
land and water.
 The previous phase of the project supported the completion of a "Study to assess factors
contributing to conflicts among pastoralists, agro-pastoralists and sedentary farmers." The
results and recommendations of this study directly influenced a restructuring of the
project to add one component aiming at demarcating (legally and mapping) and
rehabilitating traditional livestock routes to avoid further encroachment of farmers on
these routes leading to conflicts for resources access.

 In addition, the parent project has not generated any loss of access to natural resources,
such as water, by project-affected people and neither will the AF.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Desta Solomon (AFTCS)
   Mr Bedilu Amare Reta (AFTN3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The envisaged project activities are likely to generate potential environmental and social
impacts. The environmental and social impacts of the project are mostly related to the
project interventions (rehabilitation of livestock markets with additional structures, such
as shades, provision of reliable water sources, electricity supply and fodder lots, and
equipment, build new water points and consolidate livestock investment activities
through further capacity building; building additional water points; and regeneration of
grazing areas) and will continue to be small scale, limited, localized, temporary, and
easily mitigated through sensible construction management techniques and diligent
environmental management practices. No significant irreversible environmental and
social impacts from proposed project activities are envisaged and therefore the current
category (Category B) for environmental safeguards remains the same. The AF also
triggers the same safeguard instruments (OP/BP 4.01) Environmental Assessment and
(OP/BP 4.12) Involuntary Resettlement as for the original project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:


3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
To mitigate the anticipated impacts, the original project has chosen Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Plan Framework (RPF) and
Medical and Veterinary Waste Management Plan (MVWMP) as a safeguard instruments
during project preparation. These safeguard instruments, ESMF and RPF has been
prepared for Livestock production in Sudan and disclosed publicly on January, 2009 and
February 2009 respectively. In addition the ESMF has been approved and nationally
disclosed by the Higher Council for Environment & Natural Resources on May 7, 2009.
The Medical and Veterinary Waste Management Plan (MVWMP) for the project also
prepared under Sudan/MDTF project. Based on the scale and nature of the envisaged
project intervention these instruments will continue to be used as an instrument during
the AF project implementation period. In addition, under the parent project The EA was
completed in October 2010. All the safeguards instruments were prepared, consulted
upon, and disclosed in-country. They now must be disclosed in Infoshop. During
implementation, environmental checklists were prepared for the smaller civil works and
environmental plans were prepared for the water points. None of the works to date have
required the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). Based on the scale and
nature of the envisaged project intervention the safeguards instruments will continue to
be used as an instrument during the AF project implementation period; environmental
plans and/or RAPs will be prepared and disclosed as and when necessary.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementation arrangements of the original project are evaluated satisfactory and
would continue without any changes. The PCU will continue to work under the policy
direction of the Project Steering Committee (PSC), chaired by the Undersecretary of
MARFR. The PCU has a safeguard focal point (Environment Specialist) mapped in the
Project Implementation Unit of the Eastern Sector and the team can refer to him when
needed regarding safeguards issues for the entire project. In addition, PCU staff has been
trained on WB requirements for safeguards by the WB safeguard specialist in December
2009. Infrastructures and sub-projects supported though the ILPMP in the previous phase
had environmental screening systematically made, following Environment Assessment
(EA) recommendations. The EA completion date was October 28, 2010.

  During the implementation period starting June 2009, the project has been instrumental
in addressing the main challenges within the sector that has not been fully addressed by
the Ministry of Animal Resources and Fisheries, such as pastoral community inclusion in
the planning processes, chemical waste management and associated hazards,
environmental and safeguards issues. This made the project innovative within the
livestock sector.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/15/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              05/07/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               12/14/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/19/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/27/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               12/14/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
These documents have never been disclosed in Infoshop. This will be done by mid-
December.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Stephane Forman                           09/13/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Bedilu Amare Reta                         09/13/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Desta Solomon                             10/23/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Tijan M. Sallah                           09/16/2012
  Comments:
