                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                           Report No.: 73295

Date ISDS
                           18-Sep-2012
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Tajikistan            Project ID:               P133327
 Project Name:                TAJIKISTAN SECOND PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT FOR
                              SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE AND WATER RESOURCES
                              MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P133327)
 Task Team Leader:            Bobojon Yatimov
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 27-Sep-2012              Estimated Board Date: 15-Nov-2012
 Managing Unit:               ECSAR                 Lending Instrument:       Specific Investment
                                                                              Loan
 Sector:                      Irrigation and drainage (89%), Public administration- Agriculture,
                              fishing and forestry (8%), Public administration- Other social se rvices
                              (3%)
 Theme:                       Rural services and infrastructure (75%), Rural policies and institutions
                              (19%), Improving labor markets (3%), Social safety nets (3% )
 Financing (in USD Million)
   Financing Source                                                                            Amount
   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                               0.00
   IDA Grant                                                                                       18.00
   Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                                    27.90
   Total                                                                                           45.90
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? Yes


 2. Project Objectives
 The project development objectives are to (i) provide employment to food insecure people through the
 rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure, (ii) increase crop production in response to
 improved irrigation and drainage infrastructure, and (iii) support the development of improved policies
 and institutions for water resource management, as a means to improve food availability and food
 access for low-income people in poor rural areas supported by the project.

 3. Project Description
The repeater project will scale up a $10.1 million emergency food security project (Public
Employment for Sustainable Agriculture and Water Management) financed by the European Union
and implemented by the World Bank during 2010-2011. A public works program to renovate drainage
and irrigation infrastructure was the major focus of this project, providing temporary employment to
food insecure households in the short-term and increased crop production in the medium-term. Some
402,000 man.days of work were created, which provided around 10,600 beneficiaries with an average
income of 1176 TJS/person (approx. $250). The infrastructure renovated included 1,820 km of
irrigation canals, 317 km of collector and drainage canals and the installation of 305 water outlet gates.
Approximately 43,300 households benefited from the combined impact of income transfers and
improved access to irrigation over 44,300 ha. The project also contributed to the reform of water
resource management policies, and the introduction of river basin management as the basis for
sustainable management of Tajikistan’s water resources. It was implemented in 5 districts of Khatlon,
the poorest region of Tajikistan. The Khatlon region has been selected as the project area for two
major reasons. First, evidence from surveys consistently show that this is the poorest and most food
insecure region in Tajikistan. Second, the region has a high agricultural potential that remains
unrealized due in part to the deteriorating irrigation infrastructure.

The proposed financing will address Khatlon’s pressing needs for rural employment and rehabilitation
of its irrigation systems. According to a joint assessment of food security in Tajikistan carried out by
WFP, WHO and DFID (2009), approximately 1.4 million people in Khatlon were identified as food
insecure with 390,000 of them considered to be “severely? food insecure. Consequently, the IDA and
GAFSP financing would enable irrigation improvements to be extended to 12 additional districts of
Khatlon. In addition to the long-term benefits provided by the project on irrigation, temporary
employment will be provided to around 30%-40% poor rural households in the area. The repeater
project has the same general design as the original project.

The project has three main components:

Component I: Public Works and Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure (total Bank
funding of USD 35.82 million, of which USD 21.85 million GAFSP funds and USD 13.97 million
IDA funds).

Sub-component Ia: Employment Generation for Food Insecure Households through Public Works
(GAFSP financing of USD 10.07 million). Food insecure people from the project districts will be
employed for manual cleaning of secondary and tertiary irrigation canals. Expenditure will include
payments to beneficiaries, employer contributions to beneficiary social security taxes, social
mobilization and labor force administration costs, and the procurement of low-cost tools for manual
labor.

Sub-component Ib: Mechanized and Other Works (GAFSP contribution of USD 11.78 million and
IDA contribution USD 10.63 million). In addition to manual works, rehabilitation will require: the
rental and purchase of machinery (excavators, bulldozers and closed drain flushing equipment), the
purchase and installation of irrigation gates, irrigation canal and structure repair works, pipeline
network repairs and strategic pump station and vertical drainage well repairs.

Sub-component Ic: Flood Channel Emergency Works (IDA financing of USD 3.34 million). The
project will finance the emergency restoration of a flood channel that traverses and protects the city of
Kulyab as well as reduces risks for agriculture land and irrigation systems supported through the
project down in Vose district.
Component II: Technical Assistance to Support Policy and Institutional Reform for Water Resource
Management (total Bank funding of USD 8.07 million, of which USD 4.035 million GAFSP funds and
USD 4.035 million IDA funds).This component will finance technical assistance to the MAWRM and
other relevant institutions to support the reform of water resource management. Sub-components
comprise:

Sub-component IIa: National-level Policy, Legislative and Institutional Formulation (GAFSP
contribution of USD 1.17 million and IDA contribution USD 1.17 million). The project will assist the
GoT to: (i) further develop the legal basis for integrated water resource management and water sector
reform, (ii) transform the MAWRM into a Ministry of Water Resources (MWR), (iii) prepare a
National IWRM strategy to identify priorities for improving water resource management in Tajikistan,
and (iv) establish a Water Resources Information Center.

Sub-component IIb: River Basin Planning (GAFSP contribution of USD 0.54 million and IDA
contribution USD 0.54 million). The project will assist the GoT to implement river basin management
in the Kafernigan river basin. The project will assist the GoT to implement river basin management in
the Kafernigan river basin.

Sub-component IIc: Develop and Strengthen Irrigation and Drainage Institutions (GAFSP contribution
of USD 2.33 million and IDA contribution USD 2.33 million). The project will assist the GoT to: (i)
build independent, financially-autonomous irrigation and drainage service providers responsible for
the management of off-farm hydraulic assets and for water delivery to water user associations; (ii)
support the transformation of existing region and district level institutions into the new institutional
framework; and (iii) establish and strengthen water user associations.

Component III: Project Implementation. (GAFSP financing of USD 2.01 million). A project
management unit (PMU) to be managed under the World Bank-financed Ferghana Valley Water
Resource Management project will be the main implementation agency. It will be responsible for:
implementation and coordination, financial management and procurement, communication and
awareness programs, environmental management and safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project will be implemented in 10 selected districts of Khatlon region and in 2 districts of DRS,
which are located in the south and south west part of the country and have a territory of more than 52
thousand Square km. It covers three agro-climatic areas – Vakhsh, Kulyab and Hissor, which are
characterized by high temperatures and long-term frost-free period. Together Khatlon region and DRS
makes a population of about 4.3 million people, which is about two third of the country’s population.
The vast majority of its residents live in rural areas, about 3.7 million people versus about 695
thousand urban settlers. Due to deforestation, improper irrigation and excessive use of agricultural
lands combined with unregulated chemical inputs the region’s land resources are affected by
salinization, wind/water erosion and water logging. Most of the irrigation and drainage infrastructure
is in danger of collapse. The selected districts are located in three river sub-basins: (a) Vaksh Sub-
Basin: Yovon, Khuroson, Jomi, Rumi, Bokhtar, Jilikul; (b) Pyanj Sub-Basin: Vose, Hamadoni, Pyanj;
and (c) Kafernigan Sub-Basin: Nosiri Khusrav, Ridaki and Hisor.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Arcadii Capcelea ( ECSEN )
Lola Ibragimova ( ECSSO )
6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered ? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01   Yes         This OP is triggered as the project activities
                                                  (small-scale earth moving, concrete works,
                                                  cleaning up existing drainage channel
                                                  structures; rehabilitation/replacement of
                                                  pumps as well as rehabilitation of pumping
                                                  stations and of a flood channel in Kulyab
                                                  city), might generate some environmental
                                                  impacts: water and air pollution; noise, soil
                                                  erosion; dumping of excavated sediments
                                                  and other materials from irrigation and
                                                  drainage channels, structures; occupational
                                                  hazards, etc. To address these issues, the
                                                  borrower has updated the Generic
                                                  Environmental Management Plan for the
                                                  initial project and based on it, will prepare
                                                  for each selected irrigation scheme a site-
                                                  specific EMP, and in accordance with WB
                                                  and national EA rules and procedures, will
                                                  disclose and publicly consult it in the
                                                  participating rayons. For each pump station
                                                  to be rehabilitated as well as for
                                                  rehabilitation of the Kulyab city flood
                                                  channel, the client will prepare Checklist
                                                  EMPs. These EMPs will be used for project
                                                  implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No          No. As the proposed activities will be
                                                  located on the existing irrigation areas, none
                                                  of them will have impacts on protected
                                                  areas or important nature habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No          No. The project activities will be
                                                  implemented on irrigation areas with no
                                                  impacts on forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No          No. OP 4.09 on Pest Management is not
                                                  triggered as the project does not require the
                                                  purchase and/or use of pesticides, and based
                                                  on previous experience in the region, the
                                                  improved irrigation infrastructure will not
                                                  lead to changes in the crops production
                                                  which would require usage of more
                                                  pesticides. The main crop will remain
                                                  cotton with a limited application of
                                                  pesticides due to their high costs. However,
                                                  the project in view of longer term
                                                  considerations and changes in demand and
                                                  supply trends will allocate resources within
                                                  its public outreach campaign to carry out
                                                  information dissemination activities in
                                                support to Integrated Pest Management in
                                                the project area.
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No      No. As the proposed activities will be
                                                located on the existing irrigation areas, none
                                                of them will have impacts on physical
                                                cultural resources.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           No     N/A
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     No     No. The policy is not triggered because: (i)
                                                rehabilitation works will be done on
                                                existing irrigation/drainage canals and
                                                collectors; (ii) rehabilitation works related
                                                to upgrade of the pumping station buildings
                                                including replacement of pump, when
                                                necessary, will be done only on the
                                                footprints of existing facilities. The will be
                                                no civil works related to construction of
                                                new pumping stations. In order the avoid
                                                any tree cutting during rehabilitation works,
                                                while preparing site specific EMP, the
                                                borrower will analyze this issue and in such
                                                cases those canals/collectors will be
                                                excluded from the project activities.
                                                Similarly to the practice of the original
                                                project, tree cutting along the canals will be
                                                avoided.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No     No
 Projects on International Waterways     Yes    The project area covers irrigation network
 OP/BP 7.50                                     which draws water from the Amu Darya
                                                River through Tajikistan’s territory and then
                                                flows into the Aral Sea. Thus the project
                                                triggers OP 7.50. At the same time, the
                                                proposed investments under the project are
                                                only for renovation of irrigation canals and
                                                improvements of drainage infrastructure
                                                along with the purchasing agricultural
                                                machinery, which are not expected to
                                                change the volume of extraction/discharge
                                                water or quality of water of these rivers, but
                                                rather will lead to more effective irrigation
                                                and drainage of the water. Under the first
                                                PAMP, an exception to the notification
                                                requirement under Paragraph 7(a) of OP
                                                7.50 was granted. Such exception was also
                                                received under PAMP II.
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No     N/A

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will support a series of civil works which would consist of: earth moving, concrete works,
cleaning up existing drainage collector structures; rehabilitation/replacement of pumps and deep wells,
rehabilitation of existing pumping stations and of Kulyab city flood channel. Although most of these
works are fairly small scale and will be done manually, they might generate some adverse
environmental impacts: water and air pollution; noise, soil erosion; dumping of excavated sediments
and other materials from irrigation and drainage canals, structures; occupational hazards, etc. At the
same time, the project will bring several positive environmental and social impacts, and in particular,
reduction in: water logging, salinization and water losses; improved irrigation distribution; reduction
in seepage losses from main canal and over-supply of irrigation, with a beneficial effect for the area - a
lower water table, a lower risk of salinity, and less stagnant water pools in the village causing health
problems. Direct positive impacts will be also generated by increased production, more employment
and increased income.

The OP 4.01 is triggered as the project will support a series of activities which will generate some
environmental and social impacts. As the project area covers irrigation network which draws water
from the Amu Darya River and then flows into the Aral Sea, the project triggers also World Bank OP
7.50 on International Waterways. The proposed investments under the project are only for renovation
of irrigation canals, and improvements of drainage infrastructure along with the renovation of
pumping stations, which are not expected to change the volume of extraction/discharge water or
quality of water of these rivers, but rather will lead to more effective irrigation and drainage of the
water. Based on this it was requested an exception from the Bank with regard to the notification
requirement under Paragraph 7(a) of the Policy. OP 4.09 on Pest Management is not triggered as the
project does not require the purchase and/or use of pesticides, and based on previous experience in the
region, the improved irrigation infrastructure will not lead to changes in the crops production which
would require usage of more pesticides. The main crop will remain cotton with a limited application
of pesticides due to their high costs. However, the project in view of longer term considerations and
changes in demand and supply trends will allocate resources within its public outreach campaign to
carry out information dissemination activities in support to Integrated Pest Management in the project
area. The project will also not trigger OPs on Forests, Physical Cultural Resources as well as on
Natural Habitats, as all proposed activities will be implemented within the existing irrigation areas.
Lastly, the project activities will not trigger Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 as all project
activities will be done within existing irrigated areas, no land acquisition and/or other resettlement
issues are expected to arise. The rehabilitation works related to upgrade of the pumping station
buildings including replacement of pumps, when necessary, will be done only on the footprints of
existing facilities. Similarly to the practice of the original project the tree cutting along the canals will
be avoided
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The long term and indirect project impacts are positive and associated with: (a) improved agricultural
productivity; (b) Increased Farm Income, Alleviation of Poverty; (c) Reduction in Water Losses; (d)
Improved Water Resources Management; (e) Prevention/reduction of potential flood impacts on
Kulyab city and downstream districts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To address potential adverse impacts the client has updated and will apply the Generic Environmental
Management Plan (GEMP) which was prepared and applied for the initial project. Based on the
GEMP there will be prepared site-specific EMPs, taking into account the concrete conditions of the
selected irrigation scheme and/or drainage network as well as for the pumping stations and flood canal
in Kulyab city repairing, after the detailed design of each sub-project will be done. The GEMP
ensures that the proposed prevention/mitigation measures and monitoring activities identified during
the subprojects EA will be properly undertaken during the project implementation. The GEMP
includes the following: (a) short description of applicable laws, policies on environment procedures
for EA as well as EA institutions and responsibilities; (b) Environmental Guidelines (EG) specifying:
(i) potential environmental and social impacts of the rehabilitation of irrigation canals, improvements
of drainage infrastructure activities; (ii) proposed mitigation and monitoring measures to be applied
during the project implementation; (iii) description of the EMP Checklist which will be applied for
activities related to pumping stations and flood channel repairing; (c) description of implementing
arrangements, including supervision and monitoring, as well as reporting; and (d) analysis of the EA
institutional capacity of the implementing agencies along with the proposed technical assistance to
adequately implement the EA requirements for the subprojects to be supported. The GEMP also
specifies necessary steps for preparing site-specific EMP of the selected Irrigation Schemes (ISs)
and/or of the Drainage Canals (DCs) as well as for EMP Checklist for mentioned above activities.
Furthermore, it specifies the project will support only rehabilitation of the on farm irrigation
infrastructure and of the flood channel in Kulyab city when land acquisition is not necessary and there
are no any resettlement issues.

The overall management responsibility for the project will rest with the Ministry of Amelioration and
Water Resources (MAWR) and the Administration of Khatlon region. The Fergana Water Resource
Management Project Management Unit (PMU) will be the leading operational institution for the
implementation of the proposed project and carry out all project implementation in accordance with
the Operations Manual (OM). The PMU also will ensure that the EMP provisions are fully integrated
into implementation of the project, including monitoring and reporting required by the World Bank.
Proper implementation of the EMP provisions and field monitoring are the main responsibilities of the
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at the regional level. Contractors will be responsible for
implementation of the rehabilitation works in accordance with environmental requirements specified
in the bidding documents and the EMP. PIU will work closely with State Committee on Environment
Protection (SCEP) in implementing the EMPs. The existing PMU has previous experience in dealing
with safeguards issues as it implemented several WB including the first project. The WB supervision
missions done in May and November 2011 show the EMPs implementation is at satisfactory level.
The main safeguards responsibilities within the initial project were assigned to the PMU which
conducted site inspections prior to, and during the rehabilitation activities to ensure compliance with
the contract conditions and the EMP. The supervision and monitoring of proper implementation of the
measures required by the EMP was the responsibility of the PIU located in the field, closer to the
project sites. The PIU conducted regular site visits to verify that the appropriate environmental
preventive actions and/or mitigation measures have been implemented. Such environmental
monitoring included observations of soil and water within and around the rehabilitation sites as well as
of potential impacts on vegetation and on workers safety. Furthermore, in these supervision and
monitoring activities have been involved also the local Ecological Inspectors. The status of
compliance with agreed environmental preventive and mitigation measures was periodically reported
by the PIU to the PMU which included them in their regular reports on project implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project Management Unit (PMU) has disseminated the updated GEMP to the Ministry of
Amelioration and Water Resources Management (MAWRM), Ministry of Agriculture, Committee for
Environmental Protection under the Government of Tajikistan, and other relevant ministries for their
review and comments, and also, on August 01, 2012, the document was posted on websites of the
CAREC (www.carecnet.org) for its access to wide public. On August 03, 20102 the PMU has
organized a consultation on the draft document. After the consultation, the document was revised to
consider inputs from consulted parties. On August 30, 2012 the final draft GEMP was posted on the
website of the Ministry of Amelioration and Water Resources and subsequently approved by the
World Bank and disclosed in Infoshop.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      30-Aug-2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                  30-Aug-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   13-Sep-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]         No [ ]     NA [ ]
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager       Yes [ X ]    No [ ]     NA [ ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in      Yes [ X ]    No [ ]     NA [ ]
the credit/loan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                 Yes [ ]      No [ X ]   NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification   Yes [ X ]    No [ ]     NA [ ]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                Yes [ X ]    No [ ]     NA [ ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]         No [ ]     NA [ ]
Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]    No [ ]      NA [ ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
 to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]   No [ ]      NA [ ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]   No [ ]      NA [ ]
 the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]   No [ ]      NA [ ]
 the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
 safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [ ]      NA [ ]
 the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
 legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

 Task Team Leader:              Name: Bobojon Yatimov
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards            Name: Agnes Kiss                           Date: 09/24/2012
 Coordinator:
 Sector Manager:                Name: Dina Umali-Deininger                 Date: 09/20/2012
