                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/10/2012                                      Report No.: AC6460
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P089244                  Original Project Name: Energy Loss
                                              Reduction Project
Country: Tajikistan                           Project ID: P122141
Project Name: AF ENERGY LOSS REDUCTION
Task Team Leader: Imtiaz Hizkil
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 24,         Estimated Board Date: February 14, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: ECSS2                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Climate change
(33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             18
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objectives of the project are (i) to assist in reducing the commercial
losses in the electricity and gas systems; and to lay the foundation for the improvement of
the financial viability of the electricity and gas utilities in a socially responsible manner;
and (ii) to assist in the viability assessment of the proposed Rogun Hydroelectric Project
(HEP) in Tajikistan.

3. Project Description
The ELRP was approved by the Board on June 30, 2005 and became effective on
December 7, 2005. There are three components, namely Electricity Component, Gas
Component and Technical Assistance Component. The ELRP is being implemented by
two state owned entities, OSHPC Barki Tajik (BT) and OJSC Tajiktransgaz (TTG). BT is
responsible for the Electricity Component and part of the Technical Assistance
Component. TTG is responsible for the Gas Component and part of the Technical
Assistance Component. Overall, implementation has been satisfactory with about 90% of
IDA funds disbursed.

 The scope of the Technical Assistance Component was expanded with the inclusion of
the Assessment Studies for the proposed Rogun HEP. For this purpose, the PDO was
revised under the restructuring of ELRP undertaken in February 2011 and the
Environmental category of ELRP was upgraded from “C? to “A?. Barki Tajik is the
entity responsible for implementation of this sub-componen There are two studies
(Assessment Studies) that are undertaken for the assessment of the proposed Rogun HEP.
These are:
 a) Techno-economic Assessment Study (TEAS); and
 b) Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Study (ESIA).

 The TEAS will assess the overall design, operations and economics of the proposed
Rogun HEP. The study will address key issues such as seismic risk, reservoir filling and
geological integrity. The ESIA will review resettlement, water management implications
(with specific reference to ecological needs and security of water availability to
downstream countries), and construction and operations-related environmental and social
impacts. The implementation of the two studies started in March 2011.

 The proposed Additional Financing (Grant) will maintain and follow the design of the
original ELRP presented above and will cover the following:

 1.      Financing gap for completion of the Assessment Studies for proposed Rogun HEP
and related activities including capacity building and advisory services,
 2.      Scale-up of the Electricity Component for further implementation of the
Dushanbe metering program to include the supply of additional metering equipment and
distribution materials to cover the residential consumers in the districts of the Dushanbe
city that remain to be covered under the program; and
 3.      New activities under the TA Component comprising a few strategic studies and
the provision of advisory support needed in critical areas for country’s energy sector
development. The studies include: (a) assessment of sedimentation management and of
potential/options and measures for rehabilitation of the Nurek HEP to achieve higher
efficiency, capacity recovery and longevity; b) study on isolated operation of grid system
of the country. The advisory support is provided in the areas of (a) developing electricity
export potential, and (b) capacity enhancement of BT for other strategic areas, namely: i)
preparation of a winter strategy and dissemination of information to customers, ii)
collections improvement, iii) upgrading of communication, monitoring, reporting and
statistical system.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Rural and Urban Tajikistan - The locations for the Electricity and Gas Components are in
Dushanbe as well as various municipalities throughout the territory of Tajikistan.
  The prospective site of the proposed Rogun HEP is located about 110 km East North
East of Dushanbe, the capital of Tajikistan (by road M41) on the Vakhsh River, an
international waterway as defined by the Bank policy. The Vakhsh River in Tajikistan
joins the Pyanj River from Afghanistan to form the Amu Darya River that subsequently
flows to Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.

  Construction of the Rogun HEP started during Soviet times. Thus the proposed location
is defined by already existing assets (such as underground works) and auxiliary
infrastructure, such as office buildings, construction camps and access roads.

 According to the current conceptual design the proposed Rogun HEP would be a
reservoir type project with a dam height of about 335m. The reservoir would have a total
storage volume of 13.3km3 and an active storage volume of about 8.6 km3. It would
extend upstream over a distance of about 70km. The installed capacity would be 6x600
MW (totaling 3,600MW). The proposed Rogun HEP will help regulate a cascade of
hydropower stations downstream. The selected dam location is in a narrow gorge with
steep flanks, which could minimize material demand for dam construction. The site
geology is complex, being characterized by highly heterogeneous sedimentary layers (in
terms of strength and permeability) including haline, soluble strata that necessitate careful
investigation and analysis. The facility's design life would be 150-200 years. Consultants
are assessing the construction of the proposed Rogun project, which is envisioned by the
Government to proceed in stages, including an initial Stage-1dam to produce about 240-
MW of electricity.

 The proposed Rogun HEP was initiated under the Soviet regime in 1980 to provide both
energy and water regulation for the Central Asia region, but was left effectively
abandoned in the early 1990s following the Soviet Unions' disintegration. In 1993 several
consecutive flood events led to heavy damage and collapse of the tunnels, blocking of the
diversion flow and subsequent overtopping and destruction of the coffer dam.
Rehabilitation of existing (damaged) works is underway and is being financed by the
Government of Republic of Tajikistan (GoRT). Rehabilitation works to date have not
affected water regulation in terms of diversion or storage. In 2008 the pace of the works
was accelerated and currently most of the site repair and preparation works as well as a
significant amount of the underground works (access tunnels, diversion and outlet
tunnels, chambers for turbines / generators and transformers) have been completed, thus
re-establishing the status from 1993 before significant flood damage occurred.

 A key safeguards issue is the resettlement of 63 villages from the reservoir area.
Resettlement commenced during the Soviet period and part of the reservoir areas
residents have already moved to new housing provided by the GoRT in the cities of
Rogun, Obigarm and other parts of Tajikistan. However, the resettlement has not taken
place in a phased manner with the result that some relocatees belonging to later
submergence zones have been relocated whereas others in early submergence zones
remain in their original sites. A further issue is that a clear policy, procedures and
entitlement matrix is currently lacking, contributing to this uneven approach to
implementing resettlement. It should be noted that resettlement continued in the project
area until late 2010. During negotiations the Bank agreed with the GoRT that no further
resettlement will take place in the reservoir area until completion of these studies and
preparation of a RAP. However, it was agreed that resettlement of families within the
vicinity of dam site who are at risk from construction activities, and families which have
already been partly relocated, can continue. Resettlement of any other family where these
conditions do not apply may not be undertaken until completion of ESIA, RPF and RAP.
Preparation activities at new resettlement sites will also continue and is encouraged to be
accelerated so that those already resettled can get back their livelihoods and have access
to services.

 Known physical cultural resources include sacred sites, graveyards and burial sites.
These will be relocated where necessary as part of the resettlement program, in
accordance with cultural practices and the procedure recommended in the RPF. Some
graveyards and burial sites have already been relocated. No other sites of major
archeological and historical importance have been reported. However, it should be
anticipated that the project area may contain some sites. These will be identified,
documented and secured on the basis of a field survey covered under the ESIA.by
qualified specialists.

 Environmental due diligence during project preparation has started with several volumes
of environmental studies in the original first design commenced during Soviet times.
They focused on the environmental impact on the downstream river system, local flora
and fauna, local microclimate, population, and the environmental quality of the reservoir
area.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Roxanne Hakim (ECSS4)
   Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
In accordance with the World Bank's safeguard policies and procedures, including
OP/BP/GP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, the original project was classified as
safeguards Category C for environmental assessment purposes. Any planned physical
investments were so minor, that separate environmental instruments, such as EIA or
EMP, were not considered necessary.

 This situation has in principle remained valid, as still no significant physical
investments are planned to be financed under the project. However, the safeguards
aspects of the ELRP were considered to be more complex due to the inclusion of the
assessment of the proposed Rogun HEP, for which GoRT had requested Bank support.
Accordingly, ELRP was restructured in February 2011 and its Safeguards category was
enhanced to A.

 Although the project does not envisage financing any physical activities (especially for
the proposed Rogun HEP) a safeguards category A is proposed to recognize and address
the potentially significant environmental, social and riparian issues associated with the
inclusion of the proposed Rogun HEP assessment studies.

  The social issues to be addressed in the studies will include involuntary resettlement
(including cultural sites such as graves, mosques etc.), support to vulnerable groups,
impacts of labor influx, inclusion of host communities, consultation and grievance
channels, etc. The studies will also include the development of a socio-economic
baseline, a detailed Resettlement Policy Framework for the entire reservoir area, a
Resettlement Action Plan for Stage 1 of project and a Resettlement Audit to cover the
completed and ongoing resettlement. The Assessment studies would be reviewed by two
International Independent Panels of Experts (PoE), one for techno-economic and dam
safety, the other for environmental/social aspects.

 In the course of project preparation, Terms of Reference (TORs) for the TEAS and
ESIA have been prepared. The Borrower disclosed the TORs for ESIA and TEAS, and
organized public consultations in the project area and in Dushanbe on the ESIA TOR.
This was undertaken in lieu of the documents conventionally required under OP4.01
(such as EIA, EMP, RPF, RAP etc., which will be the outputs of the Assessment
Studies), as the TOR provides the best documentation regarding how safeguards
concerns are being addressed during project preparation and will be addressed in the
investment project. This variation of the standard procedure outlined in section II.B
below is the procedure usually followed for TA operations of this type.

 Agreements were reached with GoRT to limit the scope of the ongoing rehabilitation
works and their associated environmental impacts. Foremost, the GoRT will ensure that
no actions are taken which lead to or result in the diversion of waters along the Vakhsh
River unless a number of due diligence procedures have been completed: (i) the
assessments relating to coffer dam and a stage 1 dam facility, as part of TEAS and ESIA,
have been completed; (ii) the draft reports of these assessments have been shared with the
Riparian States; (iii) said Riparian States have been afforded an opportunity to comment
on said assessment within a reasonable period of time; and such assessment has been
reviewed with the Panels of Experts funded by the World Bank to determine viability of
constructing any dam facility within the proposed Rogun HEP.

 The studies on sedimentation management and options for rehabilitation of Nurek HPP
will include an environmental section that will identify potential adverse impacts
(expected mainly as minor issues during construction) and include a generic EMP that
would be used as template and guidance during further steps of the rehabilitation
activities.

 OP4.04 is triggered due to a potential impact on natural habitats in the project area. This
potential impact is recognized by the ESIA TOR and will be thoroughly investigated in
the course of the planned environmental assessment study.

 OP 4.11: It has been recognized that physical cultural heritage is likely to be
encountered in the proposed Rogun HEP project area, and consequently detailed
provisions have been included in the ESIA TOR, providing guidance to the future
analytical and planning process how to address PCR, chance finds and salvage operations
for cemeteries and places of cultural or religious significance. No major archaeological
sites or objects were destroyed. Known physical cultural resources include sacred sites,
graveyards and burial sites. These will be relocated where necessary as part of the
resettlement programme, in accordance with cultural practices and the procedure
recommended in the RPF. Some graveyards and burial sites have already been relocated,
mostly during the Soviet era. No other sites of major archeological and historical
importance have been reported. However, it should be anticipated that the project area
may contain some sites. These will be identified, documented and secured on the basis of
a field survey covered under the ESIA.by qualified specialists.

 OP4.12: During the lifetime of the project the measures to be additionally financed
involve only studies, hence in themselves require neither land acquisition, nor the
resettlement of people or businesses, nor will they negatively impact livelihoods.
However, the inclusion into ELRP of a techno-economic assessment study (TEAS) and
an environmental-social impact assessment (ESIA) for the proposed Rogun HEP has
created a strong relevance of OP4.12. Issues of potential social impacts and the need for
land acquisition and resettlement on large scale associated with any future development
of the proposed Rogun HEP are reflected in detailed sections in the TOR for the ESIA,
with the intention of mainstreaming and diligently addressing resettlement and livelihood
restoration in any further project development. The ESIA outputs will include the
development of a socio-economic baseline, a detailed Resettlement Policy Framework for
the entire reservoir area, a Resettlement Action Plan for Stage 1 of project and a
Resettlement Audit to cover the completed and ongoing resettlement.
 Some resettlement associated with the rehabilitation of the existing works is underway,
which is being undertaken by the GoRT. Based on recent site visits by Bank’s social
development specialists, the approach of the GoRT shows elements of good resettlement
practice; at the same time there are some gaps relative to good practice. Agreement has
been reached, whereby GoRT will: (i) ensure that there is no relocation of residents from
the proposed Rogun dam future reservoir area, unless and until the GoRT has prepared,
disclosed and published a Resettlement Policy Framework, Resettlement Action Plan and
Resettlement Audit Report, all satisfactory to the Bank, and as required under ESIA; (ii)
make best efforts to avoid relocation of residents in the vicinity of the proposed Rogun
dam site until the documents referred to in (i) above have been prepared; and (iii) in case
continued resettlement of remaining residents in the vicinity of the proposed Rogun dam
site takes place (to protect them from hazardous or otherwise adverse conditions, such as
operation of quarries including use of explosives, dust, noise, vibration, and operation of
heavy machinery), the GoRT will carry out such resettlement with due care and in
accordance with the applicable legal and institutional framework in Tajikistan, as well as
with international good practices (including but not limited to adequate grievance
mechanism) and acceptable to the Bank.

 GoRT also indicated its commitment to continue supporting those persons who have
already been relocated, through provision of community infrastructure and services in
resettlement areas, through continued payment to those already resettled for construction
of replacement housing, or through other means. The Bank team has emphasized that
close monitoring of resettled households is necessary to ensure that they achieve
restoration of their livelihoods to pre-project levels with a commitment to bring all
affected families up to an established minimum standard of living. This will be achieved
through development programs included in the resettlement package, ensuring
Government programs reach the new sites, and monitoring for a period of 5-10 years
following relocation.

 OP4.37: The dam safety studies are a significant topic in the TEAS. There will be an
independent Engineering and Dam Safety Panel which will include expert(s) on dam
safety, geotechnical engineering and hydropower engineering. No formal dam safety
report has been prepared, as the financing of physical investments is not included in the
project. The studies on sedimentation management and options for rehabilitation of
Nurek HPP will be included into the TOR of the Engineering and Dam Safety Panel
(EDSP) to ensure that they undergo a high level technical due diligence review. The
EDSP will determine the required scope and duration of their involvement in Nurek HPP.

  OP7.50: The Assessment Studies will not have any physical hydrological impacts on
international waterways crossing Tajikistan's boundaries and flowing into the territory of
riparian countries such as Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and eventually the Aral
Sea (which effected the inclusion of Kazakhstan as a riparian). However, in parallel to the
development of the TOR for the TEAS and ESIA for the proposed Rogun HEP, the
following actions were undertaken:
  a)    riparian countries were notified and
  b)    consultations with all Central Asian and riparian countries (hereinafter called
riparians and include Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan
and Uzbekistan) were organized and carried out. The purpose of the consultations was to
give riparian states basic information about the proposed Rogun HEP and discuss the
content of the TORs for TEAS and ESIA.

  Disclosure and consultation on the draft ESIA reports will follow Bank's operational
policies under OP4.01, and will include riparians. In addition to disclosure and
consultation on ESIA of the full project, and by agreement with the Borrower, an interim
ESIA report assessing the Stage 1 dam) project will be shared with stakeholders and
riparians (Government and public). The project activities relevant to safeguards do not
involve investments in construction activities or physical structures, but exclusively relate
to the production of studies (an ESIA, which would include documents for the
management of environmental and social mitigation, and a TEAS). As under the
currently Bank-financed project neither environmental impacts nor resettlement will
occur, the terms of reference (TOR) for these two studies are deemed the most logical
and proper safeguards documents for disclosure to, and consultation with, the public at
this time to elucidate how safeguards are being mainstreamed during project preparation.

 For Nurek HPP a separate notification of riparian countries is not considered necessary,
as the rehabilitation studies address only issues of dam safety (e.g. instrumentation and
monitoring systems) and a more efficient use of the turbined water for power production.
None of the planned activities included in the studies for Nurek would cause changes of
the hydrological flow regime of Vaksh.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The ESIA study proposed to be funded by the project has the key purpose to generate the
necessary information to assess these impacts and design ways for avoiding, minimizing
or mitigating any potential indirect and / or long term impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
One major alternative to the current project would be for GoRT to decide to proceed with
or conclude Rogun in the absence of the planned assessments (ESIA and TEAS), thereby
risking technically unsound engineering and unnecessary environmental and social
impacts. Regarding physical and technical layout, the final designs for dam site and
reservoir contours were produced during the Soviet Era, construction started about 25
years ago and had significantly progressed, thus the general siting is largely
predetermined. As part of the Central Asia Energy-Water Program, the Bank will include
an assessment of energy options for the country such as alternatives to the proposed
Rogun HEP covering alternative sources such as demand side management, hydropower
of alternative size and configuration, other renewable sources, and domestic sources of
thermal energy. This assessment is being undertaken in parallel with the Assessment
Studies (TEAS and ESIA).
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has shown strong commitment to address safeguard policy issues by
seeking the Bank support to carry these studies, and ensure their objectivity and quality
through an environmental and social Panel of Experts consisting of internationally
recruited, high level specialists. This has become operational in May 2011 and is working
in cooperation with an engineering Panel of Experts covering dam safety and technical
due diligence of the project. Borrower capacity is not very strong and it is expected that
these studies as well as the interaction with the Panels will serve the purpose of building
capacity and exposure within the country on environmental and social issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are the potential Project Affected Persons in the project area and in
Tajikistan in general, as well as (downstream) riparian countries. Consultations on the
TORs for the TEAS and ESIA were undertaken with the riparian countries and were open
to CSOs and general public of these counties, and within the Republic of Tajikistan. The
TORs were disclosed by the GoRT and by the Bank at Infoshop. To fulfill the disclosure
requirements under OP4.01 the Borrower made the TORs for ESIA and TEAS available
to the public, and organized public consultations in the project area and in Dushanbe on
the ESIA TOR. This was undertaken in lieu of the documents conventionally required
under OP4.01 - such as EIA, EMP, RPF, RAP etc. - which actually will be the outputs of
these studies. Therefore, the TOR is the 'Environmental Assessment' document referred
to in section II.B immediately below, as having been disclosed prior to Appraisal. ESIA
will follow World Bank consultation policies, including consultation with affected people
in riparian countries.

 Key interim products (e.g. inception reports, screening reports) of the ongoing technical
as well as environmental and social studies are – after review by the Bank and the Client
– released into the public domain in draft and final versions. Comments fr riparian
stakeholders (both Governments and CSOs) are and will continue to be sought on drafts,
to be appropriately incorporated into final versions.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10/14/2010
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  11/18/2010
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12/03/2010
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10/14/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/18/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/08/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               N/A
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   No
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               N/A
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         N/A
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                            N/A
  Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      N/A
  (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
  Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        N/A
  been made for public awareness and training?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Imtiaz Hizkil                             01/03/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Wolfhart Pohl                             01/06/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Roxanne Hakim                             01/03/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss                             01/06/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ranjit J. Lamech                          01/06/2012
  Comments:
