                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/12/2012                                   Report No.: AC6604
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P089566                   Original Project Name: Land Registration
                                               & Cadastre System for Sustainable
                                               Agriculture Project (LRCSP)
Country: Tajikistan                            Project ID: P129313
Project Name: AF Land Registration & Cadastre System for Sustainable Agriculture
Project
Task Team Leader: Jessica Mott
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 4, 2012 Estimated Board Date: February 21, 2012
Managing Unit: ECSS3                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (30%);Agricultural extension and
research (20%);Central government administration (20%);General agriculture, fishing
and forestry sector (15%);Crops (15%)
Theme: Land administration and management (29%);Rural markets (29%);Personal and
property rights (14%);Rural policies and institutions (14%);Rural services and
infrastructure (14%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             10
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.07
                                                                          0.07
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
Under the Additional Financing, the Project Development Objective (PDO) would be
revised to simplify the text on farmland restructuring (without affecting the substance)
and to include appropriate support for improving the immovable property registration
system. The revised PDO is “to expand farmland restructuring, to increase the number of
immovable properties with secure tenure rights, and to propose a plan for the
improvement of the immovable property registration system.?

3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Grant would help finance the costs of continuing the same types
of activities that have been supported under the original Project, as well as the costs of
new activities designed to provide relevant data and experience, and inform the
Government’s strategy and plan for improving the registration system. Thus it would
scale up farmland restructuring and the associated support activities (i.e., issuance of
certificates for family farms, upgrading of databases and mapping capacity, policy
analysis, information dissemination and training for farmers, capacity building in
environmental land management, and grants to Water Users Associations for on-farm
irrigation rehabilitation) as well as add new types of activities involving other types of
properties (e.g., household plots, buildings). Project activities comprise the following.

  Part A: Farmland Restructuring and Registration of Immovable Property Rights (i) to
enhance and expand farmland restructuring activities, regularize use rights certificates,
and improve records needed for immovable property registration in a systematic, fair, and
transparent way; (i) to build capacity for farmland restructuring and the registration
immovable property rights including by establishing and supporting RLCCs and
undertaking pilots; (iii) to develop the national cadastre and support issuance and
registration of land use certificates by establishing survey and mapping capacity and
spatial databases, and (iv) to undertake policy analysis and investment planning
supporting farmland restructuring and immovable property registration.

 Part B: Information for Immovable Property Users and Irrigation Support, comprising
 (i)    Information for farmers and other users of immovable property to educate the
population of participating regions on the farmland restructuring process, independent
farm management practices, and immovable property use rights and registration;
 (ii). On-farm Irrigation and Water Management Grants to Water User Associations for
on-farm irrigation and water management systems rehabilitation; and
 (iii). Environmental Land Management to support (a) the improvement of cotton seed
demonstrations and the associated dissemination of associated information (completed
before the 2009 Project Restructuring), and (b) capacity building among local agricultural
and environmental specialists to advise and train farmers in assessment and monitoring of
environmental conditions and in implementation of improved agro-ecological practices,
including integrated pest management, for the enhancement of sustainable productivity.

 Part C: Project Management and Coordination support to strengthen the Recipient’s
capacity in Project management, monitoring and evaluation (including audits),
procurement, and financial management activities.

  The above activities would involve provision of consultants’ services, services (other
than consultants’ services), training, goods, works, operating costs, and in the case of the
irrigation support, grants.

 The Additional Financing would continue to focus on farmland restructuring and
support an expansion of the same types of activities that have been undertaken under the
original Project. It would also support new types of activities to build the immovable
property registry database and develop capacity and plans for long-term registration
system improvements. The issuance of certificates for use rights would be expanded to
include not only family farms but also other types of properties (including household
plots), especially for those that do not yet have certificates, on a demand-driven basis
with the RLCCs’ support. Polic analysis would be expanded to include more attention to
immovable property registration and investment planning. In addition, operational
testing and demonstrations would be undertaken in selected areas. The RLCCs, in
cooperation with the raion land offices and Inter-raion Bureau of Technical Inventory
(IBTI) staff, and notaries, would systematically upgrade the records for land use rights
and buildings, and improve the conditions and quality of customer service in pilot areas
within at least three raions and one municipality. This would be done in ways that ensure
that records reflect the actual facts on the ground, eliminate duplication of effort by
separate agencies, harmonize information in the records of the various agencies, and
develop an accessible, integrated digital database for immovable property registration in
the those areas. Technical assistance, computers and other technology, as well as
support for conversion of hard copy archival and other real estate data to digital format,
along with the associated facility upgrading and incremental operating costs, would be
provided to support these new activities. In combination, these Additional Financing
activities would help build the basis for incorporating the new and upgraded property
records into the registry system, as well as a strategy and action plan for future
improvements.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The activities funded under the Additional Financing would potentially be implemented
across the entire country, mainly in rural areas with irrigation and on rainfed land with
annual crops and perennials. Some two thirds of Tajikistan's population are directly
dependent for their living on the country's 4.6 million ha of agricultural land, the greater
part of which is rainfed pasture land (although there is some rainfed land with annual
crops or perennials). Only about 850,000 ha are arable and irrigated, some 800,000 ha of
which are in lowlands and under rotation between cotton and cereal crops, with about
320,000 ha under cotton at any one time. The specific locations of two of the activities,
farmland restructuring and environmental land management, (which addresses the risks
associated with farmland restructuring) will continue to be determined by local demand,
implementation capacity, and amount of allocated budget. Project support for on-farm
irrigation rehabilitation is small: the cumulative total command area—from project
inception through the Additional Financing—that would be affected by the irrigation
grants is expected cover about 12,200 ha, in individual command areas of no more than
320 ha each, scattered throughout the country. Under the Additional Financing, the scope
of the demand-driven issuance of use rights certificates for other types of land (e.g.,
household plots) would be in accordance with demands of local residents and the
institutional capacity of the RLCCs and could take place anywhere in the country; the
pilot activities for improved registration would operate in small areas within at least three
raions and one municipality.

 The focus of the farmland restructuring has been on arable and perennial land rather
than pasture land. However, the Project has also included some uplands that have in the
past been legally classified as pasture land and have undergone small community-based
land resource management investments (e.g., orchards, improved pasture). These
investments took place under the World Bank-financed Community Agriculture and
Watershed Management Project through a well-defined participatory process that
addressed the interests of vulnerable people. The Additional Financing may also
consider issues involving land use rights on high pastures. If such policy analysis and
dialogue takes place, consistent with the Bank's policies, any resulting reforms would
include development of a community decision making process and identification of
appropriate measures to mitigate adverse impacts, if any, on vulnerable members of the
community.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr German Stanislavovich Kust (ECSS3)
   Ms Sayora Nazarova (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental impact of the proposed Project is expected to be positive. Findings
from the earlier Farm Privatization Support Project and experience from the original
Land Registration and Cadastral System Project and land registration projects in other
countries indicate that improving farmers' tenure security and ability to make farm
management decisions has a positive impact on land and soil management, and therefore
on the environment in general. In particular, in each raion (local administrative unit) key
field-based governmental staff (from land, environment and agriculture units) responsible
for the control of land use and proper use of agricultural technologies, and also
representatives of local NGOs working with farmers (more than 20 in each of the 36
raions where the training was implemented, 788 in total) received a range of professional
trainings (including pest management) provided by scientists and specialists. These
trainings use demonstration plots of local best farmers selected through a competition
specially organized for this purpose. Regional final workshops in 7 cadastral zones and
national conference of land users acknowledged the effectiveness of this approach on the
land use practice. In the raions where specialists received project-supported training,
more farmers are starting to use successful soil and water saving technologies, non-
hazardous pest control methods, and energy effective approaches. The Additional
Financing includes support to strengthen the assessment and monitoring of environmental
aspects of land management, on-farm irrigation, and pest management practices on
existing farms.

 As in the original project, OP 4.01 continues to be triggered. The project includes
support for minor civil works related to office rehabilitation and on-farm irrigation
rehabilitation, and includes standard environmental guidelines for those activities, which
have been updated to reflect current good practice. In addition, rural people are generally
not aware of sustainable agricultural approaches and methodologies or environmental
safety. Therefore, new family farmers might not anticipate the possible negative effects
associated with their agricultural practices (e.g., overexploitation of soils without crop
rotation, weak usage of organic fertilizer, salinization of irrigated lands in flat areas, soil
compaction and loss of soil structure, etc.) This could cause unfavorable changes in land
quality, including soil erosion, reduction of organic matter in soil, and land degradation.
There is a need to build the capacity of farmers to assess and monitor environmental
conditions and implement improved agro-ecological practices.

  OP 4.09 continues to be triggered as well, because farmland restructuring and
registration and irrigation rehabilitation could potentially lead indirectly to increased pest
problems and increased use of pesticides among beneficiaries. Hence, pest management
is addressed as part of the overall environmental land management capacity building, and
through the environmental management procedures for small on-farm irrigation
investments. The Project has not and will not directly support the purchase or use of
pesticides or other pest management activities, except for the very small pesticide
applications associated with the improved cotton seed demonstrations (which showed,
inter alia, a way to decrease the use of pesticides). (The demonstrations were
implemented prior to the 2009 Restructuring and were found by the Bank to be compliant
with the agreed environmental and pest management safeguard guidelines and policies.)

 The Project will not involve resettlement, or the issuance of land use rights in protected
or forested areas. It is not expected to have any adverse impacts on natural habitats or
cultural property. It will not involve international waterways or disputed areas.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of the Additional Financing, provisions for civil works (minor office
rehabilitation, and minor irrigation rehabilitation) have been updated to reflect current
good practice (taking into account the more standardized documentation used for the
Kyrgyz Republic Second Land and Real Estate Registration Project).The updated
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) includes annexes with standard
environmental clauses and checklists for works contracts and irrigation rehabilitation
grants. All civil works will continue to be designed and implemented in accordance with
environmentally sound engineering practices, and governed by environmental screening
procedures and contractual standards.

 In other aspects, the substance of the EMF and environmental management practices, as
revised during the 2009 Restructuring of the original Project, have proven to be
satisfactory and will continued to be used for the Additional Financing. In the 2009
restructuring, the EMF and Pest Management Plan (PMP) were revised to focus the pest
management specifically on awareness raising and capacity building in integrated pest
management and pesticide safety for participating farmers, farmer associations and line
representatives of the relevant ministries. Under the original Project, as restructured in
2009, the Environmental Land Management subcomponent has been building knowledge
(using an interactive training methodology) on agro-ecological management for newly
independent farmers, which has enhanced sustainable productivity. It has also enhanced
the skills of state local officers/specialists to accurately identify possible land degradation
problems and risks and to understand ecosystem interactions. In addition, it has helped
newly emerging farmers adopt environmentally safe and sound crop management
practices, and promotes integrated management of pests and increased use of organic
inputs. These activities will continue during the Additional Financing period.

 The 2009 project restructuring integrated the PMP into the EMF, rather than treating the
PMP as a separate document. However, because the 2009 revisions took the form of an
addendum rather than a revision of the entire original EMF, the original EMF still
included out-dated text that did not reflect the 2009 and 2010 project restructuring
revisions. For the Additional Financing, the overall EMF has now been fully updated
into one consolidated document.

  In addition to the existing officials in the Government's environment agency, the Project
Management Unit has a full-time specialist who will continue to monitor environmental
impacts and compliance. The design of the Additional Financing will also include a
program in environmental land management (including integrated pest management
(IPM)) to improve the quality of advice to newly independent family farmers.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The final version of the original EMF was publically disclosed in-country on September
30, 2004, after the comments of all interested stakeholders had been taken into account.
The updated EMF has now been publically disclosed as well.

 The farmland restructuring provides clear land use rights in accordance with agreed
standards and procedures that include a thorough consultation process. In addition, the
environmental land management activities will address the environmental risks of
farmland restructuring through farmer competitions on best environmental management
practice, through training of trainers, and through publicity designed to reach project
beneficiaries.

 There is a remote possibility that in some locations, project activities may involve other
agricultural lands such as pasture where natural resource management approaches may
involve some restrictions on access. To the extent that such activities occur, the Project
would use or if necessary develop a community decision making process and appropriate
measures to mitigate adverse impacts, if any, on vulnerable members of the community,
including groups involved in transhumance movement of livestock.

 The agreed EMF procedures for civil works for both irrigation and office rehabilitation
include provisions for any stakeholder consultation that may be needed on environmental
aspects. The irrigation rehabilitation grants are both proposed and implemented by Water
Users Associations (WUAs), which are required to meet participatory and social
inclusion governance requirements. Grants will be awarded to WUAs with members
who have already obtained clear land use rights through a prior, highly consultative
farmland restructuring.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12/07/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 12/07/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  12/07/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12/07/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 12/07/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  12/07/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Jessica Mott                 01/04/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr German Stanislavovich Kust   01/04/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Sayora Nazarova              01/04/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss                01/09/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Benoit Paul Blarel           01/09/2012
  Comments:
