                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/08/2012                                     Report No.: AC6589
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P079027                 Original Project Name: Municipal
                                             Infrastructure Development Project
Country: Tajikistan                          Project ID: P127130
Project Name: ADDITIONAL FINANCING MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Task Team Leader: Serdar Jepbarov
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 19, 2012 Estimated Board Date: May 8, 2012
Managing Unit: ECSS6                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Water supply (40%);Solid waste management (35%);Sub-national government
administration (20%);Sanitation (5%)
Theme: Other urban development (40%);Urban services and housing for the poor
(20%);Municipal finance (20%);Municipal governance and institution building (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              7
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.84
                                                                        0.84
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective of the Municipal Infrastructure Development Project
(MIDP) Additional Financing (AF) remains the same as the original project and is to
improve the availability, quality and efficiency of the delivery of basic municipal services
to the population of the towns which participate in the project. While stressing the
importance of continuing the investments pursued under the original project and
recognizing the urgency and the vast range of needs across the country, the Government
of the Republic of Tajikistan (GoRT) and State Unitary Enterprise “Khojagiyu
Manzilliyu Kommunali? (KMK) have requested that the MIDP-AF be less
geographically dispersed than MIDP, in favor of better integrated investments in fewer
towns, spanning urban centers and poor rural peri-urban areas as needed, and addressing
the most urgent priorities to improve the delivery of basic municipal services such as
water supply, sanitation and solid waste management.
3. Project Description
The AF will have the same components as MIDP:

  Component A: Municipal Infrastructure Rehabilitation: This component will continue to
finance improvement of municipal services in an integrated manner. Physical investments
will be limited to two towns, namely Farkhor and Vose in order to deepen the impact.
The project will rehabilitate existing water supply and sanitation systems, including the
construction of new water storage tanks, one in each town, limited extensions of the
water distribution networks to increase coverage, and the improvement of water quality at
intakes by rehabilitation of chlorination facility, construction of new wells and
rehabilitation of electric supply at the site. The project will procure solid waste
management and sanitation equipment. In Farkhor, the project would fund the
establishment of a temporary solid waste deposit site within the bounds of the existing
landfill, as well as the construction of additional public latrines. In addition, the project
will improve the access road and sludge drying bed in the existing landfill.

 This component will finance the following sub-components:

 Sub-component A1: Infrastructure investments in Farkhor. The proposed scope of
investment in Farkhor includes i) water supply system improvements, with rehabilitation
of wells and pumping station; rehabilitation and limited extension of urgently needed
water supply trunk lines; construction of a new storage tank; rehabilitation of secondary
water distribution lines; installation of water meters; ii) sanitation measures:
rehabilitation and addition of public block latrines; procurement of vacuum trucks and
excavators; iii) solid waste management: rehabilitation of existing waste collection
points; procurement of containers and waste collection trucks; construction of temporary
waste deposit site within existing landfill; improvement of access road to landfill and
perimeter fencing of the temporary solid waste deposit site, installation of sludge drying
beds in the existing landfill; and iv) procurement of solid waste management and
sanitation equipment.

 Sub-component A2: Infrastructure investments in Vose. The proposed scope of
investments in Vose will include i) water supply system improvements: construction of a
new water storage tank storage tank at the Uchkhoz intake, replacement of the
pressurized transmission main, replacement of the most deteriorated sections of the
network, limited extension to Jugien neighborhood and enhancing the water quality on
three remaining intakes by installing chlorination facility and repairing fences around
protection zones; ii) sanitation measures include the construction of ventilated improved
pit (VIP) latrine for multi-storey residential apartments; iii) solid waste management:
provision of additional solid waste containers on public land in consultation with local
community and procurement of equipment.

 Sub-component A3: Piloting the use of modern billing and collection technologies.
Installation of modern collection and billing system to use the existing infrastructure of
electronic kiosks will be piloted to automate the relevant business processes in Kurgan-
Tube, Kulyab and Dangara by building on the improvements in their accounting systems
which was supported by under the projects financed by EBRD.

 Sub-component A4: Communication Campaign. Improvements in services delivery will
require behavioral changes by the benefiting population, both with respect to conserving
water but also habituating consumers to pay for the services they receive. The sub-
component will finance public information campaign to raise awareness on water
conservation and solid waste disposal issues and advantages of metering to improve the
public acceptance.

 Component B: Technical and Institutional Strengthening: This component will continue
to support capacity building of a) KMK at the center and of b) local utilities, with specific
focus on improving utility management, operations and maintenance and financial
sustainability. As part of the scale up the project will also support KMK in developing a
Management Information System (MIS) that will promote better collection and analyses
of data required to monitor the performance of water utilities and allow participation in
International Benchmarking Network (IBNET). At the local level the project will support
some or all of the following: setting up and upgrade of accounting software in water
utilities in the cities of Kurgan-Tube, Kulyab and Dangara; establishment of complaints
handling and emergency repair unit within the local KMK branches; and staff training
and institutional strengthening.

 Component C: Implementation Support: The component finances the Project
Management Unit already established under the MIDP project, implementation
consultants and other consultant services.

 The proposed new component under the Additional Financing will be:

 Component D: Communal Services Sector Development: This component will support
the GoRT in implementing the “Concept for Housing and Communal Services (HCS)
Reform 2010-2020? approved in 2010 through the development of a Municipal Sector
Strategy which will focus, but not limited to, on the issues and reforms required to
improve the delivery of communal services excluding housing services. The Strategy will
also explore establishing rules based financing mechanism for Communal Services
Development that would attract other donor (initially limited to water supply, sanitation
and solid waste management). This component will also finance feasibility studies to
prepare investment projects indentified by the Municipal Sector Strategy for financing by
the donors.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The AF will fund civil works in Farkhor and Vose. In the other towns cities (Dushanbe,
Kurgan-Tube, Kulyab and Dangara) the Project will not have significant physical
footprint (installation of management information system, automated accounting
software, billing and collection system at the premises of the utilities).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Roxanne Hakim (ECSS4)
   Mr Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental impacts. All proposed investments are related mostly to rehabilitation and
limited extension of water supply and sanitation systems, construction of a small scale
temporary waste deposit point and sludge drying bed in the existing landfill (in Farkhor),
and procurement of transformers at water intake, as well as solid waste management and
sanitation equipment. Environmental issues associated with the above interventions are
minor, short-lived, and primarily limited to the project sites (except for movement of
equipment and materials to/from the site). These issues are primarily: dust, noise,
disposal of waste material and/or older equipment, some traffic disruption (depending
upon specific location), worker safety (e.g. welding operations) etc. All these impacts are
addressed with good engineering and construction practices and with mitigation measures
specified in the project Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to be applied by
contractors with close supervision of compliance by the Project Management Unit
(PMU).

 Social impacts. The project will also bring positive social impacts as the proposed
activities would improve social conditions for the population and would contribute to
improving local population livelihoods. The ongoing project triggered OP 4.12 and
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared and implemented in 3 towns of Vahdat,
Kurgan-Tube and Istarafshan. The implementation has been satisfactory to date and the
PMU has gained capacity to understand the requirements of RAPs. Project Affected
Persons (PAPs) were satisfied and payments of compensation were complete and
satisfactory to the Bank. For the Additional Financing of investments in Farkhor and
Vose a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed to set out the policy to
compensate and assist any persons that may be affected by land acquisition. The RPF was
disclosed to the public on January 30, 2012 and consultations conducted on February 3,
2012 in Dushanbe and February 7, 2012 in Vose and Farkhor.

 As mentioned above, the detail project design has not been completed. The on-going
studies have provided some information on some potential impacts:

  Water abstraction/intake site: The existing water abstraction on the premises of the
water utility of Farkhor which is under the KMK will be upgraded through the drilling of
new wells and refurbishment of existing structures. Presently the site is also being used
by the watchman of the water utility of Farkhor as a residence and for grazing of
livestock and limited farming. It is unlikely that there will be adequate land for these
activities to continue. In that event, compensation will have to be paid for any structures
or assets that he may have on the land such as standing crop or vegetables, fruit trees,
fences and cattle shelter. He will keep his employment with water utility of Farkhor and
continue to live there in his capacity as watchman. In addition, some unlined pit latrines
along the external perimeter fence of the intake site may have to be demolished and
replaced with lined latrines in a suitable location nearby.

 New Storage tanks: Two new storage tanks are planned on land where there was an old
dysfunctional storage tank in Farkhor and Vose respectively. The land belongs to the
local water utilities and there is no one living on it that will be affected. However, there is
a non-approved foundation of new house which is under construction adjacent to the site
of the proposed new high-elevation storage tank in Farkhor. The foundation of the house
may have to be removed and its construction stopped. The construction of the high-
elevation storage tank in Farkhor started in 1988 and put on hold in 1990. If the removal
of the foundation of the house will be confirmed during the survey for detail design
adequate compensation will be paid to the owner.

 The temporary solid waste deposit site will be located in the existing landfill of Farkhor
and no persons or resources are affected.

 Limited extension of water supply networks from new storage tanks to existing network
in Farkhor and Vose: The routing is along public streets so there is no land acquisition
impact. For the other planned infrastructure no further potential resettlement has been
identified.

 Waste water treatment. The initial project design proposal of constructing an aeration
lagoon at the existing waste water treatment site, as reflected in the disclosed version of
the updated EMP and RPF, has been removed from the investment scope of the project as
there will no longer be any rehabilitation of the sewerage network due to insufficient
funding and priority given by the government to focus on improving water supply
services. The two families that are living on the said site will therefore not be affected
under this project. The EMP and RPF will be updated to reflect this change and re-
disclosed.
 The applicability of World Bank Operational Policy 7.50, “Projects on International
Waterways? was reviewed with the Legal Department of the World Bank, and a waiver
on notifying riparian states was granted. The project will not include any irrigation and
the proposed investments would instead reduce water abstraction from rivers and canals
by reducing leakages in the system. Although the project includes the construction of
new storage tanks and limited extension of the water supply distribution network in Vose
and Farkhor abstraction of water will be less than the original designed capacity at
intakes. In addition, there will be minimal increase in water consumption from
underground sources (not expected to exceed 15%) as a net result of new household
connections on the one hand, and the installation of water meters expected to reduce
consumption on the other.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The expected long term and cumulative impacts of the proposed activities are mostly
positive and include improved water supply and sanitation infrastructure as well as
improved health and livelihood of the local population of participating cities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
There are no alternative project options.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Social measures. The ongoing project has triggered OP 4.12 and RAPs were prepared and
implemented in 3 towns of Vahdat, Kurgan-Tube and Istarafshan. The implementation
has been satisfactory to date and the PMU has gained capacity to understand the
requirements of RAPs. Project Affected Persons (PAPs) were satisfied and payments of
compensation were complete and satisfactory to the Bank.

 Environmental measures. The required mitigation measures for the project activities are
standard and widely use in construction practices as well as in solid waste management
and in water supply and sanitation works. They are prescribed in the updated
Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which was prepared for the on-going project
covers all proposed AF activities. Based on the updated EMP, site Specific
Environmental Management Plans will be prepared for activities to be done in Farkhor
and Vose. A review of the status of EMP implementation and of compliance of
implemented within the on-going project activities with safeguards issues were done
during the last WB supervision mission in November 2011. The mission concluded that
the EMP is being implemented well overall and that the PMU has relevant capacities to
ensure EMP successful implementation. The few recommendations on improving
safeguards implementation were related to better reporting as well as appointing a
responsible person within the PMU in this regard which has been done. As per National
EA legislation this project should be subject of the State Ecological Expertise (SEE),
once the draft of the site specific EMP is prepared, the PMU will disclose and consult it
with all interested parties, and officially submitted to the SEE for its review and approval.
After the SEE approval the EMP will be disclosed in the country as well as in the WB
Infoshop and will be used during project implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The EMP has been disclosed in accordance with the Bank’s policy in the country and was
also sent to the WB Infoshop in October, 2005. The update EMP was disclosed on
January 30, 2012 and consultations were held on February 3, 2012 in Dushanbe and
February 7, 2012 in Vose and Farkhor. The key stakeholders are KMK, a central
government utility agency, local municipalities, and the beneficiaries. As part of the
social assessment consultations were carried out with consumers to determine their needs
and ensure that they are taken into account in project design. Periodic consultations will
continue during project implementation and after project completion to determine the
level of beneficiary satisfaction with the project and its impact.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/30/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/30/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/30/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/30/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/30/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/30/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Serdar Jepbarov       02/08/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Arcadii Capcelea      02/08/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Roxanne Hakim         02/08/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Benoit Paul Blarel    02/08/2012
  Comments:
