                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6364


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/06/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Tanzania                              Project ID: P125375
Project Name: Private Power Generation (Ruhudji HPP) Project
Task Team Leader: Robert Schlotterer
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 9, 2013         Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2014
Managing Unit: AFTEG                           Lending Instrument:
Sector: Large Hydropower (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                         0.00
        IDA Guarantee                                                  200.00
                                                                       200.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the environment for private sector
investment in this project, thereby increasing private sector investment in Tanzanian climate-
friendly hydropower generation capacity. This will help Tanzania to meet its domestic energy
requirements through environmentally and socially sustainable development.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The GOT intends to develop the Ruhudji Hydro Power Project (HPP), a 358 MW hydro power
scheme to generate 2,000 GWh of electricity per annum, in the private sector. The project cost is
estimated to be over US$1 billion and the project was confirmed by the PSMP 2009 being the
next least cost major hydropower project in Tanzania. Energy alternatives to Ruhudji HPP
include development of coal and HFO fired power plants which are both financially and
environmentally costly and would extend the carbon footprint of Tanzania. The Ruhudji HPP
currently includes two main parts of activities, which are likely to become future project
components:
 #      Component 1 includes the design, construction and operation of the hydropower plant by
a private investor company, which will be located on the Ruhudji River some 75 km south-east
of the town of Njombe (southern Tanzania). The scheme will include a reservoir and power plant
(downstream from the dam). The project will have a 16.3 square kilometer reservoir surface
area, an underground power station, an estimated 7.3-km headrace tunnel, an estimated 1.1-km
long steel-lined pressure shaft and an estimated 3.1-km tailrace tunnel. This Component will be
financed and implemented by the private sector.
  #     Component 2 will involve the design, construction and operation of a transmission line to
evacuate the power generated from the power station to the nearest tapping point of the main grid
system. There are several line routing alternatives, which still need further economic, technical
and environmental study. This Component is likely to be financed and implemented by
TANESCO.

D. Project location (if known)
The project is approximately 75 km east of the town of Njombe, on the Ruhudji River in the
southern highlands of Tanzania. The Ruhudji is in the Rufiji River Basin, which is entirely
within the borders of Tanzania and drains to the Indian Ocean. Administratively, the project is in
Njombe District, which is part of the Iringa Region of Tanzania.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Component 1 will be implemented by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) established in Tanzania
by a selected private investor consortium, led by Aldwych International (UK). The SPV project
company will have overall responsibility for the design, finance, supply, erection,
commissioning, operation, and maintenance of the Ruhudji power plant. The project sponsors
anticipate that construction of the project will be by means of an engineering-procurement-
construction (EPC) contractor, and the selection process will take safeguards implementation
capacity and experience into consideration. In addition, the SPV will be expected to buildup
adequate environmental and social expertise to implement the project. Whilst the SPV is a new
entity, the Bank team notes that the private sponsor is highly experienced in these types of
projects. In addition TANESCO will establish a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) responsible for
supervising Project Implementation, including tracking of all project outcomes and safeguard
compliance.

 Component 2 will be implemented by TANESCO. TANESCO is currently implementing
various Bank financed projects and has adequate capacity to properly implement the Bank
safeguards.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASNS)
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
   Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    This is a large construction project that will mobilize a workforce of more than 1000 people
in a sparsely-populated, impoverished area and that will stress the existing municipal
infrastructure and services. Two dams will cause inundation of approximately 16 km2. Flow
will be significantly reduced in approximately 15 km of the Ruhudji River between the intake
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes           No        TBD
dam and the tailrace outlet. Flow patterns will be altered between the storage and intake dams
and downstream of the powerhouse, and this may affect aquatic ecology and human uses of the
river. Approximately 100 km of access roads will need to be constructed, partially on the
alignment of existing unpaved roads. The corridor for the 220-kV transmission line of about 150
km is yet to be determined, but it will require additional land for tower footings and will impose
some restrictions of land use in the right of way. An ESIA for the dam, with an analysis of
alternatives and assessment of cumulative impacts and/or associated impacts, as well as an
Environmental and Social Management Plan, will be prepared before appraisal. An ESIA for the
T-line will also be prepared before appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
    There is little natural forest left in the catchment and the areas that will be inundated.
However, 20 km of riverine ecosystem will be converted to lacustrine, and flow will be
substantially reduced or eliminated in 18 km of the river downstream of the storage dam.
Alterations in flow patterns will affect the aquatic ecosystem downstream of the tailrace outlet.
The Kilombero Wetland, a Ramsar site and therefore critical natural habitat, is approximately
100 km downstream of the project; significant impacts are unlikely but will have to be examined.
Roads and the transmission line right of way will facilitate access for illegal hunters. Impacts on
natural habitats will be addressed in the ESIAs for the dam and the T-line.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                             X
    The project may involve afforestation for catchment management, but this is yet to be
determined.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                        X
    The project may require use of pesticides to control waterborne diseases including malaria
and bilharzia.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
    The 1998 EIA (which has to be redone) identified archaeological sites from the African Iron
Age (ca 300,000 to 50,000 BCE) that will be damaged by the construction of the access roads.
Prior excavation of some sites will be necessary. There are also sites with cultural or spiritual
significance that will have to be inventoried in the ESIA. Chance finds are probable. A PCR
management plan will be a necessary part of the ESIA for the dam.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                  X
    A social assessment (SA) will be prepared before the appraisal to determine if there are
Indigenous Peoples (IPs) living in the project area and if so what are their characteristics. In
addition, an IP mapping exercise is underway in Tanzania which will be completed by the end of
June, 2011. This mapping exercise will help to determine if the OP 4.10 needs to be triggered for
this project. If the mapping exercise indicates that there are IPs in the project area, an Indigenous
Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared and disclosed by the appraisal based on the findings of the
SA.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
    The storage reservoir will inundate 1 to 2 ha of farmland. Access road development will
affect several villages. The corridor for the 220-kV transmission line of about 150 km is yet to be
determined, but it will require additional land for tower footings and will impose some
restrictions on land use in the right of way. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared
for the dam, reservoirs, powerhouse and other facilities before appraisal. A Resettlement Policy
Framework for the T-line will be prepared by the appraisal and disclosed. However, if the entire
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No          TBD
T-line or a segment of the T-line is known before appraisal, then a RAP will be prepared for the
T-line or segment. Subsequent RAP(s) for the T-line will be prepared during project
implementation.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                         X
    With two dams, heights 67 and 32 meters, the project requires a dam safety panel.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                               X
    The project does not affect any international waterways, as the Ruhudji River is in the Rufiji
River Basin, which drains to the Indian Ocean and is entirely within Tanzania.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                        X
    No part of the project is in a disputed area.


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 12/12/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   An environmental impact assessment was completed in 1998 but is outdated and does not
   meet OP 4.01 requirements. The project sponsor will engage independent consultants to
   prepare a new ESIA, for which a Scoping Report was issued in October 2009, submitted to
   the National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) in accordance with Tanzanian
   regulations, and approved by NEMC. The TORs for the ESIA are contained in the Scoping
   Report and envision a study that will require six months of baseline data collection to cover
   both high-flow and low-flow conditions, and ten months from commencement to completion
   of a final report that incorporates the results of NEMC#s review of the draft ESIA. The
   ESIA for the transmission line will be prepared separately, because the line will be
   constructed by TANESCO. Since the IDA will be financing the line, its ESIA will be
   prepared in accordance with OP 4.01, and the TORs for both ESIAs will require close
   coordination between the two preparation consultants. If the transmission line routing has
   been decided prior to appraisal, or if a segment of the T-line has been determined before
   appraisal a RAP will be prepared, If it has not been decided, an RPF will be prepared prior to
   appraisal, and the RAP(s) will be prepared during implementation. A RAP will in any case
   be prepared for the dam, reservoirs, powerhouse and other facilities. A social assessment to
   be conducted in conjunction with the ESIA will determine whether there are indigenous

1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
   peoples in the project-affected area and, if so, an IPP will be prepared. Drafts of the ESIA,
   RPF and/or RAP, and IPP (if needed) will be disclosed in country and in the InfoShop prior
   to appraisal.

    Estimated Disclosure Dates in Infoshop and in Country:
    ESIA:    06/03/2013
    RAP:     06/03/2013

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Robert Schlotterer                           07/07/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                        07/07/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Anna M. Bjerde                               07/07/2011
   Comments:
