                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6203


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/08/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Tanzania                           Project ID: P123134
Project Name: Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Development Project
Task Team Leader: Barjor E. Mehta
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11,      Estimated Board Date: April 23, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: AFTUW                        Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                            Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%)
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (50%);Municipal governance and
institution building (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           75.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           0.00
                                                                      0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
This project is being designed as an Adaptable Program Loan (APL). The proposed long-term
development program objective is to enhance service delivery in Dar es Salaam through
strengthening the institutional and urban management systems of the Dar es Salaam Local
Authorities (DLAs).

 The proposed specific objective of Phase I of the proposed Dar es Salaam Metropolitan
Development Project (DMDP) is to strengthen the institutional and urban management systems
of the Dar es Salaam Local Authorities (DLAs).

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project may have four interrelated components supporting the project development
objective: (i) institutional development for improved metropolitan and council management
systems; (ii) urban infrastructure investments; (iii) land management systems; and (iv) support
for project management. Brief preliminary descriptions of the components follow.
 Component 1-- Institutional development for improved metropolitan and council management
systems: The objective of this component is to: (a) support GoT (including concerned Ministries,
Departments and Agencies) and the DLAs in their efforts to improve the governance system for
the metropolitan area of Dar es Salaam, and the related allocation of functions and financial
arrangements among the four DLAs; (b) support development and implementation of new and
enhanced policies, systems and instruments for urban development and management; and (c)
strengthen the related capacity of the DLAs to plan and deliver the public services for which they
are responsible.

  Component 2 -- Urban Infrastructure Investments: The objective of the component is to
demonstrate advancements in such management functions as planning and prioritization of
investments, project preparation (including feasibility analysis, safeguard assessments, technical
specification, etc.), implementation management, and operations and maintenance processes, for
the infrastructure sectors that the DLAs are responsible for. Infrastructure investments will be
targeted towards: (a) investments of cross-cutting (metropolitan-wide) nature, for which
coordination and collaboration among the DLAs is particularly required (DCC would be
expected to be the implementing agency); and (b) municipal council investments for which the
respective municipality would be the implementing agency. Investments in infrastructure at the
relevant metropolitan and individual MC level will become the catalysts for mainstreaming and
institutionalizing the systems of governance between the DLAs as well as with other relevant
Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and the private sector.

  Component 3 -- Land Management Systems: In line with the government’s Decentralization by
Devolution policy, the objective of this component is to: (a) support MLHHSD’s transition to its
main role as regulator and supervisor of land use planning as the capacity of the DLAs improve;
and (b) enable the city-wide formalization and regularization of unplanned settlements through
streamlined mechanisms and provision of appropriate documentation for regularization.
  Component 4 -- Project Management: The objective of this component is to strengthen the
capacity of the DLAs to implement the project. This is expected to include capacity building and
financing of operational costs for the direct project management functions, including
procurement, accounting, financial management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), audit of
project accounts, meetings and workshops, and impact assessments. The project will also support
the DLAs to prepare project proposals for development partner or private sector finance, and to
prepare the APL Phase II.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be implemented only within the Dar es Salaam Region of Tanzania. The three
Municipal Councils which form the region are: Ilala Municipal Council, Kinondoni Municipal
Council and Temeke Municipal Council.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
DMDP is being designed to be an Environment and Social Category B project. This is because it
will follow and build on systems and implementing arrangements established under the ongoing
Local Government Support Project and the subcomponent Community Infrastructure
Improvement Project (CIUP) which is being implemented by the DLAs and which is also a
category B project. The DLAs have being managing CIUP since 2004/05 and have demonstrated
their capacity to plan and implement complex urban infrastructure subprojects involving
resettlement as well as ensuring compliance with the project#s environmental and social
management arrangements. As with CIUP, under the proposed DMDP the DLAs will have to
adhere to: (a) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (b) a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF); and (c) alignment with national procurement requirements. As
mentioned above, there is considerable experience and capacity to undertake these activities in
the DLAs, and the proposed DMDP will provide additional and continued supportive and DLA-
focused institutional strengthening inputs.
  The ESMF and the RPF will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal. Preparation of the
ESMF and RPF will involve extensive consultation with communities and other stakeholders
likely to be impacted across the three municipalities under the project: Ilala, Kinondoni and
Temeke. The DLAs have community development officials and institutional mechanisms in
place at municipal, ward, sub-ward and neighborhood levels and which will be used to conduct
consultations during preparation of and receive feedback on the proposed ESMF and RPF.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
   Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    Based on priorities determined by the DLAs in consultation with resident communities, the
proposed project is likely to support investments in local municipal infrastructure such as minor
roads with side drains, street lights, bus stands etc. The planned Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will develop guidelines -to be followed by the DLAs - to
address likely temporary environmental issues such as, reduction of temporary construction-
related disturbances and nuisances (noise, construction dust and vibration), proper planning of
on-site location of construction material, reduction and management of local traffic disturbances
and impact on flow (and improvement) of natural drains during and after construction. Even as
the DLAs have being managing CIUP since 2004/05 and have demonstrated their capacity to
plan and implement urban infrastructure subprojects, the proposed DMDP will ensure continued
appropriate strengthening of institutional systems and human capacity within the DLAs as well
as in the local communities to plan for, implement and monitor the management of any likely
environmental issues as a result of the investments for works described above. The ESMF will be
disclosed before appraisal at the community, municipal council and country level as well as
disclosed through the Bank’s InfoShop.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
    Based on DLA and community priorities, the project is likely to support construction of
community roads and pathways, road side drains, street lighting, solid waste management
systems etc. At times, such small works may involve minor adjustments to existing structures
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No       TBD
and consider temporary effects to small businesses along the construction sites. The DLAs have
been successfully implementing an existing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) under the
current CIUP. To accommodate the needs of the proposed project, a new updated and
comprehensive RPF will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal at the community, municipal
council and country level as well as being disclosed through the Bank’s InfoShop.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 12/17/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) will be disclosed in the country and at the Bank InfoShop prior to project
   appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Barjor E. Mehta                                             06/09/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       06/09/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad                                          06/09/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
