                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/14/2011                                     Report No.: 63321
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P101645                 Original Project Name: TZ-Energy
                                             Development & Access Expansion
Country: Tanzania                            Project ID: P117260
Project Name: Additional Financing - Energy Development and Access Expansion
Project
Task Team Leader: Dana Rysankova
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 23,       Estimated Board Date: April 6, 2010
2009
Managing Unit: AFTEG                         Lending Instrument: Financial
                                             Intermediary Loan
Sector: Renewable energy (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (54%);Other financial and private sector
development (46%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             25.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
This ISDS is being updated to reflect the inclusion of the Energy SME (ESME) grant in
the amount of US$ 6.5 million funded by the Russian Trust Fund for the ESME
development in Sub-Saharan Africa.

 - The objective of TEDAP is to improve the quality and efficiency of the electricity
service provision in the main three growth centers of Dar es Salaam, Arusha, and
Kilimanjaro and to establish a sustainable basis for energy access expansion.

 - The project’s global environmental objective is to abate greenhouse gas emissions
through the use of renewable energy in rural areas to provide electricity.

 - The Project Development Objective would be slightly reformulated to highlight
project’s enhanced focus on renewable energy development. The new Project
Development Objective will read: The Project Development Objective is to improve the
quality and efficiency of the electricity service provision in the main three growth centers
of Dar es Salaam, Arusha, and Kilimanjaro and to establish a sustainable basis for energy
access expansion and renewable energy development in Tanzania. The global
environmental objective will not change.

3. Project Description
- TEDAP consists of three components: (a) a grid component of US$85.8 million
focusing on urgent investments in TANESCO’s transmission and distribution network;
(b) an off-grid component of US$22.5 million (including US$6.5 million from GEF) to
support an institutional set-up for the newly established Rural Energy Agency (REA) and
to develop and test new off-grid electrification approaches for future scale up; and (c) a
technical assistance component of US$3.2 million.

 - TEDAP’s off-grid component has three subcomponents: (i) Small Power Projects
(SPPs), including renewable power generation and mini-grids; (ii) Sustainable Solar
Market Development, supplying solar PV systems for public institutions and for
individual households and businesses in rural areas; and (iii) Technical Assistance to the
Rural Energy Agency (REA) and other stakeholders. These activities are implemented
through: (a) provision of grants to the private sector (including NGOs and cooperatives)
to partially offset investment costs of new service connections (through performance
grants), and for pre-investment studies, business and market development (through
matching grants); and (b) supply, installation and provision of maintenance and other
associated services for the Sustainable Solar Market Packages, as well as the provision of
goods, consultant services and training for the technical assistance subcomponent, and
related operating expenses.

 - The proposed Additional Financing will require adding one sub-component and
adjusting implementation arrangements of the Component B (off-grid component).The
Additional Financing will not affect the Components A and C.

 - The Component B - "Off-grid Component" - will be renamed to "Small Power Project
Component". This name reflects better the component’s support to both grid-connected
and off-grid small power projects.

  - The sub-component B1 will be modified to introduce a new beneficiary and a new
activity (US$ 2 million of the Additional Financing). First, the Additional Financing will
expand the existing matching grant window under the sub-component B.1, which is
currently providing technical assistance to the project developers. The Additional
Financing will open this grant window to participating financial institutions (PFIs) for the
development, appraisal and supervision of their renewable energy portfolios. Second, the
Additional Financing will add a low-cost distribution pilot, as a new activity under the
sub-component B.1. This activity, implemented by REA, will demonstrate new
techniques and implementation approaches aimed at reducing the costs of distribution
networks. Reducing costs of distribution networks (currently among the highest in Sub-
Saharan Africa) would enhance commercial viability of SPP mini-grids and reduce
subsidy needs.

 - A sub-component B.4 Rural / Renewable Energy Credit Line would be added (US$23
million of the Additional Financing). The credit line would provide long-term funding
(up to 15 years) to eligible participating financial institutions in local currency to on-lend
to eligible small power projects (SPPs). The project developers would request loans to
PFIs of their choice. The PFIs will perform a full appraisal of the projects and if
satisfied, will request corresponding credit line funding. The credit line is open to all
Tanzanian financial intermediaries, as long as they meet eligibility criteria. The detailed
implementation arrangements and the eligibility criteria will be established in the
Operating Guidelines.

 - Implementation arrangements for component B will be adjusted to reflect the inclusion
of the new sub-component B.4. REA will act as the program manager and facilitator.
Tanzania Investment Bank will administer credit line financially on behalf of
Government of Tanzania.

 - Several grant resources have been made available to Tanzania for rural and renewable
energy development, including the Lighting Rural Tanzania grant in the amount of
US$1.1 million financed under the Africa Renewable Energy and Access Grant (AFREA)
and the Energy SME (ESME) grant in the amount of US$ 6.5 million funded by the
Russian Trust Fund for the ESME development in Sub-Saharan Africa.

  -The Lighting Rural Tanzania grant ensures additional parallel financing to TEDAP’s
matching grant window, providing grants of up to $100,000 each to the private sector for
technical assistance to develop business models that deliver a wide array of innovative
and appropriate modern lighting products to off-grid households and businesses in rural
Tanzania, with the quality, applications, costs, or configurations needed by this low-
income market segment. Energy for these lights could be from renewable energy,
mechanical, or other non fossil fuel sources. The grant is not expected to have any
negative environmental and social impacts, as it provides only technical assistance related
to the dissemination of low-cost lighting systems.

 -The objective of the ESME grant is to support the provision of reliable, sustainable and
affordable modern energy services in the rural areas in Tanzania by promoting local
entrepreneurship and investment in renewable energy development, while reducing future
carbon emissions. The ESME grant ensures additional parallel financing to TEDAP’s
performance grants, setting up a mechanism aimed at providing performance grants to
small renewable energy projects supported under TEDAP off-grid component, including
the Additional Financing, against future carbon emission reductions (CERs) in order to
address the existing market barriers for local developers, particularly the high equity
requirements of the local commercial banks (30-40%). The grant is expected to have a
positive social and environmental impact. It will support access scale up in rural areas in
Tanzania and economic growth by promoting local entrepreneurship, employment
opportunities, income generation and the development of the local communities.
Moreover, by providing performance grants against future CERs to support the renewable
energy development in Tanzania, the ESME grant will contribute to the climate change
mitigation efforts.
 - The project’s closing date is proposed to be extended to March 31, 2015.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The rural/renewable energy projects supported by the Additional Financing will be
located in rural areas throughout Tanzania. As the project is demand driven, the precise
location is not known.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASNS)
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
- The Additional Financing is expected to have an overall positive environmental and
social impact by scaling up local rural/renewable energy generation. The key benefits
include:
  * Reduced and avoided CO2 emissions and other pollutants from fossil fuel-fired
generation plants;
  * Increased generation capacity and diversification of the generation mix, helping to
alleviate the recurrent power shortages;
  * Increased access to modern energy services in rural areas;
  * Contribution to local rural development as most of the project sponsors are local
SMEs situated in rural areas.

  - The Additional Financing is not expected to trigger any additional safeguards policies.
OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) and OP/BP 7.50 (International Waterways) were originally
triggered under TEDAP. These policies were triggered since TEDAP’s offgrid component
was expected to involve mini-hydro development. Consequently riparian notification in
accordance with OP 7.50 was carried out by the Bank in 2007 (at the request of the
Government) and no comments were received opposing the project. OP 4.37 was
triggered as a precautionary measure, as only small, run-of-river dams were expected and
have been proposed to date. The ESMF prepared for Component B explains the
application of dam safety to the small dams, and the review of proposed mini-hydro
projects includes ensuring that designs are prepared by engineers qualified to incorporate
standard dam safety measures.

  - Environmental/social impact and resettlement. It is not anticipated that the additional
financing would result in any significant potential negative impact, or in any impacts
beyond those already identified in TEDAP. As the type and size of projects supported by
the credit line are the same as those already included in TEDAP’s off-grid component, the
Additional Financing will apply the same instruments and procedures already in place for
TEDAP’s off-grid component. These include the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the Riparian
Notification letter. ESMF and RPF were publicly disclosed on July 1, 2007. These
documents were re-disclosed under the Additional Financing.

 - Following outreach and consultations by the Task Team with local communities and
mini-hydro project developers during the initial years of project implementation, the Task
Team determined at Mid Term Review that there would be additional value created by
preparing summaries of the ESMF and RPF (for TEDAP’s offgrid component) so that the
documents are more easily accessible and understood by stakeholders who are both
benefitting from and being affected by the mini-hydro sub-projects. GOT through the
Rural Energy Agency (REA) has engaged a local consultant and an international advisor
to reformat these documents, which will also be disclosed in-country (in English and
Kiswahili) and through the Info Shop, once finalized.

  - The Lighting Rural Tanzania grant is intended to contribute to the social and
environmental development of rural areas in Tanzania. Given that the activity is
providing technical assistance grants for market development for dissemination of solar
lanterns and similar individual lighting devices only, no negative environmental and
social impacts are foreseen. However, REA will screen all subprojects, and if any
negative impacts are identified, the subprojects will be required to follow TEDAP’s
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), which were publicly disclosed on July 1, 2007.

 -The ESME grant will promote local entrepreneurship and investment in renewable
energy development in Tanzania, with positive environmental and social impact,
particularly on local communities in rural areas. The ESME grant will provide additional
performance grants to renewable energy projects already supported under TEDAP off-
grid component, including the credit line designed under the Additional Financing.
Therefore, the ESME grant will not trigger any additional safeguards policies. TEDAP#s
ESMF and RPF, publicly disclosed on July 1, 2007 and re-disclosed under the Additional
Financing on July 26, 2010, will be relevant for the ESME grant. REA will screen the
compliance of the renewable energy projects benefiting of performance grants under the
Russian Trust Fund for the ESME development with the safeguards procedures already in
place for TEDAP’s off grid component.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area are foreseen.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
- Borrower’s compliance with safeguards policies under the existing TEDAP components
has been satisfactory.

 - The Additional Financing is not expected to trigger any additional safeguards policies.
As the type and size of projects supported by the credit line are the same as those already
included in TEDAP’s off grid component, the Additional Financing will apply the same
instruments and procedures already in place for TEDAP’s off grid component. These
include Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), and Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF).

 - In line with the provisions of TEDAP Financing Agreement, the responsibility for
safeguards compliance for the component B (off grid) have passed from the Ministry of
Energy and Mines (MEM) to the Rural Energy Agency (REA) based on REA’s
satisfactory capacity assessment. REA has recently hired an experienced environmental
and social specialist, former National Environment Management Council (NEMC) staff.
External expertise also complements REA’s capacity for safeguards implementation.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) training has been provided to REA
under the institutional capacity building program financed by SIDA in order to enhance
the expertise in screening and practical operational exposure. NEMC staff from the
districts and the project developers have also received environmental and social training.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
- The key stakeholders are communities, households and businesses in the project areas,
which on one hand may potentially be affected by the sub-project developments, and on
other hand are expected to be beneficiaries of electrification.

 - The ESMF and RPF have been disclosed in the country and are available at REA,
including on its website. The ESMF and RPF form part of project’s Operating Guidelines
and are binding for project developers. Project developers are required to carry out and
document consultations with the communities.
 - Furthermore, the project aims at involving communities in the project implementation
(many of the projects are expected to be community-owned) and monitoring (e.g. s
Quality Control Agents), with a view to ensure that their voices and inputs are taking into
account early on in the process.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/15/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/28/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/08/2009
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/10/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/28/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/08/2009
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)            Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                            No
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts       N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements         N/A
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                          Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification            N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                         N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Dana Rysankova          07/11/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Thomas E. Walton        07/11/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Helen Z. Shahriari      07/11/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   07/14/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Reynold Duncan          07/11/2011
  Comments:
