                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/15/2012                                   Report No.: AC6057
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Tanzania                             Project ID: P124114
Project Name: TANZANIA SECOND CENTRAL TRANSPORT CORRIDOR
PROJECT - ADD'L FINANC
Task Team Leader: Yonas Eliesikia Mchomvu
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 24, 2012       Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTTR                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Urban Transport (95%);General transportation sector (5%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);City-wide
Infrastructure and Service Delivery (40%);Trade facilitation and market access (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            100
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to support Recipient's efforts to achieve economic
growth by providing reliable and cost effective: (a) mass transit system on the selected
corridor in Dar es Salaam city, and (b) airport facilities to Zanzibar island.

3. Project Description
The parent project CTCP 2 was approved by the Board of Directors on May 27, 2008
with the following three components:
 Component A: Dar es Salaam Urban Transport (IDA financing US$98.2 million). This
component supports the implementation of phase one of a bus rapid transit (BRT) system
in Dar es Salaam, including strengthening of the Dar Rapid Transit Agency (DART).
 Component B: Trunk Road (IDA financing US$57.4 million). This component supports
the rehabilitation/upgrading of the Korogwe– Mkumbara–Same road as well as support to
the Tanzania National Roads Agency (TANROADS) to implement the project.
 Component C: Zanzibar Airport (IDA financing US$$15.7 million). This component
supports the repair/strengthening of the existing runway, design of a new airport runway
and support to Ministry of Communication and Transport (MoCT).Zanzibar.
 The revised project components after the August 2011 restructuring of the project are as
follows:

 Component A: Dar es Salaam Urban Transport (IDA financing US$138.4 million). This
component supports the establishment of the Dar es Salaam bus rapid transit (BRT)
system, studies and capacity building to the Dar Rapid Transit Agency (DART).
 Component B: Support to TANROADS (IDA financing US$3.8 million). This
component supports the capacity building to the Tanzania National Roads Agency
(TANROADS) for implementation of the BRT infrastructure under Component A.
 Component C: Zanzibar Airport and Transport Studies (IDA financing US$$39.3
million). This component supports the rehabilitation and extension of the Zanzibar airport
runway, transport studies and Technical Assistance (TA) to the Zanzibar Ministry of
Communication and Transport (MoCT).

 The proposed Additional Financing would help finance the cost overruns under the
following:

 Component A: Dar es Salaam Urban Transport (IDA financing US$87.2 million) for
construction of the BRT infrastructure. The design and scope of the restructured project
remain unchanged.
 Component B: Support to TANROADS (IDA financing US$0.5 million) would
continue the financing of the TA until the completion of the component A of the project.
 Contingencies for currency fluctuations US$12.3 million.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located in the Central Business District of Dar es Salaam City.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
   Mr Godfrey Lweyemamu Kamukala (AFTCS)
   Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN3)
   Mr Juma Kayonko (AFTN1)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The details on alternative designs are described in the EAs. The following environmental
and social impacts were identified:

 Component A

 - General increase in traffic congestion during construction
 - Loss of employment in adjacent commercial activity during construction
 - Displacement, resettlement and right-of-way acquisition
 - Risk of construction related accidents
 - Increased noise and vibration levels along construction fronts and routes to support
areas
 - Public utility service interruption during construction
 - Expropriation
 - Disturbance of architectural land marks and other cultural property
 - Reduction in the availability of street parking spaces
 - Re-routing and rationalization of daladala (mini-bus) and consequent loss of
employment and income
 - Resettlement and compensation issues to about 890 project affected peoples (PAPs)

 Component B

 Not applicable (Works under this sub-component were dropped at restructuring).

 Component C

 -       The AF will not support this component.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Component A

  -     Positive Impacts: Reliable and comfortable public transport provided, reduced
green house gas emissions, reduced accidents and air pollution-related illnesses, increase
civic pride and sense of community, reduced noise levels, enhancement of non motorized
transport, more sustainable urban form and city beautification.

  -      Negative Impacts: Resettlement of both residential units and businesses,
restriction of access to businesses in Morogoro road, disturbance to the communities and
businesses during construction, especially in Morogoro road, jobs losses affecting owners
and operators of more than 1800 daladala (commuter mini-bus) that will be rerouted or
taken out of operation and the related businesses. At the same time, the DART system is
estimated to create about 3000 jobs. This, however, will not be an automatic transfer of
jobs since the newly created ones for the operation of the bus rapid transit system require
higher and different skills.

 Component B
 -    The rehabilitation/upgrading of the Korogwe – Same Trunk road was dropped.

 Component C
 -   Not applicable

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Component A

 -       The design alternative chosen for DART minimizes the need for resettlement. The
system cross-sections were, as far as possible, adjusted to fit with the available space.
Buses operating with natural gas with potentially lower emissions were considered for
DART but not chosen due to operational issues (heavy gas tanks and need for frequent
refill). The chosen alternative is diesel engines that fulfill Euro III emission standards.

 Component B

 -     Not applicable


 Component C

 -     Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental and Social Assessments (ESIAs) were prepared for each of the project
components to identify, assess and mitigate the potential environmental and social
impacts. The Ministry of Works has in place an Environmental Code of Practice for
Road Works (2009), which defines environmental criteria to be applied in Tanzania
during feasibility, design, construction and operation of the road infrastructure. The
ESIAs were prepared on the basis of the environmental criteria as defined in the Code of
Practice together with the requirements of Bank's Safeguards policy on Environmental
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).

 The design and bidding documents for the works under this project have taken the
recommendations of the ESIAs into account including, soil erosion control measures,
requirements for the handling of waste materials, mandatory HIV awareness campaigns,
road safety measures, etc.

 Furthermore, in view of the delays in commencing of BRT road works under Package 1,
DART Agency has in May 2012 updated the original Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) prepared in 2007 to accommodate any major changes in the
subprojects, due to shifting priorities, extreme weather events, change in locations (as for
newly acquired alternative sites for Fire Station and Urafiki feeder stations), design
and/or alignment of civil works. The updated ESMP has been prepared as a stand-alone
document.

  Social Safeguards: A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared for the urban
transport component (Component A) and disclosed in the infoshop on September 24,
2007 and in the country on September 3, 2007. Initially the Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP) for component A was prepared in two stages. Phase 1a was cleared and disclosed
in July 30, 2007, and Phase 1b was disclosed in the infoshop on Nov.1, 2007 and in the
country on December 5, 2007. No RAPs were required for components B and C. The
RAP for Component A was updated to reflect a number of changes, including the
additional number of PAPs, mainly in Ubungo and Magomeni. In Ubungo upcountry bus
terminal additional 142 people are affected (originally 88 PAPs were affected in Ubungo
and after the change of design the number increased to 230 PAPs). Additional number of
PAPs in Magomeni area along the main corridor is 21, making the total number of newly
affected people under component A to be 163. Other changes are minor and are covered
in detail in the project paper, among them change of locations for 'Fire' and 'Urafiki'
feeder stations in January 2012, relocation of the parking for 150 buses from Ubungo to
Dar es Salaam University, and inclusion of the interest rate in the compensation budget
for those who had not collected their compensation since 2008 (described below) The
updated RAP was cleared and disclosed in the country on March 17, 2012 and at the
Infoshop on March 21, 2012. The total number of PAPs under component A after the
RAP update is 890.

 The implementation of the updated RAP for component A will continue under AF.
Apart from Tshs.11.5 billion that had already been released by the government by
December 2011 for implementation of RAP of the parent project, the Government has
additionally released Tshs.12.03 billion required for finalization of the updated RAP.

 One critical area is Kariakoo/Gerezani where 85 out of 106 PAPs have opened four
court cases since August 2008. The PAPs' fourth case was struck out on March 22, 2012
and the government proceeded with eviction of PAPs on March 23, 2012 and demolition
of the properties after 12 hours notice through loud speakers. At the time of the
demolition, the PAPs in Karikoo/Gerezani were not compensated according to the RAP
(32 partially compensated and the rest with the court case not compensated at all).

  As part of its due diligence, the Bank hired two Tanzanian practicing lawyers to review
the legality of demolition according to Tanzanian laws i.e. whether the Government acted
within the law in the demolition process (including the notice period). The legal review
was inconclusive because two different opinions were presented. In the view of one
lawyer, it was incorrect for the government to use its compulsory acquisition powers in
the first place, given that it still held the title for the land in question, and demolitions
should not have taken place in the absence of a court order. In the view of the other
lawyer, as the government was in the process of selling the land to the PAPs, the use of
compulsory acquisition powers was proper (as the land was already subject to a sales
agreement to private parties) and legally adequate notice was given to the PAPs prior to
demolitions. As a consequence, it was concluded that, as a way forward, the most prudent
approach is to proceed in a manner that is guided by the objectives of Bank policy, and to
ensure that mechanisms are in place to allow PAPs who are able to show additional harm
from the demolitions to collect additional compensation commensurate with that harm.

 To ensure full compliance with RAP, the government has taken the following steps
since: i) deposited Tshs12.03 billion to the escrow account on June 12, 2012 for
implementation of updated RAP, out of which TShs 8,902,482,620 is for the
compensation of PAPs in Kariakoo/Gerezani, which includes the land and building value
as well as other allowances and 6% annual interest since 2008 for those who did not
collect their compensations. By June 30, 2012, 50 out of 106 PAPs in Kariakoo/Gerezani
had collected their full or partial compensation as provided in the RAP;
 (ii) re-established the grievance committee for Kariakoo/Gerezani PAPs which includes
three PAPs representatives (an initial meeting of the committee was held on July 6, 2012
and ten (10) grievances were reviewed); and
 (iii) conducted a communication and outreach program to the PAPs in
Kariakoo/Gerezani areas through newspapers and radio advertisements, individual letters
and a town hall meeting.
 In addition, the Government has made commitments to: (i) honor any claims from PAPs
resulting from any harm caused during the eviction process provided it is approved by the
grievances committee, and (ii) submit monthly RAP implementation reports for six
months, starting with the month of June 2012.

  In spite of the above efforts by the government, the 85 Kariakoo/Gerezani PAPs have
filed another (fifth) court case (Land case no. 44 of 2012).
 The project team is monitoring the situation and updating Management on any related
developments while moving ahead with the preparation of the AF. Also a legal remedy
has been proposed in the financing agreement to mitigate legal suits that may affect the
implementation of the project.

 With respect to Ubungo, where there are additional 142 PAPs, the existing Grievance
mechanism is functioning. On January 20, 2012, a meeting was held with the original 88
affected businesses in Ubungo, discussing the compensation for this groups which will be
done in the first phase of RAP implementation. Additional consultation is planned for
the newly affected persons in Ubungo. Compensation funds are available in the escrow
account for this group and updated RAP is planned to be implemented between July and
August 30, 2012.

 As mentioned above, in addition to those affected persons and businesses which are
covered under the RAP and RAP update, there are two other categories of impact under
CTCP-2, who are affected indirectly, they include: (a) Businesses along one kilometer
section Morogoro road, whose access will be affected and; (b) daladala operators and
owners. With regards to businesses along one kilometer section of Morogoro Road,
where traffic access would be restricted for use of BRT buses only, a public meeting was
held on February 12, 2012 with 125 affected residents and businesses. Consultation
process is to continue through different means, including media and public hearing

  With respect to daladalas, there will be a special program, once operations of the
system commences (planned for March 2015), for the compensation of people involved
in daladala owners and operations with the objective of providing affected daladala
owners, drivers and conductors with opportunities in the new system.. Owners will be
given preferential access to shares that will be made available by the future bus company
(as mandated in the operator's contract agreement). Also, affected daladalas will be
rerouted to hitherto underserved areas. Daladala drivers and conductors that are affected
by the DART system will be given training opportunities for the enhancement of their
skills which would increase their chances to be engaged by the new bus operator. The
mitigations measures for the dalalada operators are described in detail in the the ESIA
prepared for this component. In addition, as noted in the Financing Agreement, Section V
number 3, a grievance process, satisfactory to the Association (IDA) will be established
no later than June 30, 2013 as a mechanism for addressing any grievances that may arise
from affected private operators of daladals and daladals drivers in connection with the
introduction of the DART system.

 Capacity of the borrower to implement the above measures: The borrower has shown to
have adequate capacity to plan and implement the measures described in the
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) of the Project. Institutional
arrangements for environmental and social management are included in relevant
safeguards documentation. Each of the executing agencies under this project has an
environmental and social unit.
 Overall responsibility with the implementation of ESMP is with TANROADS.
TANROADS has an experienced social and environmental unit being part of its
Directorate of Planning. This unit will be required to report quarterly on progress of the
implementation of ESMP measures throughout the project period. The EA/SA reports
will be part of the quarterly project progress reports (QPR).

 The responsibility for the implementation of the RAP is with DART agency, which has
an environmental and social staff. The Agency was established in 2008 and the capacity
of implementing RAP has been weak. However, the capacity has been strengthened after
hiring of an Environmental and Social Manager and a Social Consultant in mid-2011.
The staff have further participated in Safeguards Clinics including by ASPEN and work
closely with the Social Development Specialist in the Bank Country office.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Component A

 Extensive consultations were done during ESIA preparation. This included a wide
variety of stakeholders, including public entities with direct or indirect involvement with
the project, as well as residents and businesses located along the corridor, and also those
that will be directly affected by expropriation.

 The main public entities / public officers consulted during ESIA preparation include:

 -     Vice President's Office (VPO)
 -     Prime Minister's Office (PMO)
 -     National Environnent Management Council (NEMC)
 -     Tanzania Electricity Supply Company (TANESCO)
 -     Dar Es Salaam Water and Sewage Corporation (DAWASCO)
 -     Tanzania Telephone Communication Limited (TTCL)
 -     Tanzania Railways Corporation (TRC)
 -     Dar Es Salaam City Council (DCC)
 -     The Municipalities of Temeke, Kinondoni and Ilala
 -     Ward Executive Officers along the alignment

 Further to public entity consultation, several local experts and university professors
specialized on transportation planning, urban planning, environmental management and
other pertinent skills were contacted and contributed with their views toward adjustment
of the DART project to better meet local needs.

 Similarly, a representative sample of project affected peoples (PAP) including Daladala
operators was interviewed in order to obtain an idea of expectations on the project and
other information useful for planning of future project disclosure. Consultation of all
PAPs and all relevant stakeholders is an interactive process and will continue during
project implementation, per the RAP consultation/participation framework.
 Component B

 -     Not applicable

 Component C

 -     Not applicable

  The reports for all the three components were disclosed by advertising in news papers
informing the public where they can find the reports. These reports can be accessed in at
least one of the locations: TANROADS HQ offices, DART Agency Office, Kinondoni
Municipal council, Ilala Municipal council and the National Environment Management
Council (NEMC). Stakeholders, including the community at large have been encouraged
to access the report as the disclosure enhances transparency and accountability in the
implementation of the project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/21/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              07/30/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               07/30/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                               12/05/2007
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/21/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/17/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/21/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Yonas Eliesikia Mchomvu   07/17/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa       07/13/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Helen Z. Shahriari        07/17/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Juma Kayonko              06/26/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Cary Anne Cadman          08/09/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Fabio Galli               08/09/2012
  Comments:
