                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6365


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/07/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Tanzania                              Project ID: P126432
Project Name: SINGIDA WIND POWER PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Robert Schlotterer
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 6,          Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2013
2012
Managing Unit: AFTEG                           Lending Instrument:
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                         0.00
        IDA Guarantee                                                  100.00
        Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified)                200.00
                                                                       300.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the environment for private sector
investment in this project, thereby increasing investment in Tanzanian climate-friendly wind
generation capacity.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project consists of a 100MW wind farm to be built, owned, and operated (BOO)
by a private-sector project company (Wind EA). The project cost is estimated to be between
US$230-290 million and the project was confirmed by the PSMP 2009 as one of the next least
cost short to medium term generation additions. It is envisaged that this privately financed
Project Company will supply power into the Tanzanian national grid under a long term Power
Purchase Agreement (#PPA#) with TANESCO. The wind farm will be constructed along the
Rift Valley on a site located east of the town of Singida, in the district and region of Singida.
 The intended site enjoys both a favorable climatic condition and geological base and an
acceptable seismic condition. It is anticipated that the Project will, in the long term, require a
total of 3,000 hectares. The mean wind speed of the site is assessed to be 8.8 m/s. Based on the
measurement data collected until September 2010, the net capacity factor of the WIND EA
power plant is estimated to be 42% and the net annual energy production 370.0 GWh/y.
Assuming a reasonable, yet aggressive, development schedule the plan calls for achieving
Financial Close in early 2013, construction during 2013 and delivery of first power in 2014.
  The Project will include the construction of any necessary transmission line to connect the plant
to the grid. Since the 220kV transmission line interconnection is only in the region of 10km, and
no major resettlement issues are anticipated due to this line construction, the current project
scope proposes that the transmission link will be designed and implemented by the private
company. However, it is further intended that, upon completion of construction, the title to the
transmission line will pass to TANESCO. Nonetheless, as the Project includes the costs for this
line, WIND EA will need to recoup these costs as a standard Project cost.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed project is a wind energy facility (or #wind farm#) with 100MW of installed
generating capacity. It will be located approximately 10 km east of the city of Singida, in the
district and region of Singida. The developer has identified an area in which wind conditions are
favorable and anticipates needing a total of 3000 ha for the installation of up to 50 wind turbines
with rated output between 2 and 3 MW. The turbines will be installed on 80-m towers and will
have blades up to 50 m long (i.e., 100 m rotor diameter). The selection of the exact locations for
the multiple trains of turbines (and hence the parcels of land to be acquired) depends on the
results of ongoing wind measurements. The development will be a Build, Own and Operate
(BOO) Independent Power Producer (IPP) project, with power to be sold to TANESCO under a
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA). Connection to the TANESCO grid will be by means of a
220-kV transmission line, for which alternative alignments are under consideration, the longest
of which is approximately 10 km.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The developer is Wind East Africa Ltd., a joint venture of Six Telecoms Company Limited,
KenTec Denmark APS, and Aldwych International Ltd. Aldwych is a UK-based company with
extensive experience in developing power projects in Sub-Saharan Africa. Wind East Africa has
engaged an international consultant to prepare the ESIA and RAP for the project. Wind East
Africa anticipates that construction of the project will be by means of an engineering-
procurement-construction (EPC) contractor, and the selection process will take safeguards
implementation capacity and experience into consideration. The company that will operate the
wind farm is yet to be identified, and so its capacity to implement safeguards cannot be
determined at this stage. It is likely to be a subsidiary of Aldwych.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASNS)
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    Site preparation will involve land clearance for access roads, a lay-down area, construction
offices, the substation, and the generator tower footings (approximately 400 m2 for each). Dust,
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No           TBD
noise, and loss of vegetative cover will result. Normal impacts of construction can be anticipated,
plus the unusual impacts of the delivery of the generator components and equipment necessary
to install them # e.g., 50-m rotor blades, 60 to 80-ton generator nacelles, and cranes to lift them
to 80 m. Typical impacts of operation are visual, noise, vibration, and bird mortality from
collisions with rotor blade. Bat mortality is also common at wind farms, but observers report
that bats are not seen in the area proposed for this one. An Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA)/Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                    X
    There is no critical natural habitat in the area under consideration. Land cover in the parts of
the site visited by the project team was a mixture of bush, agricultural land, and settlements. The
ESIA baseline studies will determine whether the project will convert or degrade any natural
habitat.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
    The project will not involve or affect forest management.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
    The project will not involve procurement or use of pesticides, nor will it promote increased
usage of such chemicals in its area of influence. Herbicides will not be employed in site
clearance or maintenance.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                         X
    The ESIA baseline survey methodology will include identification of PCR that could be
affected by the construction or operation of the project. A PCR Management Plan will be a
component of the project ESMP if PCR are present. In case of chance finds are probable, the
ESMP will require the EPC contractor to have in place a chance finds procedure.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
    There are no indigenous peoples in the project area of influence.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    Land will be acquired for the wind farm, substation, transmission line and substation. A
Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
    The project does not involve construction or operation of dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
    The project does not affect any international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X
    No part of the project is in a disputed area.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 06/30/2012
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The developer has already engaged an international consultant to prepare the full ESIA and
   RAP. An initial scoping study was conducted in June 2008, bird surveys commenced
   October 2008 and have been ongoing, and the kick-off of ESIA and RAP studies are planned
   to commence in 2011.

         Estimated Disclosure Dates in Infoshop and in Country:
         ESIA:    10/12/2012
         RAP:     10/12/2012

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Robert Schlotterer                                          07/06/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       07/07/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Anna M. Bjerde                                              07/07/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
