                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/12/2011                                  Report No.: AC6331
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Tanzania                            Project ID: P125484
Project Name: TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT-
PHRD ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Task Team Leader: Zainab Z. Semgalawe
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 9, 2011       Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTAR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (68%);Agricultural extension and research
(21%);Irrigation and drainage (10%);Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and
forestry (1%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (63%);Rural markets (33%);Other rural
development (2%);Rural policies and institutions (2%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
         Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund             14.25
                                                                       14.25
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]       No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
ASDP has two complementary objectives: (i) to enable farmers to have better access to
and use of agricultural knowledge, technologies, and infrastructure, all of which
contribute to higher productivity, profitability, and farm incomes and (ii) to promote
private agricultural investment based on an improved regulatory and policy environment.
The proposed PHRD Grant would foster the achievement of these objectives of the
ASDP.

3. Project Description
The PHRD Grant would support the scaling-up of rice production activities in small scale
irrigation schemes, supported under the local level support and national level support
components of the ASDP:

 a) Component 1: Local Support. This component primarily fosters the first Project
objective by improving Local Government Authorities'(LGAs') capacity to plan, support,
and coordinate agricultural services and investments in a more efficient, participatory,
and sustainable manner, through implementation of District Agricultural Development
Plans (DADP) which are supported by District Agricultural Development Grants. A
competitive funding mechanism, the District Irrigation Development Fund (DIDF),
provides supplemental resources for small-scale irrigation. Under this component the
PHRD Grant will support scaling up of agricultural services (research and extension),
capacity building and market linkage activities for enhancing rice productivity in 20
irrigation schemes.

 b) Component 2: National Support. This component fosters the achievement of both
Project objectives. The first objective is supported by improvements in the relevance and
responsiveness of the agricultural research system, including better linkages with
extension. The second objective is supported by improvements in the national policy
environment and by the development of mechanisms for greater public-private
partnerships. The grant would provide funding for the National Irrigation Development
Fund (NIDF) established under this component to scale up ongoing capacity building
activities for irrigation development to Zonal Irrigation and Technical Units (ZITSUs),
extension staff and Irrigation technicians; and enhance the training capacity and quality
of Irrigation Training Institutes (MATI-Igurusi and Kilimanjaro Agricultural Training
Institute).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The ASDP is implemented in 132 districts throughout Tanzania. Significant amount of
the funding from the original credit and two previous Additional Financing credits have
been used to support development of small-scale irrigation through the District
Agricultural Development Grants (DADGs) and the District Irrigation Development
Fund (DIDF). The grant resources will be used to increase returns from irrigation
investments in selected rice producing irrigation schemes through scaling up of
agricultural services (research and extension), capacity building and market linkage
activities for enhancing rice productivity. Salient physical features of ASDP with
implications for safeguards include the utilization of surface water resources for irrigation
development. Many of these resources are riparian lakes and rivers, although some are
solely national resources. The proposed grant activities will focus on software issues in
existing irrigation schemes, and no irrigation investment expansion is envisaged, thus no
effect on riparian water resources in national and riparian lakes and rivers. Rather,
interventions such as System of Rice Intensification will help to reduce water utilization
for rice production thus help to mitigate some of the risks.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
   Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project's environmental and social impacts are associated with implementing
subprojects in the District Agricultural Development Programs (DADPs). These
subprojects receive financing through the DADGs, DIDF, and also from the national-
level NIDF. Many of the adverse impacts with the DADPs will continue to be of low
intensity, minor, site-specific, and relatively straightforward for the beneficiaries to
manage, assisted and primarily monitored by their local institutions. For districts that
manage many and relatively larger irrigation schemes, the potential impacts may become
more significant, intense, and widespread. These impacts may be associated with the
unsustainable abstraction of water (affecting water quantity and quality), point and
nonpoint pollution of water sources, soil erosion, increased loss of soil fertility,
cultivation of marginal lands, and other water and land use conflicts. There is also a
potential for some public health concerns, as irrigation schemes will provide breeding
ground for disease vectors (such as mosquitoes) in stagnant pools of water.

 With regards to OP 4.12, in accordance with the Bank's safeguard policies and
procedures, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared for the original ASDP
credit and disclosed in the country and InfoShop on March 25, 2010. The activities under
the PHRD Grant are a continuation of the on-going activities of the original project and
are not expected to generate significant negative environmental or social impacts. As the
nature of the works to be financed under the grant will not change, the existing RPF for
the initial project will also apply for the activities supported by the Grant and will be the
basis for the preparation of the specific RAPs, as need arises.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Tanzania's National Environment Policy identifies several critical environmental
problems facing the country: land degradation; lack of accessible, good quality water for
urban and rural inhabitants; environmental pollution (such as water contamination); the
loss of biodiversity, habitat, and wetlands; the deterioration of aquatic systems; and
deforestation. During the preparation of the original project, the immediate and root
causes of these problems were reviewed and it is concluded that PHRD Grant will not
aggravate the situation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the original project, the Government of Tanzania prepared and disclosed an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to meet the World Bank's
and the government#s own requirements. It also prepared and disclosed a RPF in
compliance with the Tanzanian laws and the World Bank OP 4.12. The ESMF and RPF
were re-disclosed again in March 2010 for the purpose of the second Additional
Financing (Cr. 4740-TA).

 Review of implementation of ESMF: During the preparation and appraisal of the
original project and the preparation of the PHRD Grant, the Preparation Teams reviewed
the ESMF and confirms that its scope and content adequately capture the issues
associated with Grant operations.

 The Mid-Term Review and Joint Implementation Review (JIR) done in October 2010
examined implementation of the ESMF, and noted areas for improvement, and developed
corresponding action plans to be implemented according to an agreed timetable. For
instance, some districts seem unaware of the ESMF and RPF and the capacity for
safeguards management was found weak. Owing to a lack of due diligence by local staff,
safeguard issues were not addressed adequately. The Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) was delayed because the contract was not awarded on time.

  To strengthen and improve implementation of the ESMF and other safeguards
requirements, several actions have been implemented by the Government since the MTR
in 2008. ESMF processes have been incorporated into the training modules and DADP
guidelines issued by PMO-RALG, ESMF and RPF documents have been distributed to
all districts and training has started. The LGAs have appointed District Environmental
Management Officers (DEMOs) responsible for coordination and supervision of local
investments to ensure integration of safeguards issues. The DEMOs have been trained on
application of ESMF/RPF, and the need to carry out Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIAs) and preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plans
(ESMPs) for specific subprojects. Most of the civil works so far have focused on
rehabilitation of existing irrigation systems and few new irrigation subprojects which
required preliminary ESIAs. A full ESIA is been undertaken for an irrigation scheme in
Msoga village in Bagamoyo District. In order to ensure full compliance with Safeguard
Policies, the project will carry out an environmental and social audit for all the irrigation
subprojects. The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for the national
irrigation master plan and the national irrigation policy was completed in May 2011. The
SESA identifies potentially adverse environmental and social impacts emanating from the
implementation of the national irrigation policy/national irrigation masterplan, and
provides strategic guidance on how to minimize and mitigate those impacts when
implementing irrigation development projects/programs in the sector. With regard to pest
management and responsible pesticide use, the government's performance in
implementing the original Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) (effective since 2006
under original project) was reviewed in 2009. The government prepared an Integrated
Pest Management Capacity Building Plan, which has been integrated into the capacity-
building framework of ASDP to ensure that the IPMP is implemented and remains
sustainable beyond the life of ASDP.

 To understand further how safeguards principles and procedures were followed and
whether the mitigation measures based on the principle of the ESMF/RPF were
implemented, especially in sub-projects involving land where affected people need to be
compensated and preparation of ESIA and ESMP, an environmental and social audit for
ASDP subprojects will be conducted in FY12.

  International Waterways (OP7.50). For reasons explained earlier, the PHRD Grant, like
the original project and previous additional financings (Cr 4639-TA and Cr. 4740-TA) ,
triggers the safeguard policy on international waterways. The Task Team worked with
Government to determine the extent to which the original notified amounts of water
extraction from the original project, AF-I and AF-II may have been exceeded and to
ascertain the additional amounts required given the anticipated irrigated area and water
abstraction rates for irrigation schemes supported under AF-I and AF-II. In both cases the
notified water extractions were exceeded and new notification letters were sent out to the
concerned riparian countries. As aforementioned, the activities under the PHRD Grant
will not involve expansion of irrigation investments and riparian notification is thus not
required.

 Safety of Dams (OP4.37). Irrigation infrastructure will include small dams and dykes.
To comply with OP4.37, the government has integrated dam safety requirements into the
ESMF for situations where it may apply.

 Environmental Management (OP4.01). Under the original project as well as the
additional financing credits, the environmental management of irrigation will be
undertaken at the subproject and national levels:

 a) Subproject level. Irrigation within subprojects will be managed through the ESMF in
all districts. As stated, ESMF processes have been included in DADP guidelines, and the
ESMF and RPF have been distributed to all districts.

 b) National strategic environmental management. The SESA, which has been prepared
under the original project, adequately covers irrigation issues and the agriculture sector in
general. The Strategic Environmental Assessment covers the country's national irrigation
policy and national irrigation master plan, and it provides specific guidance for preparing
Environmental Assessments (EAs) for individual national level irrigation projects.
 Involuntary Resettlement Issues (OP4.12). Since the implementation of the ASDP none
of the sub-project required the preparation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
Nonetheless, to ensure that the principles of the RPF were followed, as noted above, an
environmental and social safeguards audit for sub-projects under preparation and
implementation will be undertaken under the ASDP. During the implementation of ASDP
activities in the districts, the Project design and ESMF require that Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIAs) and/or Environmental and Social Management Plans
(ESMPs) be prepared for subprojects. These will obtain more detailed and site-specific
information about the impacts of project activities, including information on whether
there is a need for site specific RAPs, especially in districts where irrigation schemes may
be intensified. In the event that there will be land acquisition or/and resettlement, sub-
project specific resettlement action plan will be prepared and executed in line with the
World Bank and Government policies as guided by the RPF.

 Cumulative impacts. No later than three months before project closing, the Government
of Tanzania has agreed to complete a Cumulative Impact Assessment (CIA). In
documenting the cumulative impacts of this operation, the government will gain a better
understanding of the broad effectiveness of its various safeguard plans and measures
(such as the SEA, IPMP, and ESMF). The CIA for ADSP will be done jointly with the
Accelerated Food Security Project (AFSP).

 Capacity assessments. With regard to the government#s capacity to plan and implement
safeguard measures, substantial progress has been made over the years in a number of
Bank-funded operations in the agricultural sector, such as the Participatory Agricultural
Development and Empowerment Project (PADEP) and ASDP. Nevertheless, institutional
and technical capacity for environmental and social management at the district and lower
levels could be improved. This deficiency is being addressed in detail in the individual
plans and reports noted above. Some training is already funded under the original project.
These plans have undertaken or will undertake substantial assessments of capacity in the
key implementing institution, and they will develop plans to address any gaps.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the farming communities that will develop and receive support
for their District Agricultural Development Plans. They include individual farmers,
farmer associations and groups, agribusiness dealers, national research and extension
service providers, national and local institutions such as water boards, customs agents,
and others who are linked to the plan in question. The process of preparing and/or
reviewing the development plans and related documents is continuous and requires
meaningful participatory consultation. The on-going training on the ESMF and RPF for
the NFT, DFTs, and WFTs in conjunction with the incorporation of ESMF processes into
DADP guidelines will increase awareness and capacity for managing environmental
issues related to district development plans. During the planning process the respective
stakeholders are consulted to ensure that the plans are relevant and responsive to their
needs. The preparation of the site specific RAPs, if required, also will be done in
consultation with the communities and a summary of the RAPs will be distributed among
the affected communities in Kiswahili. Once completed, the revised and/or new plans
will be disclosed in Kiswahili in Tanzania and at the World Bank InfoShop. The plans
will be available at the district level and in the offices of the relevant agencies.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    08/05/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                08/09/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 08/11/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    08/05/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                08/09/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 08/10/2005
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    07/09/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                09/09/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 09/09/2009
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The additional financing operation will continue to use the ESMF document prepared and
disclosed for the Original Project. The ESMF did not need to be revised. Similarly, the
IPMP prepared and disclosed for the Original Project will be used.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           N/A
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        N/A
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Zainab Z. Semgalawe     04/20/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa     05/03/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Helen Z. Shahriari      05/03/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   08/03/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Iain G. Shuker          08/29/2011
  Comments:
