                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: AC6398


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/11/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Tanzania                              Project ID: P126875
Project Name: Energy Sector Capacity Assistance Project (ESCAP)
Task Team Leader: Robert Schlotterer
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1,          Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTEG                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Oil and gas (70%);Other Renewable Energy (20%);General energy sector (10%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (90%);Regulation and
competition policy (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            27.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               1.50
        NORWAY: Norwegian Agency for Dev. Coop. (NORAD)                  3.50
                                                                         5.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of the GOT to manage its
natural gas sector and large power generation projects.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project is expected to be part of continued World Bank support to improve governance,
sector management, and contribution to growth and sustainable development for the years to
come in Tanzania#s energy sector. The proposed Project will assist the Government to
strengthen its capacity (i) to manage development of its natural gas resources in an efficient,
transparent, accountable and sustainable manner, and (ii) to enhance the Government#s capacity
to implement large and complex power generation projects on a PPP basis. The Project will also
continue to support a number of cross-cutting issues, such as strengthening of the Extractive
Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) and other accountability mechanisms, enhancing capacity
for gas sector revenue collection, infrastructure public-private planning.
 The Project is proposed to include two main parts, with the main PART 1 including three
components providing assistance to the Natural Gas sector and a PART 2 providing assistance to
the GOT in preparing new large power generation projects on a PPP basis. The different parts are
proposed to be structured as follows:

 PART 1: Gas Sector capacity Assistance

 Component 1 will focus on the development of sector policies related to the synchronized
development of gas resources and domestic gas markets and on increased understanding of the
gas sector, especially among the key public (cross-sector) players in country, in order to support
effective and consistent implementation of policies and agreements and cooperation among
various government organizations. A coordinated Power System Master Plan and a Gas Master
Plan are crucial to develop strategic options and a decision hierarchy for the development of the
gas market. Gas to power has the largest potential to grow the domestic market, but relatively
low electricity prices and the financial position of the Tanzania Electric Supply Company Ltd
(TANESCO) has hampered investments by the private sector or PPP#s. In addition there is a
need to create more awareness in Government organizations about how the gas industry
functions, how investment decisions are made, what the scale and the timeline of investments
and developments are, how risks are managed, what provision of local services are required, and
what the roles of the various organizations are to govern a much larger industry than before and
to find the balance between attracting investors and maximizing the fiscal revenues for the
country.

  Component 2 will involve the further development of the legal, regulatory, fiscal and
institutional framework for the gas sector. Aspects that have already been identified as necessary
to address in order to be ready for a much larger and more complex gas sector, include the lack
of sector-specific safety and environmental regulation, the effective operationalization of the Gas
Act and PPP Act, the stability of the fiscal framework, consistent implementation of existing
legislation and agreements, and clearly defined roles and responsibilities in the institutional set-
up.

 Component 3 will focus on enhancing institutional capacity, including education and technical
skills development. The project should be designed to directly benefit numerous institutions
engaged in regulating and monitoring the commercial operations of the private developers and in
responding to potential environmental and social impacts of the industry. A particular focus may
be put on Ministry of Energy and Minerals (MEM), Tanzania Petroleum Development
Corporation (TPDC), Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority (EWURA), National
Environment Management Council (NEMC), Occupational Health and Safety Authority
(OSHA), as well as Tanzania Electric Supply Company (TANESCO), the largest consumer of
the gas on the domestic market, and selected national educational institutions that train the
professionals to be employed by the gas sector or affiliated industries.

 PART 2: Large Power Generation Projects capacity Assistance:

 Component 4 will finance various capacity enhancement activities for the GOT in relation to
the preparation of large power generation projects. The final scope of activities will be identified
during preparation of this ESCAP. It is currently foreseen that this project component would be
implemented by the MEM.

D. Project location (if known)
While the project activities have yet to be detailed further it is likely that most of the assistance
supported by this project will benefit institutions and stakeholders situated in Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
It is currently proposed that the project is implemented by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals
(MEM) and the Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation (TPDC). Both institutions are
currently implementing or have recently completed various Bank financed projects and therefore
have adequate capacity to properly implement Bank safeguards.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASNS)
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The environmental and social issues related to the Gas Sector as a whole are to be dealt with
as part of a proposed support to the NEMC and OSHA. This Project will finance capacity
building measures and technical advisories to both Government institutions to develop a
comprehensive set of environmental, social and safety guidelines for the oil and gas industry in
Tanzania. One of the outcomes of this TA will be the preparation of a sectoral environmental
assessment that will analyze the environmental and social impacts of the sector and guide the
preparation of the environmental, social and safety guidelines, drawing on consultations with
various stakeholders The Bank will support the GOT to prepare Terms of Reference for the
sectoral EIA and conduct this EIA during project implementation. The TOR, jointly prepared
with the safeguards colleagues and cleared by ASPEN, will be consulted upon and disclosed in
country and Infoshop prior to appraisal. A senior environmental safeguards specialist and a
social development specialist are included in the World Bank team to review the safeguards
documentation and the environmental, social and safety guidelines. The draft guidelines will be
referred to the Bank for review prior to formal adoption in the national regulatory system.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   12/14/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The Bank will support the GOT to prepare Terms of Reference for the sectoral EIA and
   conduct this EIA during project implementation. The TOR, jointly prepared with the
   safeguards colleagues and cleared by ASPEN, will be consulted upon and disclosed in
   country and Infoshop prior to appraisal.
     Estimated Disclosure Dates in Infoshop and in Country:
     Sectoral ESIA TOR:        11/20/2011

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Robert Schlotterer                                          07/11/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       07/11/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Reynold Duncan                                              07/11/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
