                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6110


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/06/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Tanzania                              Project ID: P124045
Project Name: Tanzania Third Social Action Fund - Productive Social Safety Net
(TASAF III-PSSN)
Task Team Leader: Ida Manjolo
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 17,          Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: AFTSP                           Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                               Loan
Sector: Public administration- Other social services (70%);General water, sanitation and
flood protection sector (10%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
(10%);Microfinance (10%)
Theme: Social safety nets (50%);Other social protection and risk management
(30%);Participation and civic engagement (10%);Gender (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):           220.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 0.00
                                                                           0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The development objective of the proposed operation is to improve incomes of poor rural and
urban households while smoothing consumption through a well-targeted productive safety net
system. The following are the key result areas: (i) increased incomes of beneficiaries (through
cash transfers and public works); (ii) i mpro ved access to services (as a result of community
assets created though public works); (iii) increased access to opportunities ( through community
savings and in vestment promotion); and (v) established building blocks of a safety net syst em
in Tanzania.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project will have the following two components: (i) Support for Social Safety Nets (SSSN);
and (ii) Institutional Support.
 Component 1 - Support for Social Safety Nets. The SSSN will support three interventions
namely: (a) Public Works Program, (b) Cash Transfers (Conditional or Unconditional), and (c)
Communi ty Savings and Investments Promotion (COMSIP).

 a.     Public Works Program (PWP)- The subcomponent will provide grants for
implementation of labor intensive public works program (PWP) to support families living under
the food poverty line. The PWP would provide a predictable source of seasonal temporary
income to targeted families. The labor end owed households for part icip ation in the program
will be selected through the commu nity based targeting method. The PWP will be implemen ted
for a pre-determined period of time each year, defined according to expected seasonality of
events, such as the lean season and labo r-slack period. The works undertaken by the PWP will
depend on whether it is implemented in urban or rural a reas. Subprojects to be undert aken will
incr ease community assets, and as such, they will be determined locally by the beneficiary
comm unitie s through participatory planning processes, and be integrated into district plan s.
The scope of interv ention s will include construction/rehabi litation of roads, small irrigation
schemes, small community earth dams, storag e systems; rehabi litation of access roads,
drainages, and establishment of soil and water conservation measures. Most public works will be
implemented during the dry season. However, there will be other acti vities that will be
implemented during the lean period, which coincides with the rainy season. The wage rate will
be set at around 10 percent below the market w age rate.

  b.     Community-Based (Conditional/Unconditional) Cash Transfers (CB-CCT)- Building on
lessons learned from the pilot Community Based-Conditional Cash Transfers (CB-CCT)
financed by the JSDF grant and subsequent expansion of the CCT under the TASAF II additional
financing as well as the Government- implemented Most Vulner able Children (MVC) program,
the proposed TASAF III-PSNP will further expand the conditional cash transfer am to other
districts and villages, linking up with t he MVC program. The subcomponent will support cash
transfers to targeted be bene ficiarie s. As in the PWP, beneficiaries for the CB-CCT will be
selected using th e communi ty based targeting method. The targeted families will be those living
u nder the food poverty line, and able to agreed conditions including: school atte ndance for c
hildren, regular health check-ups for under-five c hildren and the e lderly, incentives for girls to
remain in school, incentives for pregnant women to deliver at health facilities, ensuring nutrition
for children through inform ation on meal preparation, and micro-nutrient initiative supplemen
ts. Some families living below the food poverty line and who are unable to provi de either labor
for the PWP or capable of complying wit h specific co-responsib ilities (for in stance, extremely
poor elderly, child headed , poor female-headed households and the physically challenged) will
be exempted f rom co-responsibilities. Existing c ommunity management scheme established for
the MVC program will be utilized as a main governance structure at the community level.

  c.    Community Savings and Investment Promotion (COMSIP) # This subcomponent will
finance the promotion of savings and investment by the poor as a way of equipping them with
tools to better manage the social risks they face and respond to shocks. The targeted individuals
will be the poor living under both poverty lines and accessing the cash transfers through the PWP
and the CB-CCT. Information on sav ings will be provided in clud ing capacity building on
business skills. As the individuals graduate, they will be linked to microfinance institutions.
 Component 2 - Institutional Support # This component will aim at developing institutional
capacity for social safety net in Tanzania. It will support two sub-components:
 a.     System Development # This subcomponent will put in place the building blocks of the
safety net system, including: (i) establishment of a unified targeting system; (ii) beneficiary
registration and unified beneficiary registry; (iii) payment system; (iv) monitoring and evaluation
system as w ell as putting in place systems (a) information, education and communication (IEC),
(b) Information, Com munication and Technology (ICT) ,(c) Management information system
(MIS). This sub-component will also support the Department of Social Welfare and local and r
egional governments in building their capacity for the management of the nationa l social safety
net program. This sub-component will also support the transparen c y and a ccountability
measures to be put in place for monitori ng the governance aspects of the program.
 b.     Project Management # This subcomponent will support the costs related to managing the
project effectively and in conformity to the Financing Agreement and the Operational Manual, in
order to achieve the development objective.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be implemented in all districts and will target poor households selected through
existing community based selection processes and validated through a proxy means testing. Sub-
projects are expected to be small in size and site-specific.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
TASAF III-PSNP is designed to be an Environment and Social Category B project. The Project
will use the same arrangements established under TASAF II which was also a category B
project. The implementers at district and community level will adhere to the Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and the
Operational Manual, which will be updated for TASAF III. The Operational manual will state
that (i) no subproject will be approved if it does not include an Environmental Management Plan
with mitigation measures for any negative environmental and social impacts of the subprojects
and (ii) no subproject is approved unless it has necessary social safeguards instrument in case the
sub-project triggers OP 4.12. In addition, each subproject will complete a check list when
submitted for approval. This checklist will included a number of criteria to determine if the
proposed subproject needs to prepare additional social safeguards instruments such as a
Resettlement Action Plan or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan. The information to be
provided in this data sheet includes if the sub-project needs land for its construction, the type of
land - farming, household land, private, public, community; the size; if other assets are needed to
build small infrastructure then type of assets; the number of people affected; the community
arrangements for requiring land for sub-projects.

 The LGAs and communities have varying levels of capacity to implement subprojects with
adherence to the ESMF, RPF and the Operational Manual; as such the project will support
capacity enhancement measures with specific emphasis on monitoring and reporting on the
implementation of the ESMF and the RPF.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
   Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    The PWP component might support some subprojects that have some minor land acquisition
and/or changes in access to resources, with subsequent impacts on population movements and
settlements.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                               X
    The discussion is on going with regard to the Policy being trigger since the Project is going
to be nationwide.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                               X
    The PWP component might support some subprojects that have some minor land acquisition
and/or changes in access to resources, with subsequent impacts on population movements and
settlements.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                              X
    This Policy for now is TBD, pending further discussions with the government on the project
boundaries and consultations with stakeholders.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X
    Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

     As the civil works financed by the project under the Public Works component will likely
have environmental and social impacts and could involve some land acquisition/involuntary
resettlement and/or loss of access to resources or livelihoods, OPs 4.01 and 4.12 are triggered.
The other safeguards policies are TBD, pending further discussions with the government on the
project boundaries and consultations with stakeholders.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/14/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS by August
   30, 2011.

        The PWP component might support some subprojects that have some minor land
       acquisition and/or changes in access to resources, with subsequent impacts on population
       movements and settlements. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) that is in place for the
       TASAF II Project will be updated prior to appraisal and disclosed by appraisal. Measures
       required for preventing, minimizing, mitigating, and/or compensating for adverse impact will
       be incorporated in the Project Implementation Manual. If sub-projects will impact on the
       access to resources, based on the check list, a process framework will be prepared and
       disclosed.

        At this point, it is not clear if the IP 4.10 is triggered. However, an Indigenous Peoples (IPs)
       mapping is underway in Tanzania which is being finalized and will inform the project if there
       are IPs in the districts where will be covered under the TASAF III. If there are IPs in the
       project areas based on the IP mapping, an IIPF will be prepared by the appraisal and
       disclosed and based on that sub-project specific Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared on
       the case by case basis during implementation.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                Ms Ida Manjolo                                                               04/06/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                                     09/02/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                  Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz                                                   07/28/2011
      Comments: Approved by Anush Bezhanyan acting SM.




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
