                                                                                               76725
                          INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No:
Date prepared/updated: April   gth   April2013

I. Basic Information

 .    . P ro.1ec
1 BaSIC      ' tD a t a
Country: Thailand                                    Project ID: P143770
                                                     Additional Project ID (({any):
Project Name: Community-based Livelihood Support for the Urban Poor (SUP)
Task Team Leader: Patricia Fernandes
Estimated Appraisal Date: n/a                        Estimated Board Date: n/a
Managing Unit: EASTS                                 Lending Instrument: Japanese Social Development
                                                     Fund (JSDF) Grant - Emergency Window
Sector: Social ~otection (Other)
Theme: Other Social Services (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: Grant (JSDF)- Total US$ 3,000,000
Of the total amount, US$2,850,000 will be Recipient Executed and US$150,000 will be allocated for
incremental Bank Costs
Environmental Category: B -partial assessment
Is this a transferred project                        Yes []                     No [X]
Simplified Processing- Processing Guidelines for Simple [X]                     Repeater []
JSDF Emer2ency Window
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and           Yes[]       No [X]
Emergencies)                                                                          I
2. Project Objectives:

The objective of the grant is to assist the Royal Thai Government to provide at 3,000 vulnerable
households in poor urban communities with access to bridging income support and improved
living conditions. The grant objectives will be achieved through a community basic
infrastructure rehabilitation program in five Provinces where the impacts of the economic crisis
have been aggravated by the recent floods.

3. Project Description:

The global economic crisis had varying impacts on the Asia and Pacific economies with
Thailand suffering significantly in terms of reduced growth. The Thai economy contracted by
5.7% between October 2008 and March 2009. Analysis carried by the World Bank in 2009 and
2010 indicated that the government's stimulus package had not been effective in reaching the
poor in the informal sector 1.These negative impacts ofthe economic crisis on the poor have now
been compounded by the 2011 floods, reported to be the worst in 50 years. The proposed project
aims to provide 3,000 beneficiaries in 5 urban areas with bridging income support and improved
living conditions. The grant objectives will be achieved through a community basic
infrastructure rehabilitation program in five Provinces where the impacts of the economic crisis
have been aggravated by the recent floods. The proposed project, (US$2.85 million) to be
implemented by Community Organization Development Institute (CODI), includes three
components:

1. Community mobilization and capacity building (US$407 ,000) - covering the cost of a
community-based communication strategy, social preparation activities by trained facilitators
and the training of community groups on how to implement the selected sub-projects.

2. Community grants (US$2,230,000) - for small-scale infrastructure .and housing
rehabilitation activities benefiting 3,000 households. Investments would be selected in a
participatory manner by the targeted communities. Rehabilitation work would have a set labor
intensity of 50% and ensure a minimum of 2 weeks paid labor to participating households.
Wages would be set at below market rates for unskilled work (based on existing regional data)

3. Monitoring and Evaluation (US$212,500) - will include the establishment of an
Management Information System (MIS), the implementation of a qualitative impact evaluation
(baseline and end-line) and the dissemination of lessons-learned.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The project will work with 50 communities in urban areas most affected by the Global Economic
Crisis and the recent flood crisis. These will be selected in consultation with the CODI from
among the following areas Bangkok, Nonthaburi, Patumthani, Nakomsawan and Ayudhaya


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Warapom Hirunwatsiri (Environmental Specialist, EASTS)
Satoshi Ishihara (Social Development Specialist, EASTS)




1
    Rapid Assessment ofthe Impacts ofthe Global Economic Crisis (2008, 2009 and 2010)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                     Yes   No
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                    X
The project will fund small-scale rehabilitation of individual housing
and basic community infrastructure e.g. drainage maintenance, access
path or road upgrading/maintenance, water supply system
construction/maintenance, flood protection upgrading/maintenance, etc.
Such rehabilitation may results in minor and site-specific adverse
impacts on environment during construction i.e. disposal of
construction waste, dredged materials/spoil from drainage cleaning,
dust dispersion, nuisance noise, etc. In addition to the site-specific
impact, the impacts will be the short-term impacts (cease after
construction completion), and can be mitigated by mitigatory
measures. The project has, therefore, been assigned an
Environmental Assessment Cate_g~ry B.
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                  X
The project locations will be in poor urban communities and there
will be no impacts on natural habitats.
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                           X
The project locations will be in poor urban communities and there
will be no impacts on forests.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      X
The project will not promote an increase use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                       X
The project activities involve rehabilitation of housing and
infrastructure in existing poor urban communities and will not affect
any physical cultural resources. Chance find procedures will be
included in construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                X
This is an urban intervention and the screening carried out by the
project team indicated that IP groups are not present in target areas.
Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                        X
The project will support small scale infrastructure
rehabilitation/construction in poor urban communities (on occasions
it may result in the widening of existing lanes with slightly wider
surfaces, or in building /upgrade drainage ditches). The so called
right-of-way therefore needs to be increased by one or two meters,
and this can only happen if the land bordering the road is acquired or
if there is agreement on its donation to benefit the overall
community. Similarly, it is possible that the community may choose
to invest in improvements in water/sanitation given the overall
conditions observed in target areas and it may not always be possible
to locate these small scale investments (pipe-laying, latrine
construction) in communally held land. The project has, therefore,
triggered OP 4.12 and developed a Resettlement Policy Framework
and set of operational procedures. This will aim to help beneficiary
communities avoid or minimize potential land acquisition and other
negative impacts in subprojects and provide them guidance on how
to address potential impacts if unavoidable.
Safety of Dams (OPIBP ~.37)                                                                 X
The project does not involve dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                            X
The project does not involve international water way.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                    X
The project locations will be in poor urban communities and not
located in a disputed area.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

This project will fund the rehabilitation of the small-scale labor-intensive community
infrastructure (including housing). Total budget envelope for small-scale infrastructure per
communities will be US$23,300 per cycle. Rehabilitation needs and priority will be determined
by eligible communities. The potential infrastructure rehabilitation activities includes individual
housing repair and basic community infrastructure e.g. drainage maintenance, access path or
road upgrading/maintenance, water supply system construction/maintenance, flood protection
upgrading/maintenance, etc. These infrastructure investments aim to improve access to basic
services and the maintenance and upgrading of public spaces within the community. Given that
size of investment per community, scale and nature of civil works to be supported will be small,
the anticipated adverse impacts on the environment will be minor, short-term, site-specific and
manageable impacts. The potential impacts includes disposal of construction waste and dredged
materials/spoil from drainage cleaning, dust dispersion, nuisance noise and temporary traffic
disruption from construction works, etc. These impacts can be mitigated though implementation
of good planning and good environmental management practices. The project has, therefore,
been assigned an Environmental Assessment Category B.

In addition, during the construction of infrastructure it is possible that some land may need to be
acquired and some assets (such as trees) might be damaged to allow the most effective, efficient,
and beneficial use of resources. The SUP grant will support small scale rehabilitation of existing
infrastructure and housing damaged by the most recent floods at the end of 2012. Therefore,
need to build new structures is expected to be limited. However, the project will not be able to
exclude the need to on rare occasions, widen existing lanes with slightly wider surfaces, or to
build/upgrade drainage ditches. The so called right-of-way therefore needs to be increased by
one or two meters, and this can only happen if the land bordering the road is acquired or if there
is agreement on its voluntary donation to benefit the overall community. Similarly, it is possible
that the community may choose to invest in improvements in water/sanitation given the overall
conditions observed in target areas and it may not always be possible to locate these small scale
investments (pipe-laying, latrine construction) in communally held land. Therefore the project
has triggered OP 4.12 and prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework.


An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was developed. The EMF includes an
environmental safeguard screening and review process and safeguard actions, to be carried out
and applied to all sub-projects investment. The screening and review will take place prior to
submission of subproject proposals. It will also include set of simple mitigation measures for
typical small-scale rehabilitations works. The screening procedures in line with the EMF will be
included in the project's operation manual. The completed screening checklist and the mitigation
plan will be included as part of the sub-project documentation. The EMF will be used as part of
the overall project training for the implementing partner Community Organization Development
Institute (COOl) staff and community facilitators to ensure that the environmental mitigation
measures will be implemented to minimized the adverse impact from the project activities.
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)

The project will support small-scale infrastructure rehabilitation and construction implemented in
a participatory manner. The project may result in the widening of existing lanes or in the
building/upgrading of drainage ditches. The so called right-of-way therefore needs to be
increased by one or two meters, and this can only happen if the land bordering the road is
acquired or if there is agreement on its donation to benefit the overall community. Similarly, it is
possible that the community may choose to invest in improvements in water/sanitation given the
overall conditions observed in target areas and it may not always be possible to locate these
small scale investments (pipe-laying, latrine construction) in communally held land.

The project has, therefore, developed a Resettlement Policy Framework and set of operational
procedures which aim to help beneficiary communities avoid or minimize potential land
acquisition and other negative impacts in subprojects and provide them guidance on how to
address negative impacts if unavoidable. The guiding principle of the framework is that no
family will experience a material reduction in their income, living standards, or livelihoods as a
result of subproject implementation, the details of which will be spelled out in the project's
Operations Manual and the terms of reference of community facilitators, and the project will
provide both internal and independent monitoring of their implementation.

The operations manual to be developed by CODI will also include a checklist for reviewing,
appraising and monitoring the sub-projects for social impacts that should be filled by
communities. Communities would be asked to confirm that there are no ethnic minority
communities in project areas. This will be verified by CODI as part of the sub-project approval
process.

The project is expected to result in positive impacts for targeted communities in terms of living
conditions and access to income bridging income support.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

The project is expected to result in long-term positive impacts for 3,000 beneficiaries in 5 urban
areas through bridging income support and improved living conditions.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:

N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The COOl has been working to support urban poor communities throughout Thailand since early
2000. The World Bank (WB) will provide CODI with capacity building support implement WB
safeguards policies and in line with the EMF and RPF. COOl staff will be in charge of the
compliance to the social and environmental safeguards requirements as stipulated in the grant
agreements of the project. Implementation progress reports will include a section for reporting
compliance with World Bank safeguards policies.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The key stakeholders are urban poor communities who will be consulted through a participatory
planning process to define the small scale infrastructure and housing rehabilitation activities.
Project facilitation will emphasize the inclusion of vulnerable groups within the community and
environmental protection consideration. Participating communities will sign an agreement with
COOl, which will require them to support the participatory planning process. The project
principle of full transparency will be implemented through a program of disclosure of plans,
budgets and expenditures supplemented by independent civil society monitoring. The EMF and
RPF have been disclosed through the World Bank Info shop and in Country and will be further
included in SUP's Operations Manual.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Mana2ement Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                               January 7, 2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          January 14, 2013
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                          February 8, 2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                               March 7, 2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           3ra April2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                            3ra April2013
Indi2enous Peoples Plan/Piannin2 Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  n/a
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     n/a
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                 n/a
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                                 n/a
Pest Mana2ement Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  n/a
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     n/a
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    I          n/a
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     I          n/a
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]    No[x]       N/A []
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]    No[x]       N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Mana2ement
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]    No []      N/A [X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]    No []      N/A [ x]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 -Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ x]    No [ ]     N/A []
cultural property? (A chance find procedure will be
included in the Environment Management Framework to
be developed)
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]    No [ ]     NIA [ x]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [X]      No [ ]     NIA []
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes approved by the Acting EASTS
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the        Sector Manager on 5th April 2013
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ x]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37- Safety of Dams
Have darn safety plans been prepared?                      Yes f 1     No f 1     N/A [ x]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]     No [   1   N/A [X]
If the project falls under one ofthe exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the R VP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60- Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the    Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes [x]     No [ ]     NIA [ ]
the World Bank's lnfoShop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safe2uard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ x]       No [ ]       N/A []
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes (supervision, technical
included in the project cost?                                assistance and facilitation costs)
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Safeguards aspects will be monitored
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and      at sub-project level in line with good
measures related to safeguard policies?                      practices used in the region for other
                                                             COD interventions
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

 Sif{ned and submitted by:                             Name                   Date
 Task Team Leader:               Patricia Fernandes                      gm April2013



                                   ~;;::>
 Environmental Specialist:       Warapom Hirunwatsiri                     2na of April
                                                                              2013
 Social Development Specialist   Pamomrat Tansanguanwong                  2na of April
                                                                              2013
 Additional Environmental        Satoshi Ishihara                         2na of April
 and/or Social Development                                                    2013
 Specialist(s):

 Aooroved by:



                                 _A1
 Regional Safeguards             Peter Leonard
 Coordinator:

                                                      L~~~               q-€1~ ..   13

   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                 Julia M. Fraser

                                 Jctne.lle.. flumWier, A<.t\t\.9    ~M   os-   o<q-~
                                         [erw.a.i \ cM4a c-heck )

   Comments:
