                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                        Report No.: 76147
Date ISDS
                          December 19, 2012
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Thailand            Project ID:             P115761
 Project Name:                Thailand HCFC Phase-out Project
 Task Team Leader:            Viraj Vithoontien
 Estimated Appraisal Date: July 1, 2013           Estimated Bank          October 30, 2013
                                                  Approval Date:
 Managing Unit:               EASER               Lending Instrument:     Specific Investment
                                                                          Loan
 Focal Area:
 Sector:                      Other Industry (90%); Central Government Administration (10%)
 Theme:                       Pollution Management and Environmental Health (50%); Environment
                              Policies and Institutions (50%)
 Financing (in USD Million)
   Financing Source                                                                      Amount
   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           6.00
   Montreal Protocol Investment Fund                                                          23.79
   Bilateral Contribution: Japanese Government                                                  0.30
   Financing Gap                                                                                0.00
   Total                                                                                      30.09
 Environmental Category       B
 Is this a Repeater project? Yes


 B. Project Objectives:
 The PDO is to reduce HCFC consumption in the air-conditioning and foam sectors in order to
 contribute to Thailand’s efforts to meet its HCFC consumption phase-out obligations.

 C. Project Description

 Component 1: Investment in HCFC Consumption Reductions (US$20.6 Million)
The project will finance in the foam and air-conditioning sectors respectively, the conversion
from: (i) HCFC-141b used as a blowing agent for manufacturing polyurethane foam (PU
foam) at about 200 enterprises; and (ii) HCFC-22 used as refrigerant for manufacturing air-
conditioning (AC) equipment at twelve enterprises.

Investments will be made in the foam sector to assist enterprises that manufacture rigid
polyurethane (PU) foam, flexible PU foam and integral skin foam to change to low-GWP
(Global Warming Potential) alternative blowing agents where feasible.            Investment
subprojects are proposed for about 130 small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs).
Depending on the application and the availability of viable technologies, as well as the
HCFC-141b baseline consumption, alternatives will be hydrocarbon, an HFC-based solution
(such as a reduced formulation to minimize the amount of high-GWP substances used) and
water-blown (CO2) technology. Investment subprojects will not be feasible for the remaining
microenterprises in the sector, therefore, support will be channeled to them through polyol
suppliers under Component 2.

Twelve AC manufacturers with Thai majority ownership will participate in an investment
activity to develop, test and introduce a novel, lower-GWP alternative refrigerant technology
in Thailand. The enterprises will receive funding for new manufacturing equipment and
technology, for redesign, developing prototypes and testing, for safety investments in the
production line and for storage, and, for operational costs. As the conversion will depend on
proprietary technology, special attention will be given to help enterprises receive favorable
treatment in licensing arrangement and to identify appropriate supply chains for specialized
parts. At present, the Japanese manufacture that owns patents of HFC-32 air-conditioning
technology has already offered to provide all of its basic patents to the Thai industry.

Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$0.77 million)

To support expeditious conversion from HCFC to non-HCFC technology and to ensure
sustainability of this transition by all beneficiary enterprises, the Project proposes to finance a
series of technical assistance activities. These include technical support to all beneficiaries
with subprojects on each step of the subproject cycle (including preparing project proposals,
procurement and financial management) and public awareness activities targeting HCFC-
consuming enterprises in the foam and air-conditioning industries, consumers of the final
products, relevant government agencies, and the public.

Sector specific technical assistance will entail the development and marketing of pre-blended
polyol alternatives for, and technical assistance to the micro-enterprises. Thai-based system
houses will receive guidance from experts and chemical suppliers to develop formulations
with alternatives suitable to the operating and climatic conditions in Thailand and which can
be easily adopted by micro-enterprises.

In the refrigeration and air-conditioning sector, the project aims to provide assistance to a
Thai compressor manufacturer to eventually establish local supply of climate-friendly
refrigerator and air-conditioner compressors in Thailand, thereby avoiding dependency of the
Thai AC manufacturers on one international supplier of HFC-32 and other low GWP-
compatible compressors. Technical workshops will be offered on climate friendly refrigerant
for large and small AC systems to familiarize the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration
(BMA) which owns a large number of buildings, of emerging low-GWP, non-ODS (Ozone
Depleting Substance) technology. Related activities will seek to include non-ODS and low
GWP refrigerant as part of the criteria for the three classes of green buildings in an existing
program; and to conduct feasibility studies for major types of buildings on replacing existing
air-conditioning equipment to high energy performance, non-ODS air-conditioners.

Finally, in order to ensure safe use of HFC-32 based equipment both at plant and end-user
levels, support will be provided to first adopt standards on the use of mildly flammable
substances in AC appliances and second to the servicing sector. For the latter, training by
experts in the technology and in servicing in general will be given to trainers at the
Department of Skill Development (DSD) to develop training modules for service technicians
for employing good practice in servicing air-conditioning units with flammable refrigerants
and for avoiding leakage over time. Towards the latter part of the project, DSD will begin to
roll out training modules in training centers in time for the introduction of HFC-32-based AC
units into the Thai market. The servicing sector work will also include broader curricula to
improve in general the servicing practices in the sector in face of reduced supplies of HCFC-
22. Technical assistance activities for safe handling of HFC-32 based equipment will be
carried out with bilateral support of the Japanese Government.

Component 3: Project Management and Policy and Regulation (US$1.38 million)

A project management unit (PMU) will be created within the Department of Industrial Works
(DIW) to manage and coordinate implementation of the Thailand HPMP. Its main function
will be to assist DIW to put into place both overarching regulations and sector specific
regulations and policies. The introduction of rules governing HCFC import quotas, banning
the use of HCFC-141b in the foam sector (except for spray foam) in early 2016 and of HCFC-
22 in AC sector in 2017, and banning imported HCFC-based products in the same sectors are
pivotal to the success of the project, and most critically of reaching the country’s MP
compliance targets. Thus, sufficient resources will be provided to enable DIW and relevant
ministries and agencies (such as Customs) to effectively promulgate need regulation and
policies.

The DIW PMU will be staffed by one project manager and two technical officers.             In
addition, the PMU will work closely with a financial agent to be appointed by DIW to
undertake implementation of Components 1 and 2. The financial agent, who will staff itself
with required technical capacity, will be responsible for day-to-day implementation of the
Project in close coordination with the PMU. Annual work programs of the financial agent
will be agreed with DIW. The financial agent will be the caretaker of project funds channeled
through the World Bank. It will be remunerated on a fee basis (2 - 3% of funds disbursed).

Component 4: Strengthening of the National Ozone Unit (US$1.04 million)

The National Ozone Unit was established in 1992 within DIW. Its main functions are to
monitor import and export of ODS and to report to the UNEP Ozone Secretariat in accordance
with Article 7 of the Montreal Protocol. In this regard, the National Ozone Unit is responsible
 for establishing import/export quotas of ODS for all importers/exporters and liaising with
 other government agencies including the Customs Department to ensure the effective control
 of the borders to preempt any illegal shipments of ODS in and out of the country. In addition,
 the National Ozone Unit is required by the Executive Committee of the Multilateral Fund to
 provide progress reports in the implementation of the country program, national ODS phase-
 out program, on an annual basis.

 The National Ozone Unit is also tasked to carry out public awareness activities, information
 exchange with stakeholders in the country, including both public and private sectors, and
 stakeholders in other Article 5 countries within the region. It is also required to participate in
 all international meetings related to the Montreal Protocol, including meetings of the Parties,
 UNEP networks of ozone officers, and other meetings organized by all implementing
 agencies of the Multilateral Fund (i.e., UNDP, UNEP, UNIDO, and the World Bank).

 D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
 (if known)
 According to the survey conducted through suppliers of raw materials for the foam
 production, there are about 200 foam enterprises identified as potential beneficiaries of the
 project. These enterprises are located in Bangkok and nearby provinces. A final list of beneficiary
 foam enterprises will be determined during the project preparation. For the air-conditioning sector, the
 project will cover 12 enterprises. These enterprises and their locations are known. HFC-32 and
 hydrocarbons, which are flammable materials, are the main alternatives to be adopted by the project.
 This could lead to safety issues for which proper safety equipment and training should be put in place.

 E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
 The National Ozone Unit (NOU) under the Department of Industrial Works is experienced
 with Hazardous Substance Control Act, and safeguard issues under the implementation of the
 Thailand-National CFC Phase-out project.

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Waraporn Hirunwatsiri (EASTS ) - Environmental Specialist
 Wasittee Udchachone            - Environmental Specialist (Consultant)
 Songling Yao                   - Sr. Social Developmental Specialist

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP          Yes             The project will have a positive impact on
 4.01                                                    the global environment as HCFCs are not
                                                         only ozone depleting substances, but they
                                                         also are high global warming gases whose
                                                         global warming potential (GWP) ranges
                                                         from several hundred to several thousand
                                                         times that of carbon dioxide. Moreover,
                                                         the conversion of various HCFC-based
                                                         manufacturers to alternative, advanced
technologies usually leads to improved
energy efficiency, particularly in the
refrigeration and air-conditioning sectors.
Thus, phasing out HCFCs provides two
types of potential benefit to the climate.

The project will cover enterprises
manufacturing air-conditioners and those
manufacturing foam products including
rigid polyurethane foam, flexible
polyurethane foam and integral skin foam.
Among 200 foam enterprises,
hydrocarbon technology is the preferred
technology for enterprises with HCFC
141b consumption of more than 20 MT
per year. Hydrocarbon (cyclopentane) has
a GWP less than 25. Due to its
flammability, safety requirements
associated with hydrocarbons are
important and should be in place. There
are twelve air-conditioner manufacturing
enterprises covered by the project. The
proposed alternative technology is HFC-
32 with GWP of 700 (about 1/3 of the
chemical to be replaced). Since HFC-32
is mildly flammable, potential safety risks
and fire hazards must be properly
addressed.

For all project sites, a due diligence
review on occupational health and safety
measures, fire and exposure risk will be
conducted and appropriate emergency
preparedness and response measures will
be described as identified in the World
Bank Group Environment, Health and
Safety (EHS) Guidelines. Staff involved
in the production, installation and services
will be trained as needed.

To address the environment, health and
safety issues, the environmental
management framework (EMF) will be
prepared prior to appraisal, and
environmental management plan (EMP)
with site-specific mitigation measures for
                                         each sub-project will be prepared prior to
                                         project implementation.

                                         All the participating enterprises must be in
                                         compliance with National, and local law
                                         and regulations related to environment/
                                         social/health and safety protection.

                                         The project activities will likely occur in
                                         the existing facilities, even though
                                         flammable substances such as R-32 and
                                         hydrocarbon will be used of which may
                                         create safety and occupational health
                                         issues. However, these impacts can be
                                         mitigated. Therefore the project is
                                         assigned as an Environment Category B
                                         project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No   The project will not affect any protected
                                         areas, known natural habitats, or
                                         established or proposed critical natural
                                         habitats as all the project activities will
                                         take place in existing industrial facilities.
                                         According to Thai law and regulation, the
                                         factory will not be permitted to locate in
                                         any protected areas, known natural
                                         habitats, or established or proposed
                                         critical natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No   The project will not finance activities that
                                         would involve significant conversions or
                                         degradation of critical forest areas or
                                         related critical natural habitats as defined
                                         under the policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09             No   The project will not finance procurement
                                         of pesticides or pesticide application
                                         equipment (either directly or indirectly).
                                         In addition the project will not affect pest
                                         management in a way that harm could be
                                         done, nor lead to increased pesticide use
                                         and subsequent increase in health and
                                         environmental risk.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP   No   The project will not adversely affect sites
4.11                                     with archeological, paleontological,
                                         historical, religious, or unique natural
                                         values.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No                  All project activities will be developed
                                                                      within project enterprises or in existing
                                                                      industrial area, so there is no IP group to
                                                                      be affected. Therefore, the project will not
                                                                      trigger this policy.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No                  All the project activities will be within
                                                                      project enterprises, so there is no land
                                                                      related impact.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No                  The project is not involving with
                                                                      construction or rehabilitation of any dams.
 Projects on International Waterways              No                  The project is not involving international
 OP/BP 7.50                                                           waterways.
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP                 No                  The project is not located in any known
 7.60                                                                 disputed areas.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

 A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: January 2013.


 B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
     The safeguard instrument, Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for
     the implementation of the foam conversion sub-project, will be developed before the
     appraisal. Specific Environmental Management Plan (EMP) of twelve enterprises under
     Air-Conditioning sector will be developed before the appraisal. The ESMF and EMP will
     be disclosed locally (in local language-Thai) and in the Bank Infoshop prior to the
     appraisal mission.


IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:                      Name: Viraj Vithoontien
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards                    Name: Peter Leonard                                     Date: January 11, 2013
 Coordinator:
 Sector Manager:                        Name: Julia M. Fraser                                   Date: February 4, 2013



 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
 affected persons.
