                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/15/2012                                Report No.: AC6706
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Timor-Leste                         Project ID: P125443
Project Name: GPE Management Strengthening Project
Task Team Leader: Stephen David Close
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 21, 2012       Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2012
Managing Unit: EASHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: General education sector (100%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     0.00
         EFA-FTI Education Program Development Fund                   2.80
                                                                      2.80
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To support the implementation of the National Education Strategic Plan (NESP) through
strengthening the capacity and systems of the Ministry of Education.

3. Project Description
Component 1 will strengthen Targeted Management Directorates.

 Component 2 will strengthen public financial management and evidence-based planning
capacity, including management information systems.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Not applicable

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is focused on management strengthening at the central Ministry level. The
focus on management strengthening includes inputs of technical assistance only. No
 safeguards are expected to be triggered and no physical investments are planned in the
proposed project

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not applicable.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
No safeguard policy issues have been identified in the project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are management staff of the Ministry of Education of Timor-Leste.
Strategic Plan implementation coordination groups and the Annual Joint Review process
are supported through project activities as fora for consultation.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Stephen David Close   05/04/2012
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Luis Benveniste       05/15/2012
  Comments:
