                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                         RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/19/2012                                   Report No.: AC6813
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Timor-Leste                         Project ID: P104794
Project Name: Health Sector Strategic Plan Support Project
Task Team Leader: Yi-Kyoung Lee
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 11,      Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007
2007
Managing Unit: EASHH                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (83%);Central government administration (12%);Sub-national
government administration (5%)
Theme: Health system performance (33%);Child health (17%);Malaria (17%);Nutrition
and food security (17%);Population and reproductive health (16%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              1
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           0.00
         AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development29.24
         EC: EUROPEAID Agency                                         8.46
         Financing Gap                                                0.00
                                                                     37.70
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The initial Project Development Objective (PDO) is "to improve the quality and coverage
of preventive and curative health services, particularly for women and children, in order
to accelerate progress toward the health millennium development goals (MDGs)".
However, the initial design has proven too complex for the implementation capacity, and
thus the PDO will be changed to: "support Government of Timor-Leste to get more
resources to where they are needed most, to improve the delivery of health services in
districts and sub-districts." The restructured Project will target the system and resource
management issues that underpin improved essential health service delivery at the district
level, which is where live the majority of the Timorese population.

 The proposed modifications in the PDO and its components do not change the overall
environmental category of the Project (rated Category C), nor do they trigger new
safeguard policies. The ISDS is being updated to reflect the changes in the PDO and
components.

3. Project Description
The restructured Project will focus on the system and resource management issues that
will ultimately improve primary health care services in districts and sub-districts. Central
to the restructured Project is a 'roadmap' to improve public financial management (PFM)
for increased service delivery captured in the NHSSP.

 The following components will replace the existing components:

 Component 1. Improving PFM and Fund Flows for Service Delivery: (i) strengthening
the MoH's planning and budgeting; (ii) advocating for an increased overall health budget
allocation; and (iii) increasing flexible and innovative funding for district service
delivery;

 Component 2. Strengthening Pharmaceutical and Medical Supplies Management: (i)
strengthening the clinical and logistics management capacity of the health sector; (ii)
strengthening regulatory capacity of the health sector; and (iii) improving quality control;
and

  Component 3: Improving Evidence-Informed Decision Making and Health Sector
Coordination: (i) developing and using an agreed sector M&E framework to assess
performance across the health sector; (ii) institutionalizing health sector coordination; and
(iii) strengthening research capacity.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
As the restructured Project will focus primarily on resource management by
strengthening the system and building capacity among staff to better manage it, the
restructured Project will not finance any drugs or any civil works, except for very minor
rehabilitation (i.e., shelf and window screen for drug storage). Accordingly no land
acquisition or involuntary resettlement is needed. Thus, no adverse social or
environmental impacts are anticipated. Various capacity building activities will target all
PFM related staff in the health sector (e.g., central MOH, all 13 district health teams,
hospitals, and central medical stores) without any preference given to specific ethnic
and/or gender groups.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Knut Opsal (EASER)
   Mr Isono Sadoko (EASID)
   Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (EASHH)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Yi-Kyoung Lee             11/12/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja   11/12/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Isono Sadoko              11/13/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Knut Opsal                11/15/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Toomas Palu               11/19/2012
  Comments:
