                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/04/2011                                 Report No.: AC6313
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Togo                                   Project ID: P123922
Project Name: Integrated Disaster and Land Management Project
Task Team Leader: Shelley Mcmillan
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 29,         Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTWR                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (35%);Other social
protection and risk management (35%);Water resource management (30%)
SPF Amount (US$m):                0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               5.45
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
         Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery             7.29
         Least Developed Countries TF for Climate Change Activities      3.70
                                                                        10.99
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The PDO is to strengthen institutional capacity of targeted institutions to manage the
risks of flooding and land degradation in targeted rural and urban areas.
  The GEO is to expand sustainable land management (SLM) in targeted landscapes and
in climate vulnerable areas in Togo.

3. Project Description
The Togo Integrated Disaster and Land Management (IDLM) Project was born out of the
merger of two projects that were both under identification in 2010, namely:
 #     National Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Plan (P123922)
 Funding source: Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)
 and
 #     Ecological Support to Agricultural Activities in the National Agriculture and
Food Security Investment Program (PNIASA: Programme National d#Investissements
Agricoles et de Sécurité alimentaire) (P124198)
 Funding source: Global Environment Fund (GEF)
 The rationale behind the merger of the Togo DRM Country Program and the SLM
Project into the IDLM Project can be substantiated at three complementary levels: (a)
thematic, (b) institutional, and (c) strategic.
 (i)    At the thematic level, both projects offer strong synergies and reinforce each
other. For example, the GEF/LDCF funded activities which support ecosystem services
restoration help reduce and mitigate flooding. Furthermore, sustainable agricultural and
forestry practices in the watershed are known to consolidate land coverage, reduce
erosion, and improve rain infiltration in the ground. The GEF-funded SLM activities thus
contribute to consolidate the outcomes of the DRM activities. Similarly, the GFDRR-
funded activities, including small-scale reforestation, tree nursery and tree planting
contribute to more sustainable land and water management.

 (ii) At the institutional level, both projects fall under the responsibility of MERF to
implement so the merger facilitates one coherent program for MERF and the Bank.

 (iii) At the strategic level, the newly approved PNIERN has identified institutional
capacity building, SLM, and DRM as its three priorities for investment. Both projects
fully contribute to the implementation of the PNIERN so merging them into one is
logical.
 However, the availability of funding for the GEF/LDCF-financed activities and the
GFDRR-financed activities differs so the project has been structured as follows:

 Table 2: Project Structure.


 FUNDING SOURCES               PHASE I       PHASE II       TOTAL

 GFDRR      1,575,000     5,715,000      7,290,000
 TLF 500,000              500,000
 GEF STAR          4,527,778     4,527,778
 LDCF              3,703,704     3,703,704
 GEF SFM             925,926       925,926

 Totals2,075,000       14,872,408    16,947,408
 The project has four components: (a) Institutional Strengthening and Awareness
Raising, (b) Community-Based Activities for Adaptation and Sustainable Land
Management, (c) Early Warning, Monitoring, and Knowledge Systems and (d) Project
Management.
 COMPONENT 1: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND AWARENESS
RAISING (US$ 3.12 MILLION)
 Institutional Strengthening: The capacity of key national, regional, local, and
community organizations engaged in DRM and SLM will be strengthened through the
provision of equipment and training.
 In Phase 1, communication and pumping equipment will be provided to the National
Civil Defence Department of Lomé. Combined with specific technical training, this will
strengthen the preparedness and response capacity of the Department. In addition, the
National Platform for DRR will also be equipped to be able to operate properly. In Phase
2, the operational capacity of the National Fire Brigade (the main operational structure of
the Civil Defence Department) will be significantly strengthened in the Northern areas of
the country by opening and equipping a new base in the Kara Region. Further, the
capacity of key national, regional, and local institutions involved in managing and
promoting SLM will be strengthened through the provision of training and equipment.
Training will target experts who play an active role in preventing and managing risks of
land degradation. Training will cover an introduction to land degradation phenomena,
how these events may be affected by climate change and how prevention, mitigation, and
rehabilitation can be improved.
  Awareness Raising: Awareness about the risks of flooding and land degradation will be
enhanced through targeted information campaigns at national and local levels.
  General awareness campaigns about the risks of flooding and land degradation will be
conducted to educate the population about flood-prone areas, flood evacuation plans, and
flood prevention, and to improve readiness when such events occur. The campaigns will
also raise awareness on how SLM can directly mitigate impacts of flooding and other
extreme events such as landslides, mud flows, and drought. The multiple benefits of SLM
for improved productivity and livelihood will be disseminated. Climate change resilient
SLM techniques will be promoted such as protecting soil cover (mulch, crops, grass, and
trees), and improved water productivity (rain water harvesting and runoff/run-on control).
  COMPONENT 2: COMMUNITY-BASED ACTIVITIES FOR ADAPTATION AND
SUSTAINABLE LAND MANAGEMENT (US$ 7.07 MILLION)
  Community-Based Activities in Watersheds and Flood-Prone Areas: Resilience to
flooding will be strengthened through targeted pilot activities at the local level that will
enable communities to better manage disaster risk and land degradation.
  In Phase 1, four small-scale interventions will be implemented on a pilot basis.
Interventions will include: community improvement of drainage canals in the city of
Tchamba (Central Region); community works for the clearing and maintenance of Lac
Boko canal and consolidation of the banks (Maritime Region); a study for improvement
works on the river Eké (Atakpamé in Plateau Region) and stabilization of Bombouaka
dam through reforestation (Savanna Region). Similar activities will be scaled-up in other
sites of Togo in Phase 2 in priority vulnerable areas as identified during Phase 1.
  Community-Based activities in Cropland and Grazing Land: Resilience of agriculture to
climate change, promotion of land productivity and water-use efficiency and SLM best
practices will be piloted and promoted in targeted areas.
  In Phase 1, a total of six small-scale interventions will be implemented on a pilot basis
at select sites located in the Kara, Maritime, Plateau, and Savanna Regions. SLM best
practices will be piloted and promoted with a focus on introducing sustainable
agricultural practices that increase resilience to climate change. These activities will
address local area needs to increase SLM practices so communities can select those
techniques most appropriate for a given environment. These techniques include
reforestation / afforestation, agroforestry, conservation tillage and conservation
agriculture, integrated soil fertility, mulch and crop residues, limiting use of fire in range
management, manure management, conservation and restoration of agro-biodiversity and
habitats, and integrated watershed management. Similar activities will be undertaken at
other sites in Phase 2.
 Community-Based Sustainable Forest and Wetland Management: Communities will be
assisted in preparing sustainable financing plans and in developing small income
generation activities in and around select protected areas and forests to reduce pressure
on forest resources and restore ecosystem services.
 In Phase 1, one small-scale intervention (boundary demarcation of the classified forest
in Abdoulate) will be implemented in the Central Region. In Phase 2, participatory
management will be promoted and sustainable financing plans prepared for the
communities in the select protected areas. Small income generation projects will also be
developed to reduce pressure on forest resources and restore ecosystem services in select
protected areas.
 COMPONENT 3: EARLY WARNING, MONITORING AND KNOWLEDGE
SYSTEMS (US$ 5.16 MILLION)
 Early Warning System (EWS): A nation-wide EWS will be developed to alert
communities of upcoming possible flood events and allow them to take appropriate
actions to protect lives and property, through enhanced collaboration and
communications between the national hydro meteorological services and the Togolese
Red Cross. Specific technical equipment and training will also be provided to the key
players.
 In Phase 1, equipment needed to monitor meteorological and hydrological parameters in
select areas will be provided to the relevant government agencies. A shared working plan
and a coordinated approach to better forecast floods in flood-prone rural and urban areas
will also be developed. Assistance will be provided to improve communications between
the National Hydrological Service, the Ministry of Water and Sanitation, the Togolese
Red Cross, and the Department of National Meteorology. In Phase 2, the same approach
will be extended to other select areas.
 Environmental Monitoring: A country-owned climate and land monitoring system,
including geo-spatial data, will be developed to monitor vegetation cover and land use
(crop, pasture/range, forest, wetland, protected area, and other relevant categories), and to
provide carbon sequestration estimates in select project areas.
 These activities will be carried out in Phase 2, although some baseline data will be
gathered in Phase 1 (see Component 2). The monitoring system will be based on the
regional TerrAfrica prototype that was developed in Mali to allow compilation at
different local, district, and regional levels.
 Knowledge: An update of the national cartography and targeted risk assessments will be
conducted to identify appropriate disaster mitigation investments and/or risk transfer
mechanisms, including hazard, asset, and vulnerability analyses. A guide of select SLM
best practices which incorporates climate change impacts will also be developed.
 In Phase 1, the project will support the update of the cartography for the Greater Lomé
area as a basis for a comprehensive approach to the flooding issues affecting the capital
city. In addition, in response to the critical situation of the Baguida neighbourhood, which
was flooded for over six months during 2010, the project in Phase 1 will also support an
analytical study of the hydrology, the layout of the settlement and the economic and
social profile of the population of this specific area. This study will include an overview
of the different possible investment options for improving the situation. In Phase 2, the
SLM best practices guide will be developed for dissemination.
  COMPONENT 4: PROJECT MANAGEMENT (US$ 1.11 MILLION)
  For the project to be effectively implemented, project management functions including
fiduciary management, M&E, technical supervision, reporting and audits, will be covered
under this component.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Targeted rural and urban areas in Togo

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
   Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project is classified as environmental category B because no activity funded under
the Project is expected to have a significant negative environmental or social impact. The
Project triggers five safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, OP
4.09 on Pest Management, OP/BP 4.36 on Forests, OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats and
OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. This is because the project will broad
environmental and social impacts, albeit minimal to moderate, pest management may be
undertaken for some of the agricultural activities, and some of the community projects
will involve management and protection of forests and critical habitats. Activities under
the project are not expected to generate any adverse environmental or social effects, as a
large part of the project is geared towards reducing the risk of flooding and land
degradation in targeted rural and urban areas in Togo. Three safeguards instruments
associated with the proposed project are the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), Pest Management Plan (PMP) and the Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF). These have been prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-
country and the Bank#s Infoshop on June 28, 2011.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site
specific, thus easily remediable. No long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen during
project implementation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry of Environment and Forest Resources (MERF) has an environment
department that handles environmental assessments so MERF has reasonable capacity to
manage environment and social safeguards. This unit will be responsible for following up
safeguards issues with the designated PIU#s environmental and social specialist during
project implementation. Part time consultants will also be hired as and when necessary to
work with this unit. The Bank will provide guidance on the elaboration of the TORs and
the Environment Department of MERF will be responsible for providing overall quality
control through the review and clearance of the Environmental Management Plans
(EMPs), Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) and Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) as and when necessary. The environment department will also assist in enforcing
compliance with Bank safeguards policies and monitor the implementation of the EMPs.
Specific capacity building on environmental management and environmental assessment
will be provided to the technical services departments of the participating ministries. In
accordance with Bank guidelines, all EA studies and ARAPs/RAPs will need to be
reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to the commencement of the civil works.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Key stakeholders include:
 -      Ministry of Environment and Forest Resources
 -      Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries
 -      Ministry of Water and Sanitation
 -      National Hydrological Services
 -      Department of National Meteorology
 -      Togo Red Cross
 There were consultations with the population and key institutions during preparation of
the safeguards instruments and this will continue during implementation of the
instruments. Public comments were solicited during the disclosure process of the
safeguards instruments through announcements made in two local newspapers. No
comments were received. Consultations and public meetings will continue during project
implementation
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/28/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/28/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/09/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/28/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        N/A
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       N/A
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      N/A
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 N/A
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           N/A
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Shelley Mcmillan         09/28/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba   09/28/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni       09/28/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi    09/28/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala   09/28/2011
  Comments:
