                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/30/2013                                     Report No.: AC6668
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P113415                 Original Project Name: Emergency
                                             Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Energy
                                             Project
Country: Togo                                Project ID: P126899
Project Name: Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation & Energy Project - Additional
Financing
Task Team Leader: Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 21,       Estimated Board Date: June 4, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: AFTU2                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Flood protection (80%);Sanitation (20%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (80%);Other urban development (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             14
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective of the second AF will remain the same: to increase
access to infrastructure and urban services in Lomé. The achievement of this objective
would support the GoT's efforts to demonstrate concrete improvements in the lives of its
citizens, a critical step for sustaining social and political stability in the country. The
current closing date, December 31, 2015, will remain unchanged and will apply to the
second Additional Financing (AF).

3. Project Description
The second AF project will support an expansion of the rehabilitation and construction
works under sub-component A1 (Drainage) and A2 (Urban Roads) as follows:

 Component A: Infrastructure Rehabilitation (US$ 14 million equivalent)
 A.1 Drainage cleaning and Rehabilitation (US$ 9.8 million equivalent): to reduce the
number of people affected by periodic flooding in the poor neighborhoods of Lomé. The
activities planned for this component will benefit at least an additional 48,000 people.
Strengthening of the drainage system through: (a) cleaning of, approximately, additional
six (6) kilometers of canals at Aflao Gakli, Totsi and Agbalépédogan neighborhoods of
Lomé; (ii) rehabilitation and extension of, approximately, additional four (4) kilometers
of unsound drainage structures, through resurfacing the inner walls of drains, and
construction of new culverts along Malou road, 190 AGP Road and Baptist Church road
at Agbalépédogan, using mostly labor-intensive methods; and (iii) construction of a water
retention pond including a gutter for drainage of rainwater from the natural depression at
Gbati locality in Aflao/Gakli linking it to a network of canals (some expanded in size) to
drain the water into the Lomé lagoon.

 A.2 Urban Roads (US$ 4.2 million equivalent): to rehabilitate about 5 kilometers of
secondary roads in Lomé to increase access to currently isolated areas of the city.
Despite considerable efforts under the project, enormous needs persist to rehabilitate
heavily dilapidated roads and to reinforce drainage systems in the urban centers, mostly
as a result of the excessive floods. Rehabilitation of, approximately, additional five (5)
kilometers of roads (including, Baptist church road at Agbalépédogan, improvement and
paving of Malou road, 164 street, 190 AGP road, second side of Boulevard Malfakassa
and second part/side of Avenue Pya and Pya Prolongee) roads in Lomé to increase access
to Agbalépédogan, Aflao Gakli, Totsi, Tokoin, Be Kpota and Anfame neighborhoods of
Lomé through: reshaping and reinforcing of base structures, re-gravelling and paving of
roads, and rehabilitating drainage structures along those roads. Key results are expected
to include improved and lower cost public transportation in the disadvantaged
neighborhoods in which citizens are currently isolated from businesses and job
opportunities. An additional 27,500 people are expected to obtain access to all-season
roads.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project location will be in Lomé.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
   Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed activities are similar in type and scope to the original investment program.
It is not expected that the additional civil works activities to be carried out under the
proposed second AF will affect the environmental category of the project, which remains
at Category B. No new safeguard policies are triggered. The types of investments
included in the second AF are covered by the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared and disclosed
in the country and InfoShop on August 13, 2009, and August 23, 2009, respectively, and
the ESMF and RPF still apply as agreed by the decision meeting. The implementation of
these two safeguards policies was moderately satisfactory. ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs for
the original project have been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed; additional
ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs will be prepared per site specific needs as project
implementation progresses.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be moderate, site-specific
and easily mitigated (most of the works consist of reparis/rehabilitation os existing
infrastructure). There are no indirect or long term adverse impacts expected during
project implementation.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Lomé Municipality staff and the Implementing Entity (IE) safeguards specialist have
been trained on Bank safeguards policies and now have better information and guidance
on how to prepare and implement ESMPs and RAPs, as well as using the ESMF and RPF
to screen for safeguards risks in the project. The IE safeguards specialist follows up
environmental and social issues during project implementation. However, as
implementation has progressed, the limited capacity of Government to fully engage and
undertake Social Safeguards supervision has caused the Bank team to provide guidance
including: (i) need for Government to provide to various actors sufficient means to carry
out the follow-up and the supervision of subprojects' ESMPs and/or RAPs; (ii) sharing as
much as possible projects safeguards instruments with project stakeholders; (iii)
strengthening the capacity of the various stakeholder groups in environmental and social
assessment and monitoring and reporting procedures, through training and sensitization
programs; (iv) ensuring that proposed mitigations measures are effectively implemented;
(v) ensuring that local communities are involved in the implementation and monitoring of
subprojects. The Bank team is closely monitoring safeguards issues related to the project
to ensure that the IE complies with safeguard requirement under this AF.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
All key stakeholders (Government, Agencies and Ministries, NGOs, Comité de
Development de Bè, Lomé Municipales authorities, priva sector, communities,
development partners, etc.) are being and will be consulted regularly Key concerns
include timetables for repairs/rehabilitation works, disturbance affecting access to
residences/businesses, and longer term environmental and social impacts. The project
will continue the dialogue with key stakeholders and the project will rely on the rigorous
implementation of RPF and ESMF to ensure that the appropriate mitigation measures are
taken into account in accordance with the Togo and the Bank's safeguards policies in
actives consultation with key stakeholders. This participatory approach will be carried on
throughout implementation, maintenance, supervision and evaluation of the project
activities with the support Local Development Committees.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    08/12/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                08/13/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 04/29/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    08/12/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                08/13/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 04/29/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh   04/24/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Maman-Sani Issa         04/24/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor    04/24/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   04/26/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Alexander E. Bakalian   04/24/2013
  Comments:
