                                                                                 68787

                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: 

Date prepared/updated:    c.rS f (:\ \   \~~ \ L 

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Proiect D
Country: Tunisia                                 Project ID: P 128427
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any) :NI A
Project Name: Community Works and Local Participation (P128427)
Task Team Leader: Diego Angel-Urdinola
Estimated AppJaisal Date: NI A                   Estimated Board Date: May 4, 2012
Managing Unit: MNSHD                             Lendin& Instrument: Specific Investment Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme Social safety nets (80%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):O
IDA Amount (US$m.):O
OEF Amount (US$m.):O
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: Japan Social Development Fund (US$m.):3
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a transferred project                    Yes []                   No [X]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises         Yes []       No [X]
and Emergencies)                                                                     I
2. Project Objectives:

The main objective is to provide direct income support to low-skilled and long-term unemployed
citizens, through their participation in labor-intensive community works, to be selected and
implemented in a highly participatory manner in the underserved governorate of Jendouba of the
Republic of Tunisia.

3. Project Description:

The proposed Project will provide grants to finance labor-intensive community works, to be
proposed and implemented by local associations (including NOOs, CSOs, etc.) in close
collaboration with Ministry of Vocational Training and Employment (Ministere de la Formation
Professionnelle et de l'Emploi) and other government agencies.

Component 1: Community-based public works and local participation

The Project is expected to finance approximately 100 community works sub-projects in the
Jendouba region. Approximately 3000 low-skilled long-term unemployed and 100 skilled
workers (chef de projets) will therefore be temporarily employed through the project. Each
beneficiary will work about 2.5 months, 5 days a week. The transfer per month is set at 260
DTN (approximately US$171) for the 3000 low-skilled workers. For skilled workers, the transfer
is set at DTN 1175 (US$775).

Activities may include (but are not limited to): Cleaning and rehabilitation of public parks or
spaces; cleaning and rehabilitation of cultural or leisure infrastructure and services (eg., Maisons
de jeunes, sport centers, etc); rehabilitation of small roads in rural and peri-urban areas;
rehabilitation of small roads and spaces leading to cultural sites of importance for the
community; rehabilitation of schools and health centers; reforestation activities; urban
beautifying activities.

Eligible activities. Activities that may be proposed by associations must meet the following
eligibility criteria:

   • 	 They must be labor-intensive, which means that they should be implemented using a
       budget ratio of 70% for wages, 20 % for material and tools, and 10% for NGO
       administrative costs.
   • 	 They must be implemented in lendouba.
   • 	 They must provide temporary employment for at least 30 unskilled workers and one
       skilled worker (project leader) for a period of two to three months per project.
   • 	 They should not adversely affect the environment or have negative social consequences,
       as per the environmental and social safeguards included in Section 7 of the Operations
       Manual.
   • 	 They must be identified in a participatory manner, proposed on the basis of extensive and
       demonstrable consultations held with community members (including potential
       beneficiaries) and civil society
   • 	 They must a public good or service.

Capacity Building and Implementation. The project will finance:

    • 	 Recruitment, in accordance with the criteria set forth in the Manual of Operations, of: (i)
        a regional coordinator for the project, (ii) a financial officer, (iii) an environmental
        expert;
    • 	 Operating costs by the PCU;
    • 	 Training activities for associations and MFPE. Training will be provided to all'
        associations wishing to submit a proposal. This training will range from how to meet the
        selection criteria to ensuring that subprojects are developed in a participatory way with
        community members and beneficiaries. Proposals must also explain the benefits that the
        community will derive from the rehabilitated infrastructure, and how these benefits will
        be shared in an equitable, participatory and transparent manner. Some funds will also be
        allocated to the organizations whose proposals have been selected, and will be used to
        build the capacity of these organizations by providing some basic equipment,
        participation in training or other events. Proposals will detail how the organizations
        intend to use the capacity-building funds .
   • 	 Monitoring and evaluation activities performed by the PCU and by relevant local
       officials.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The main objective is to provide direct income support to low-skilled and long-term unemployed
citizens, through their participation in labor-intensive community works, to be selected and
implemented in a highly participatory manner in the under-served governorate of lendouba.
lendouba is one of the regions in Tunisia displaying highest poverty and unemployment rates.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Hana Salah ( MNSSO )
Suiko Yoshijima (MNSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                        Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                        X
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                             X
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                                     X
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                               X
Projects on Internationa'i Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)          -           -          -
                                                                                          X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The maJonty of sub-projects are expected to be activIties which can provide substantial
economic and environmental benefits rather than causing disturbances. Each activity is also
expected to be small scale (approximately US$25,000 per sub-project out of which 70% is
allocated for salaries and 10% for administrative cost for the NGOs) and labor intensive where
impacts would be very limited.

The project is classified as Category "B" in accordance with World Bank Operational Policy
4.01, as sub-projects will be proposed by NGOs during implementation, which could have
potential impacts on the environment. The expected types of sub-projects identified through the
consultation with the NGOs are the following:
    • 	 Painting and repairing of the damaged buildings during the revolution
    • 	 Repaving damaged small roads
   •   Replanting trees in public parks

Given these types of sub-projects, the main environmental risks are those associated with
nuisances (dust, odors, and noise), solid waste management (wastes collected from repairing and
urban beautifying work), and environmental health and safety on the worksite, therefore, such
impacts can be addressed by incorporating standard environmental operating procedures into the
Operations Manual and technical training courses. There are no potential large-scale, significant
and/or irreversible impacts associated with this project. Any type of new construction is
ineligible for financing under this grant, as are any activities which would be considered to fall
under Category A as defined in OP 4.01. OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement does not apply as
none of the eligible activities involve land acquisition or restriction of access to land or resources.

A negative list was prepared and included in the Operations Manual in order to ensure other
safeguard policies except OP4.0 1 are not triggered. Any type of new construction is ineligible for
financing under the grant, as are any activities which would be considered to fall under Category
A as defined in OP 4.01. Further, as none of the eligible activities involve land acquisition or
restriction of access to land or resources, OP4.12 on involuntary resettlement does not apply. The
activities will not result in a change in footprint. Any type of new construction is ineligible for
financing under this grant. OP4.36 will also not be triggered because the reforestation activity
will be limited to replanting in the public park where trees used to be planted. The activity will
not affect the rights and welfare of people and their level of dependence upon or interaction with
forests.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

No cumulative impacts are expected. The work will be a one-time rehabilitation of existing
facilities so it is very unlikely to cause long term impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

Since this is a category B project and a separate EMP needs to be disclosed, a simple
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) including an Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) was prepared separately for disclosure purposes and the EMP will be included in the
Operations Manual in order to ensure full consideration of environmental safeguards in
accordance with the Bank environ.ri1ental guidelines. A consultation workshop was conducted on
March 29, 2012 in order to raise awareness of the safeguard aspects of the project and also gather
more information on the potential sub-projects from the NGOs.
The mitigation measures consist from the following core items which are included in the
Operations Manual:

   I.   Negative list to avoid any sub-projects with significant impact on the environment
   2.   Checklist to assess potential impacts
   3.   List of mitigation measures/good practices linked to potential impacts
   4.   Regular monitoring mechanism by an environmental specialist and technical experts

A mechanism for screening sub-projects for their environmental impact (e.g., negative list and
checklist which are linked to a list of mitigation measures), and a list of mitigations measures
and good practices to avoid potential impacts have been prepared. The measures for workers'
safety are also included in the Operations Manual. Implementation will be pursued through
oversight by a qualified part-time Environmental Specialist and technical engineers, who are also
responsible for carrying out preliminary environmental screenings and providing training to the
NGOs.

A presentation on the World Bank safeguard policies was given at the Ministry of Vocational
Training and Employment for its staff and representatives from NGOS during the preparation in
order to ensure their understanding on the safeguard matters. Mr. Fethi lamai, Regional Director
of Environmental Issues from The Ministry of Environment and his team were consulted during
the preparation of the EMF/EMP. A representative of the Ministry of Environment will be
included in the Steering Committee for this project. A series of safeguard related training will be
conducted for the UCP members and NGOs during implementation to further strengthen their
capacity.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Consultation on project design and the draft EMP was held in the governorate of lendouba on
March 28, 2012 to raise awareness of the environmental aspects as well as to ensure participatory
approach throughout the project. The consultation was chaired by the governor and attended by
around 30 NGO members, the representative of the MFPE as well as the regional managers of
the environment and the vocational training and the employment. The draft EMP was presented
during the consultation emphasizing the means, the procedures and the best practice to be
implemented for the conservation and the protection of the environment. Comments received
were incorporated into the final design of the EMP. Further public awareness events and training
surrounding safeguards will be conducted around the project launch and before submission of
call for proposals.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/AuditlManagement Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 NB: As this is a JSDF grant and therefore is not subject to formal                 Yes
 appraisal, disclosure occurred prior to signing.
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     4116/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                            5/7/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                             5/7/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                               N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFrameworkIPolicy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
Indigenous Peoples PlanlPlanning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:.




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to befilled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OPIBP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes []    No [ ]    N/A [x]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     N/A
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OPIBP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [x]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
  Does the EA adequately address the pest management          Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [x]
  issues?
  Is a separate PMP required?                                 Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [x]
  If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
  safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
  requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
  project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
  OPfBP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
  Does the EA include adequate measures related to            Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [x]
  cultural property?
  Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
  the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
  resources?
  OPfBP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning             Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [x]
  Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
  consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
  safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
  design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
  Social Development Unit?
  OPfBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [x]
  framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
  prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
  safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
  plan/policy framework/process framework?
  OPfBP 4.36 - Forests
  Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional    Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [x]
  issues and constraints been carried out?
  Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
  overcome these constraints?
  Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
  so, does it include provisions for certification system?
  OPfBP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
  Have dam safety plans been prepared?                        Yes [ ]   No [   1   N/Alx]
  Have the TORs as well as composition for the
  independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
  approved by the Bank?
  Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
  prepared and arrangements been made for public
  awareness and training?
I OPfBP 7.50 - Proj~cts on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?      Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [x]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OPfBP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent infonnation on the      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [x]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PADIMOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [x]   No [ ]   N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes
public place in a fonn and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [x]   No [ ]   N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

 Sil!ned and submitted bv:
 Task Team Leader:

 Social Development Specialist
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development
 Specialist(s):


 Regional Safeguards
 Coordinator:
   Comments:
 Sector Manal2:er:
   Comments:
