                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 
 68193
Date prepared/updated: 17 April 2012 


I. Basic Information

 .     .    .
1 B aSlC PrOJec tD a ta
Country: Tunisia                                 I Project ID: P 120233
                                                 I Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Emergency Grant to Support Young Rural Tunisians Affected by Multiple
Shocks
Task Team Leader: Gloria La Cava
Estimated Appraisal Date: NI A                  I Estimated Board Date: NI A
Managing Unit: MNSSO                            I Lending Instrument: JSDF grant
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Other social development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: JSDF 3.0 million US$
Environmental Category: B - Partial assessment
Is this a transferred project                   I Yes [ ]                No [X]
Simplified Processing                           I Simple [ ]             Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises        Yes []      No [X]
and Emergencies)                                                                  I
2. Project Objectives:

The objective of the grant is to provide emergency income support and short-term employment
to approximately 3,000 youth to meet their basic needs through cash-for-work, training,
apprenticeship and self-employment opportunities.

3. Project Description:

Component 1- Cash-for-Work for Youth Employed in Rural Community Projects and
Services (Amount US$1,300,OOO)

The main goal of this component is to provide direct transfers to individuals particularly hit by
the crisis and who do not have access to formal safety nets. Up to 2,000 crisis-affected
unemployed youth in rural areas will be given cash-for-work opportunities by participating in a
variety of sub-projects and services to be proposed, designed, implemented and monitored by
local NGOs. There will be 50 of these NGO-led sub-projects, each in the size of up to US$
5,000, and youth participating in the sub-projects will receive cash-for-work at a flat rate of
US$450 over the period of up to 5 months. The sub-project selection procedure will be as
follows: (i) the PMU opens an "Expression of Interest" to NOOs, and then make a short-list of
NOOs based on eligibility criteria; (ii) short-listed NOOs will receive training on proposal
writing; (iii) NOOs will submit; (iv) each proposal will be assessed by the Selection Committee
based on the criteria set forth in the OM; Selection Committee meets to determine the winners;
(v) winners are announced; and (vi) training/orientation for winners are offered.


Eligible sub-projects for financing under this component of the grant include youth social
inclusion initiatives such as community radios, recreational, cultural and psycho-social support
activities for young male and women/girls, youth skills training and mentoring, development of
ICT -related applications and tools for social ~ccountability and civic engagement, environmental
or health awareness raising, and so on. Overall, there are only minor rehabilitation works, and
only the following five types of activities involving small works will be eligible for funding: (i)
street and public space cleaning and rehabilitation involving no change in footprint of such areas;
(ii) garbage collection; (iii) minor rehabilitation of youth centers and facilities for information
and communications technology (lCT) training involving no change in footprint of such
facilities; (iv) rural road repair and rehabilitation; and (v) minor rehabilitation and upgrading of
market storage and distribution facilities involving no change in footprint of such facilities. Any
type of new construction is ineligible for financing under this grant.

Training/orientation for the grant winners will be organized immediately after the selection of
proposals. The aim is to build the general capacity of the grant winning NOOs in implementing,
managing and monitoring the community development sub-projects and services. Topics to be
covered in this training will include: financial management, procurement, project implementation
cycle, social and environmental safeguards, techniques to monitor and report progress of
activities, the type of information and data required to prepare an evaluation report, techniques
on how to involve beneficiaries through participatory process, monitoring the attendance of
beneficiaries, etc.

Component 2 - Conditional Cash for Youth Training and Internships. (Amount
US$60S,OOO)

The main goal of this component is to lay the foundations for a formal safety nets mechanism to
cope with future shocks. Up to 600 crisis-affected vulnerable youth will be given the opportunity
to enroll in innovative training program that will provide conditional cash transfers to them for a
period of up to 6 months. The training will be tailored based on skills needed from local
employers and equip the youth to develop their technical and soft skills i.e. behavioral skills, ICT
skills for farm and off-farm job opportunities. Microsoft and Manpower have offered to provide
training modules, trainers and equipment to provide up to 3-month of skills training to help youth
improve their technical knowledge and their communication, problem-solvi'ng and critical
thinking skills and develop good work habits relevant to the farm and off-farm job market.
Upon completion of the training, youth will be placed into paid internships or apprenticeships for
a 3-month period to put their newly acquired skills into practice and gain work experience.
Youth will receive a monthly living stipend of approximately US$l 00 during the training, and a
monthly stipend of US$150 during the internships/apprenticeships to sustain their livelihood and
cover their basic needs. Employers will be encouraged to continue funding the interns to cover
the stipends for 3 more months. The stipend will be conditional upon 90% attendance.

Component 3 - Conditional Grants for Youth Self-Employment. (Amount US$420,000)

The main goal of this component will be to set up a rapid response system for financing for
micro-enterprises in distress as a consequence of the crisis. Up to 400 youth micro-entrepreneurs
who have been working as self-employed, both in the formal and informal sector, will be given
the opportunity to apply for a conditional grant of about US$l ,000, and about 250 grants will be
awarded . The grant could cover the cost of equipment and Business Development Services. In
addition, youth enrolled in the self-employment program will receive training and individual
coachinglmentoring by senior entrepreneurs in planning, market research, business design,
project implementation and microenterprises formalization. Youth will also receive group
mentoring which will allow them to network with their peers as well as with other business
leaders.

Component 4 - Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (Amount $455,000)

Project Management will include project human resource management (hiring of project
manager, procurement officer, and FM officer) annual audits, travels and transportation related
to project management, and goods and supply for management. Project Monitoring & Evaluation
will include hiring of M&E specialist and creation and maintenance of Management Information
System (MIS). Mobile technologies will be used to introduce substantial cost efficiencies for the
project. A mobile based platform will be created and all project beneficiaries will be connected
to this platform through their personal mobile phones. For instance, they will be sent surveys on
services they receive from the project and answer by text messages; and they will also receive
reminders and refreshers of the training they attended.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The project activities will take place in rural areas of Tunisia, within the central-western
governorates of Kasserine and Siliana. The five types of eligible sub-projects involving physical
interventions (listed under Component 1 in Section 3 of this ISDS, above) will be carried out in
the towns and villages and on the rural roads of these areas. There are no special physical
characteristics of the area that will affect the safeguards analysis and risk mitigation approach to
the grant.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Andrew Losos, Environmental Specialist, MNSEN
Atsuko Muroga, Social Development Specialist, MNSSO
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                         Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                         X
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                                X
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11J                                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                              X
InvoluntaLY Resettlement JOPIBP 4.12)                                                        X
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                                  X
Pro.iects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                                      X

II. 	 Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Environmental and social risks under this grant pertain to Component 1, under which there are a
range of sub-project types eligible for funding, and Component 3, which makes available
conditional grants for youth self-employment.

Risk in the case of Component 3 is considered de minimis as grants are no more than US$ 1 000
each for equipment and business development. Grants may be given to support, among other
things, municipal solid waste collection (e.g. municipal garbage bin collection and disposal in
existing disposal sites) or drinking water provision (e.g. small-scale distribution of water taken
from an existing water supply point to homes and businesses) by small youth-run businesses.
The project Operations Manual will layout the procedures for awarding these grants and will
include a negative list of ineligible uses which will be sufficient to mitigate any risk under this
Component.

The range of sub-project types eligible for funding under Component 1 includes youth social
inclusion initiatives such as community radios, recreational, cultural and psycho-social support
activities for young male and women/girls, youth skills training and mentoring, development of
ICT-related applications and tools for social accountability and civic engagement, environmental
or health awareness-raising, and so on. Most of these would be considered to be Category C
activities requiring no specific safeguards instrument. However, some small rehabilitation work
of a physical nature is also eligible and is considered to fall under Category B.

Within the spectrum of all eligible sub-project types, there are only five which involve "Category
B" physical work requiring safeguards considerations. They are:

       (1) 	street and public space cleaning and rehabilitation involving no change in footprint of
            such areas;
       (2) garbage collection;
        (3) minor rehabilitation of youth centers and facilities for information and
            communications technology (lCT) training involving no change in footprint of such·
            facilities;
        (4) rural road repair and rehabilitation; and
        (5) minor rehabilitation and upgrading of market storage and distribution facilities
            involving no change in footprint of such facilities.

Any type of new construction is ineligible for financing under the grant, as are any activities
which would be considered to fall under Category A as defined in OP 4.01. Further, as none of
the eligible activities involve land acquisition or restriction of access to land or resources, OP
4.12 on involuntary resettlement does not apply.

Given these five types of physical interventions, the main environmental risks are those
associated with nuisances (dust, odours, and noise), solid waste management, and environmental
health and safety on the worksite. There are no potential large-scale, significant and/or
irreversible impacts associated with this project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

There are no expected indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project areas.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

N/A .

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The first and most important risk management tool for this grant is the tightly circumscribed
nature of the list of eligible physical works. Only low-risk activities will be eligible, and as a
result, overall environmental and social risk is correspondingly low. In order to manage this
residual low risk, a second risk management tool has been created in the form of an
environmental management plan (EMP) to be included in the Operations Manual for the grant. It
contains the following four elements:

        (I) a pre-populated table of environmental risks and mitigation measures for each of the
            five types of sub-projects on the list;
        (2) a set of standard contract conditions covering environmental factors as well as
            environmental safety and health of workers;
        (3) a grid of factors for each of the five types, to be considered by personnel conducting
            monitoring; and
        (4) a checklist of specific questions for use as a memory aid and quality control tool
            during monitoring site visits.
In effect, the EMP presents a full, pre-populated set of risks, mitigation measures and monitoring
provisions for each of the five eligible types of sub-projects. In addition to the contents of the
EMP document itself, some training in safeguards implementation will be made available to the
supervision staff or consultants hired by the implementing agency.

For projects of this nature, involving sub-projects whose exact details are not known at appraisal
or signing, the customary safeguards instrument is an environmental and social management
framework (ESMF). In the case of this grant, however, an EMP is deemed sufficient because
screening is not necessary; in effect, the list of eligible sub-project types is a means of screening
higher-risk activities out of consideration a priori. There are only five specific types of eligible
sub-project that could be considered to fall under Category B, each of which carries only low
environmental and social risk.

Because the number of eligible types is small, the EMP is sufficient to capture all of the potential
risks for these sub-project types and to prescribe adequate mitigation and monitoring measures
without the need to establish an ESMF. This approach is consistent with the small scale of the
sub-projects (maximum ofUS$ 5 000 each, not including stipends).

One further potential source of risk would be the possibility that sub-projects might be
undertaken which would involve physical work other than those five types explicitly permitted
by the EMP. This risk is managed by ensuring that consistent criteria are applied to the selection
of sub-projects for financing, and by extension that only the five permitted types will be
approved. The sub-projects will be proposed, designed, implemented and monitored by local
NOOs which will receive small grants up to US$ 5,000 on a competitive basis. The summary
description of the selection procedures is as follows:

   1. 	 The project management unit (PMU) opens a call for "Expressions of Interest" to NOOs,
        and then makes a short-list of NOOs based on eligibility criteria
   2. 	 Short-listed NOOs will receive training on proposal writing.
   3. 	 Proposal are submitted by NOOs
   4. 	 Each proposal is assessed by the Selection Committee based on criteria set forth in the
        Operations Manual. These criteria will clearly restrict the approval of proposals
        involving physical work or activities to the five explicit types identified in the EMP;
   5. 	 Winners are announced
   6. 	 Training/orientation is offered for grant winners

Training/orientation for the grant winners will be organized immediately after the selection of
proposals. The aim is to build the general capacity of the grant winning NOOs in implementing,
managing and monitoring the community development sub-projects and services. Topics to be
covered in this training will include: financial management, procurement, project implementation
cycle, social and environmental safeguard policies and procedures, techniques to monitor and
report progress of activities, the type of information and data required to prepare an evaluation
report, techniques on how to involve beneficiaries through participatory process, monitoring the
attendance of beneficiaries, etc.
This combination of risk management measures is sufficient to manage the low level of risk
inherent in the sub-projects and activities proposed for financing through this grant.

The borrower is inexperienced in managing World Bank projects, but has committed to build the
capacity necessary to apply the EMP by hiring staff or consultants to supervise project works and
monitor safeguards compliance. Additional training and/or technical support on safeguards will
be available through consultants in Tunisia and from the Bank team itself during supervision.

To mitigate its capacity risk, the implementing agency has committed to establish a Project
Management Unit which will work on the implementation, supervision and monitoring of the
project including its safeguard aspects. Within the PMU, the Project Manager, as well as the
Component One Coordinator, a technical specialist, will be responsible for the supervision and
monitoring of the sub~projects including safeguard compliance. The Bank team will provide
them with training on envirorunental and social safeguards in the early stages of the project. The
Bank team will also provide additional technical support on safeguards during the grant winners'
orientation. During the implementation of sub-projects, the technical staff of the PMU will
conduct frequent site visits to ensure compliance using the checklist and monitoring guidance
and tools included in the EMP.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The primary group of project-affected persons in this case is the youth of the targeted regions of
Kasserine and Siliana. Consultations on project design were held in the targeted regions in May
and June 2011. Following development of the EMP, consultations were held on II April 2012
via videoconference between Washington DC and Tunis with representatives of nine youth
NOOs to receive feedback on its content. Comments received were incorporated into the final
design of the EMP. Further public awareness events surrounding safeguards will be
programmed to coincide with the project launch in May 2012.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/AuditlManagement Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
   NB: As this is a JSDF grant and therefore is not subject to                      Yes
 formal appraisal, disclosure occurred prior to sil(ninl(.
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   12Apr2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               16Apr2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                18 Apr 2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                                    N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFrameworkIPolicy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                    N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        N/A
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                    N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
Indi2enous Peoples PlanlPlanning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A 

  Date of receipt by the Bank 
                                                N/A 

  Date of "in-country" disclosure 
                                            N/A 

  Date of submission to InfoShop 
                                             N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to apJ!!aisal?                              N/A 

  Date of receipt by the Bank 
                                                N/A 

  Date of "in-country" disclosure 
                                            N/A 

  Date of submission to InfoShop 
                                             N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 

the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 

Assessment/ Audit/or EMP. 

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 




 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to befilled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]   No [X]       N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     N/A
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to           Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
culturalyroperty?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OPIBP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples PlanIPlanning            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OPIBP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OPIBP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OPIBP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
If the project falls under one ofthe exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the R y 'p prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RYP approved such an exception?
OPIBP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent infonnation on the      Yes [ ]   No [ ]    N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the P ADIMOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the 0 P?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X]    No [ ]    N/A []
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a fonn and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Si ned and submitted b :
 Task Team Leader:                   Gloria la Cava

                                     Atsuko Mura a




                                     Nina Bh

                                                                                 - vi L-­
   Comments:
