                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                 CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                      Report No.: XXX
                                                                                                        77282
Date ISDS
                                  03-January-2013
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                        Tunisia                   Project ID:               P129848
    Project Name:                   Tunisia Sustainable Agriculture Carbon Project
    Task Team Leader:               Taoufiq Bennouna
    Estimated Appraisal Date:       06/20/13                  Estimated Board Date:     06/20/14
    Managing Unit:                  MNSEN                     Lending Instrument:
    Sector:                         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector: 100%
    Theme:                          Climate change
    Financing (in USD Million): $US 5 million
      Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
      Borrower                                                                                             0.00
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                0.50
      Other                                                                                                2.11
      Total                                                                                                2.61
    Environmental Category                                                                                   B
    Is this a Repeater project?                                                                             No
.




    B. Project Objectives
    The Development Objective of this project is to sustain agricultural yields in the North-Western and
    Central Governorates of Tunisia by scaling up sustainable agriculture practices. This objective will
    help leverage carbon finance revenue streams.
    This objective will contribute to increase carbon content in the soils, therefore to improve soil
    structure and characteristics, with corresponding reduction in soil erosion and nutrient depletion, as
    well as improvement of water retention. The increased organic content in soils or above the ground,
    together with fuel savings will allow for generating high quality GHG Emissions Reductions and
    therefore mobilize carbon finance resources. Based on initial estimations, the project could generate
    60,172 Emissions Reductions by 2017 and 240,688 cumulated Emissions Reductions by 2022

    C. Project Description
    The project results from the 10-year piloting experience coordinated by INGC. Following the
    positive economic and environmental results of the pilot, and in response to farmers demand, INGC

                                                          1
    decided to scale up the adoption of Conservation Agriculture practices, and potentially develop
    additional sustainable agriculture packages to address specific needs. INGC will help farmers
    address the main barriers for large scale dissemination. This will be achieved through (i) the
    extension of dissemination and technical support efforts to cover larger areas and reach out a larger
    number of farmers, including small and medium size farms, (ii) developing partnerships with other
    institutions and development projects to reach out a larger number of farmers and (iii) supporting
    farmers in accessing or acquiring adapted seeders. New technological packages to extend the range
    of sustainable agriculture practices and address specific needs will be developed through Research
    and Development activities.

    INGC will target large, medium and small size farms in the six North-Western Governorates of
    Tunisia, i.e. Bizerte, Jendouba, Béja, Siliana, El Kef and Zaghoouan, and two Central Governorates
    (Benarous and Manouba). It will be developed in two phases. The first phase (2012-2017) will build
    upon the piloting experience and disseminate technical packages starting with areas where CA
    benefits are most visible. In parallel, additional packages will be developed in partnership with other
    institutions and development projects to include new activities (e.g. agroforestry, pasture land) and
    reach out new ecosystems. The second phase (2019-2022) will expand the areas under sustainable
    agriculture, building upon the first phase. INGC’s objective is to achieve 24,000 ha adopting
    conservation agriculture in phase 1 and additional 102,000 ha in the second phase. INGC’s objective
    is therefore to achieve 126,000 ha by 2022, representing 8% of the total arable land and 10% of the
    arable land dedicated to large crops (cereals rotated with legumes).

    Component 1: Strengthening capacities ($US 1,400,000)
    Activities under this component will strengthen capacities for adoption and management of
    sustainable agriculture practices including conservation agriculture. This will include dissemination
    of knowledge through demonstration initiatives, trainings and technical support to interested farmers
    in selected areas, as well as to Government officers and extension specialists at the national, regional
    and local levels. Partnerships between INGC and existing development projects (including PNO4
    and PGRN2) and other institutions will help target a wider range of farmers and include other
    sustainable agriculture practices. The objective is to sensitize farmers and encourage them to adopt
    these new technical packages (and include them in their local development plans where relevant).

    Sub-component 1.1: Training and sensitization

    INGC will provide trainings on conservation agriculture, building upon its piloting experience, and
    will coordinate with identified partners to provide trainings on the new technological packages to be
    developed (e.g. agroforestry, pasture land,…). The objective is to disseminate knowledge, help
    farmers understand the value they can get from the proposed technological packages (and eventually
    include them in their PDPs where relevant1), and ensure ownership. The targeted audience will
    include:
        • Farmers: Large crops farmers (cereals under rotation) of all sizes who are usually covered by
           INGC as well as farmers covered by other development projects.
        • Officers and technicians from relevant Ministries and public institutions.

1
  To date, farmers covered by identified partner projects have not included conservation agriculture in their PDPs
even where there is an explicit diagnosis of land degradation and climate change impact. This is mainly due to lack of
knowledge.

                                                          2
        •    Consultants and facilitators who are involved in the awareness campaigns and training
             programs within partner development projects.

    Trainings will rely on demonstration units run by INGC for illustration and sensitization purposes.
    INGC will also select farms where conservation agriculture was adopted that will serve as
    dissemination poles from which neighboring farms can learn. This model of dissemination relying
    on a network of demonstration units and dissemination poles was tested in the piloting phase and
    proved to be successful2. A specific communication strategy to reach out farmers will build on
    INGC’s experience but could also benefit from AVFA’s3 facilities (TV, rural radio channels).
    Trainings will also be provided to INGC staff to support their extension activities. This includes:
        • Training to new staff who will be hired to support the extension activities.
        • Specific trainings to INGC staff to strengthen existing capacity in specific areas such as
           machinery, weed science, pesticide management, animated cooperative structures, farm
           business management, physiology ...). This will be achieved through partnerships with
           national research institutes4 as well as study tours and exchanges with regional and
           international research and development institutes or specialized institutions5.
    Trainings will also be provided to address the specific needs of carbon asset development (leading to
    carbon payment) :
        • To INGC staff : The World Bank will assist INGC in building its capacity to understand the
           methodology and standard requirements. The World Bank will also support INGC in
           preparing the requested design documents (including baseline and GHG accounting
           protocol), in putting in place and implementing its MRV system in accordance with these
           requirements.
        • To farmers and partners (public institutions and development projects) : INGC will in turn
           train relevant partners and farmers participating in the project and on the requirements in
           terms of information reporting for the purposes of proper implementation of the MRV
           system.

    Sub-component 1.2: Intensification of INGC’s support to farmers in scaling up conservation
    agriculture Practices

    INGC will reinforce its support to farmers who decide adopt the proposed technological packages.
    This includes assistance for the use the adapted seeders, types of crops rotations to be applied, ways
    to deal with technical issues (weeds, fungal diseases, subsidence,…). The network of demonstration
    units and dissemination poles proved to be very efficient in providing such technical assistance
    during the piloting phase. “Leading? farmers (who run the farm serving as a dissemination pole)
    who cumulated experience from their early adoption of conservation agriculture provided useful

2
  INGC currently supervises 9 dissemination poles covering all the agroecological conditions of the north-western governorates.
3
  Agence de la Vulgarisation et de la Formation Agricoles. INGC has already a partnership agreement with AVFA
4
  INGC has already cooperation agreement with IRESA (Institution de la recherche et de l’enseignement supérieur agricole),
INRAT (Institut national de recherche agronomique de Tunis), INAT (Institut national agronomique de Tunis), ESAK (École
supérieure d’Agronomie du Kef), ESAM (École supérieure d’agriculture), ESIER (École supérieure des ingénieurs en équipement
rural M’djez el beb), CBBS (Centre biotechnologique Borj Cedria), ISBB (Institut supérieur de biotechnologie de Béja)
5
  INGC is a member of the Mediterranean Crops Network and was designated as the Tunisian implementing entity for a regional
project across the Maghreb, financed by the Australian Government. Field trips are also planned as part of this project, in
collaboration with ICARDA (International Center of Agricultural Research in Dry Area).

                                                              3
    advice to neighboring farmers who start adopting conservation agriculture. This network will be
    reinforced to enlarge the geographical coverage and reach out more farmers. The number of
    dissemination poles will be doubled to 20 farms under INGC’s coordination. INGC will also
    increase the number of demonstration plots from 65 to about 120.

    The partnerships with development projects will be the basis for providing technical assistance to
    farmers covered by these projects. INGC will rely on the institutional set-up of each project to
    support farmers, who are likely to be of smaller size. In the context of these partnerships, INGC will
    also develop and implement adapted packages to address specific needs (small farms, slopes, agro-
    forestry, pasture land,…). INGC will also build a specific partnership with OTD6 and interested
    SMVDA7 to reach large-size farms.

    The extension strategy will be based on needs expressed by farmers. The expressions of needs will
    be channeled to INGC through CRDAs8, dissemination poles and PDPs developed within the
    partner projects. In establishing new demonstration units, priority will be given to areas that are
    subject to erosion and with higher sequestration potential, or where there is a high potential of
    limiting dams siltation. The existence of a form of farmers association (GDA9 or SMSA10), or
    farmers willingness to adopt a coordinated approach will also be a parameter.

    Sub-Component 1.3: Partnerships with development projects

    The proposed project addresses land degradation issues that are exacerbated by the effects of climate
    change. Other existing development projects overlap with the proposed projects, with regard to their
    geographical coverage and their overarching objective of natural resource preservation. Partnerships
    with these projects will allow for reaching out more farmers, developing further technological
    packages and accessing the available financial resources.

    Amongst the projects that have been identified at this stage, two are World Bank financed projects:



     Project                 Description
     PNO4 ( 2011-2016        Objectives: Improve the socio-economic conditions of rural populations and promote
     $57,2     million       better protection and management of natural resources in the project areas through the
     EU/WB)                  implementation of a participatory community based approach. Activities include the
                             support to local communities for agricultural and pastoral production and income-
                             generating activities, including through providing agricultural technical assistance.
                             Geographical scope: 5 Governorates of Beja, Jendouba, El Kef, Siliana and Bizerte.
                             65,000 ha are under cereals and 14,000 ha dedicated to agro-forestry.
                             The project aims at improving 12 000 ha of pasture land.
                             Institutional set-up: ODESYPANO is the implementing agency. The project relies on a
                             participatory approach through the preparation by local communities of Participatory
                             Development Plans.

6
  Office des Terres Domaniales
7
  Société de Mise en Valeur des Domaines Agricoles
8
  Commissariats Régionaux au Développement Agricole
9
  Groupement de Développement Agricole
10
   Société Mutuelle de Service Agricole

                                                       4
 PGRN2 (2010-2015,       Objective: Improve local communities’ livelihoods through enhancing access to
 $   67    million       infrastructure and basic services, increasing and sustaining income and encouraging best
 EU/WB/GEF)              practices for natural resource management.
                         Geographical scope: Governorates of Jendouba, Kasserine and Medenine. In Jendouba,
                         109,000 ha are agricultural, of which 50,000 ha of cereals and 6,000 ha of pasture land.
                         Institutional set-up: Directorate of Finance, Investments, and Professional Organizations
                         (DGFIOP) of Ministry of Agriculture is the implementing agency. The project relies on a
                         participatory approach through the preparation by local communities of Participatory
                         Development Plans.

Two other projects financed by other donors have been identified:

 Project                 Description
 FCGBV                   Objective: Promote sustainable management of natural resources through a participatory
 (2008-2013, EUR         approach, integrated at the level of the watersheds, in order to sustain agricultural yields,
 54.2 million            enhance livelihoods and secure access to water at the national level by protecting
 AFD/FFEM)               watersheds from erosion, flooding and siltation.
                         Geographical scope: Governorates of Bizerte, Zagouan, Le Kef, Siliana, Béja as well as
                         Kairouan, Madhia, Kasserine, Sidi Bouzid et Gafsa.
                         Institutional set-up: DGACTA is the implementing agency. The project relies on a
                         participatory approach through the preparation by local communities of Participatory
                         Development Plan.
 PDAI Siliana (2012-     Objective: Contribute to the sustainable improvement of incomes and living conditions of
 2016 FIDA)              rural communities, targeting the poorest areas and small and medium-sized farms.
                         Geographical scope: Governorate of Siliana.
                         Institutional set-up: The Directorate of Finance, Investments, and Professional
                         Organizations (DGFIOP) of Ministry of Agriculture is the implementing agency. The
                         project relies on a participatory approach through the preparation by local communities of
                         Participatory Development Plan (PDP). The project has already experimented conservation
                         agriculture practices.

The partnership would be formalized through a cooperation agreement between INGC as the
implementing agency for the proposed project and the coordinating agency of the partner project.
The areas of partnership and distribution of roles would be as follows:

                      TSACP/ INGC                                    Partner project/ implementing agency
 -Training and sensitization to farmers on conservation     - Facilitation of trainings and sensitization campaigns
 agriculture                                                (also through financing)
 - Development of new technological packages (for           - Facilitation of interaction with local communities
 agro-forestry, pasture land, pasture land, slopes,…)       - Financing of seeders acquisition
 - Support farmers in implementing the technological        - Data collection (for MRV) and transfer to INGC
 packages selected by farmers as expressed in their PDPs
 - Training on the MRV requirements to farmers and
 partner project’s implementing agency


Component 2:
Application of the proposed conservation agriculture package requires the use of adapted seeders.
The cost of these adapted seeders is the major barrier for a large scale dissemination of CA. Small
and medium size farmers cannot afford individual investment. Their preference is for renting seeders
from other (large) farmers, where the number of available seeders is limited.
It is estimated that 80 to 100 seeders would be required to reach the objectives of phase 1 (24,000

                                                      5
ha). The unit cost of such seeders is currently around USD 40,000. Low cost seeders are also
available and being used at large scale in countries such as Turkey, with a cost around USD 4,500.
In the context of scaling up, the following options would be available for farmers who want to apply
the proposed technological packages:

   •   Individual investment: An initial analysis made by INGC based on the piloting experience
       showed that farmers with farm sizes of more than 100 ha can acquire adapted seeders
       through their own capital potentially combined with loans. The gain in operating margin
       allows for investment amortization within 2 years. Below that threshold,, farmers have
       limited capital and access to bank loans, which makes individual investments difficult.
   •   Grouped investments: This would require that a group of farmers be willing and able to
       constitute a group to invest in a seeder and share it (it is estimated that one seeder could
       cover 300 ha per season, but no more than 8 farms, due to the seeding campaign being
       concentrated in 1 to 1.5 months). Such grouped investments would benefit from a 40%
       subsidy on agricultural investments. In the context of the Investment Code revision, the
       Ministry of Finance is considering the possibility of raising the level of subsidies to 60% for
       certain investments that would include investments in adapted seeders. However, apart from
       irrigated areas where experience of farmers association exist (mainly driven by access to and
       management of water resources), there is neither real willingness nor the capacity for making
       a grouped investment and managing it.
   •   Renting seeders from a third party: The cost of renting would be slightly higher than for a
       conventional seeder, but the incremental cost is compensated by the operating margin gains.
       This is the preferred option expressed by farmers. However, it is limited by the availability of
       seeders

Under the proposed project, INGC will assist farmers in finding the right solution that is adapted to
each specific context. Technical assistance will be provided to farmers who are willing to make a
grouped investment (in creating the associative structure, making the investment, operating the
seeder and sharing it). INGC will also help farmers access to sources of finance when available
(submission of bank loan applications, access to subsidies, preparation of PDPs,…). This major
constraint and the way to address it will be further assessed during the preparation phase.

Component 3: Research and Development ($ 600,000)

Within the third component, INGC will conduct Research and Development activities covering:
   • Crops and cultural associations;
   • New packages to address specific agro-ecological and specific needs: the areas identified at
       this stage are specific packages for agro-forestry and pasture land;
   • Adaptation of seeders to specific conditions (e.g. slopes) and access to low cost seeders;
   • Weeds and pest control methods, to find alternatives to the use for glyphosates;
   • Modelization of carbon dynamics in the soils, which is necessary to use the SALM
       methodology.

These activities will be conducted in partnership with national and international research institutes
with whom INGC has already cooperation agreements in place. These include IRESA (Institution de

                                              6
     la recherche et de l’enseignement supérieur agricole), INRAT (Institut national de recherche
     agronomique de Tunis), l’INAT (Institut national agronomique de Tunis), ESAK (École supérieure
     d’Agronomie du Kef), l’ESAM (École supérieure d’agriculture), ESIER (École supérieure des
     ingénieurs en équipement rural M’djez el beb), CBBS (Centre biotechnologique Borj Cedria),
     ISBB (Institut supérieur de biotechnologie de Béja) and ICARDA ( International Center of
     Agricultural Research in Dry Area).

     Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation ($ 500,000)

     In addition to the monitoring activities that will be required to follow the progress of the project,
     strong monitoring and evaluation frameworks will be put in place to monitor the carbon assets and
     the other environmental and socio-economic benefits generated by the project.

     Carbon asset MRV: dedicated staff will collect, archive and process the required data to conduct the
     VERs calculations, based on the Project Design Document and in accordance with the SALM
     methodology. For large crops farmers, INGC will collect data directly. The nature of data to be
     collected is not different from what INGC monitors as part of its standard activities (production by
     nature of crops, inputs used,…). For farmers that are covered by partner projects, data will be
     collected by the implementing agency of the partner project and will be transferred to INGC. Based
     on initial estimates11, the volume of ERs to be generated would total 20,000 tCO2eq over the period
     2012-2017 and 105,545 tCO2eq over the period 2018-2022.

     In addition, even if it is not required by the methodology, INGC plans to continue and complete the
     monitoring of data collected directly in the soil (organic matter content, nitrogen, phosphorus,
     potassium), to feed-in ongoing research works with its partners. The monitoring unit will place
     permanent plots on which analyses of the sequestered carbon will be performed. 30 additional plots
     will be installed to complete the 20 plots already in place.

     Monitoring of environmental and socio-economic benefits: The economic and environmental
     benefits of conservation agriculture practices constitute the main motivation for farmers to adopt
     them. The monitoring of these benefits is therefore essential. INGC already monitors the following
     data: (i) yields (ii) losses, (iii) amount of residue (iv) income (vi) rate of water infiltration (vii)
     moisture at key stages, (viii) post-harvest parameters: quality of the grain size, weeds, (ix) impact of
     different diseases and weeds. INGC is also work in partnership with research institutes to further
     analyze the (reverse) correlations between carbon sequestration erosion. Based on these data, and
     additional data to be determined, a specific monitoring framework will be designed and
     implemented in partnership with the BioCF. The objective is to demonstrate, quantify and monitor
     the correlation between the activities undertaken and some environmental benefits and socio-
     economic factors such as the fight against erosion, management of water resources (soil moisture,
     watersheds), improving the living conditions of rural communities, the organization of the
     agricultural profession, ...



11
  Based on FAO EXACT tool, and using IPCC default values for the sequestration rate. Fuel savings are accounted for in these
estimations.


                                                               7
    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
    known)
    The proposed project objective is to scale-up sustainable agriculture practices in the north-western
    and central governorates of Tunisia. These sustainable agricultural practices will lead to increased
    carbon content in the soils, therefore contributing to reduction in soil erosion and nutrient depletion.
    The project will contribute to climate change mitigation through the sequestration of soil and over
    the ground Carbon and fuel savings, while facilitating the adaptation of the Tunisian agriculture to
    climate change.


    E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
    The project will be implemented and coordinated by INGC as a lead partner. INGC will also be
    responsible for the VERs monitoring, reporting and verification, in partnership with research
    institutes. INGC developed expertise and capacities for conservation agriculture packages. INGC
    will hire qualified staff to advice farmers, and implement and run a monitoring, reporting and
    verification system. Farmers will join the program on a voluntary basis and will commit to follow
    the recommended practices. INGC will build partnerships with other development projects and
    institutions. INGC’s partners will provide assistance for identifying interested farmers, giving
    technical advices, financing, and implementing agro-forestry activities.

    INGC has no capacity in safeguard, it will relay on the implementing agencies for partner projects,
    including PNO4, PGRN2, FCGBV and PDAI Siliana. During the project preparation, a specific
    agreement will be established with one of these partners which will be responsible for safeguards
    issues.
.




    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Environmental Safeguards: Andrew Michael Losos ( MNSEN )
    Social Safeguards: Abdoul-Wahab Seyni ( MNSSD )

.


.




II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
    Safeguard Policies                    Triggered      Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP        Yes            The project could finance small-scale physical
    4.01                                                 investments within targeted areas (including habitat,
                                                         roads, gravel roads ...). An Environment and Social
                                                         Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared
                                                         by the Government
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
    Pest Management OP 4.09               No
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP     No
    4.11

                                                   8
 Ci/
   so    Indigenous Peoples OPIBP 4.10                    No
5'O~
         Involuntary Resettlement OPIBP 4 . 12            TBD                Although the will finance small-scale physical
'{y
                                                                             investments within targeted areas (including habitat,
                                                                             roads, gravel roads) and for some investment
                                                                             sustainability, it may potentially led to community
                                                                             restriction of access which may triggered the OP
                                                                             4.12. (an RPF and f or PF should be prepared for this
                                                                             purpose)
         Safety of Dams OPfBP 4 .37                       No
         Projects on International Waterways              No
         OPIBP 7.50
         Projects in Disputed Areas OPIBP                 No
         7.60


        III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

         A.
              Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 



              22 December, 2014 




         B.
              Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
              specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

               TBC

        IV. APPROVALS

         Task Team Leader:                     Name: Taoufiq Bennouna                                           0"   4c,£«-?!;()
         Approved By:
         Regional Safeguards                   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed
         Coord inator:
         Sector Manager:                                                                   Date:




          I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop
         and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                                                                     9
