                                                                                     82018


                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET



Report No.:
.
Date ISDS
                             March 29, 2013
Prepared/Updated:

I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     Tunisia             Project ID:           P144674
    Project Name:                SOCIAL PROTECTION REFORMS SUPPORT PROJECT
    Task Team Leader:            Heba Elgazzar
    Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2013         Estimated Board Date: n/a
    Managing Unit:               MNSSP               Lending Instrument:   SIL
    Sector:                      Other social services (100%)
    Theme:                       Other social services (100%)
    Financing (in USD Million)
      Financing Source                                                     Amount
      Borrower                                                             1.0
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                4.7
      Total                                                                5.7
    Environmental Category: C
    Is this a Repeater project? No
.


.




    2. Project Objectives
    The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen institutional capacity to
    design social protection reforms and improve targeting of safety net programs.

    3. Project Description
    The project has three components: (1) Subsidy and Safety Net Reform Support; (2)
    Strengthening Social Security Analysis and Planning, and (3) Project Management and
    Monitoring.
Component 1: Subsidy and Safety Net Reform Support


This component finances consultant services, workshops and goods to support the reform
process and includes the following sub-component activities:


Sub-Component 1.1: Technical Assistance to Inter-ministerial Working Group
This sub-component would finance consultant services, workshops and goods to provide
technical assistance and capacity-building to the Inter-ministerial Working Group for
designing a food and fuel subsidy reform and subsidy-compensation program for households,
including: (i) assesing the poverty, economic, environmental and social impacts of possible
reform scenarios for food and fuel subsidies; (ii) assessing various automatic fuel price
adjustment mechanisms; and (iii) developing a plan and operational manual (OM) for a
subsidy-compensation program for households, including simulating the amount needed to
compensate households under various reform scenarios and the key target households and
their eligibility criteria.


Sub-Component 1.2: Development of a Unified Database and Targeting System
This sub-component would finance consultant services, workshops and goods to provide
technical assistance for the creation of a unified population database to identify households
through a unique identifier (UI), including: (i) developing proxy-means testing (PMT)
formula and questionnaire for targeting compensation; (ii) assessing various payment options
for delivering household cash transfers under the subsidy-compensation program (banking,
postal or other mechanisms); (iii) an assessment of database reform scenarios based on an
evaluation of identification systems currently used by various government programs; (iv)
information technology (IT) support for           creating an inter-ministerial management
information system (MIS) for the unified database; and (v) support to improving the MOSA
MIS for managing current social protection programs.           The unified database will be
managed by MOF and will be created through consolidation of existing databases (including
those hosted by MOSA) linked to revenue collection, national identification numbers used by
the Ministry of Interior (MOI), the database administered by the National Gas and Electricity
Company [(Societe Tunisienne de l'Electricite et du Gaz (STEG)], and various identification
numbers used for social programs administered by MOSA. Specialist consultants would
provide international best practice and input to the architecture of a unique identification
system and coordination with other national databases, such as the social security system and
national identification number.

This activity will be co-financed by the Government through a budget of US$ 1.0 million to
MOSA to consolidate and develop a “smart card” system for social security beneficiary
registries that would be linked to the MOF unified population database, including reducing
fragmentation among registries for CNSS, CNRPS, CNAM, PNAFN and the subsidized
health card program. MOSA conducted a feasibility assessment for the development of a
new MIS in 2012, to which the Government has allocated funding to launch a MOSA MIS
project for its development.


Sub-Component 1.3: Consensus-Building and Communication:
This sub-component will finance consultant services, workshops and goods to provide
technical assistance for consensus-building and communication, including: (i) monitoring of
political economy considerations; (ii) improving access to information on subsidy and safety
expenditure analyses through traditional and social media in advance of reforms for internal
(including governmental agencies, Council of Ministers and National Constituent
Assembly/Parliament) and external (public) stakeholders; (iii) developing a public
consultation mechanism on reform options in advance of reforms; and (iv) refining
communication and existing grievance redress mechanisms after the launch of reforms.
This sub-component would therefore support greater social accountability through both
public disclosure of relevant administrative information, new types of consultative
mechanisms, and improving grievance redress for ensuring the poor and vulnerable have
access to social support during reforms. The tasks described above would help to inform and
involve the public in the assessment, planning and design of reforms throughout the process.
During this activity, the PIU would track, measure and support reporting on program-related
dialogue and communications. The work would finance consulting firms and consultants to
support the development and dissemination of data and information and liaise with radio,
television, newspapers and social media in implementing a communication strategy and
developing public participation mechanisms in advance of and during the reform process.

Component 2: Strengthening Social Security Analysis and Planning
This component would finance consultant services, workshops and goods to provide
technical assistance for building institutional capacity to analyze and develop consensus on
an integrated reform plan for pensions and health insurance. This component includes the
following activities: (i) hands-on training of Government staff on policy analysis of pension
and health insurance reform options, including an assessment of legislation and
administrative arrangements and risk analysis; (ii) training on poverty and social impact
analysis for assessing social contributions and unemployment insurance reforms (iii) training
on policy analysis of labor legislation in relation to social security; and (iv) preparation,
coordination and dissemination of information on policy reform options among social
dialogue partners.


Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring
This component finances consultant services and goods to support the PIU in managing the
project and monitoring project-related activities and outcomes.
    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
    National
.




    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Ana Nuñez Sanchez (MNSEN), Environmental Specialist Consultant
    Abdoul Wahab Seyni ( MNSSO ), Sr. Social Development Specialist
.




    6. Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01     No
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No
    Pest Management OP 4.09                 No
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           No
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     No            The project activities will not lead to
                                                          civil works or any land related issues.
                                                          Therefore, there is no need to prepare
                                                          any social safeguards related report.
                                                          The project should be categorized as C
                                                          and it is a good candidate for transfer to
                                                          the sector.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No
    Projects on International Waterways No
    OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No
.




II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project is expected to have positive social impacts through improving equity through an
    improved targeting of safety nets and sustainability of social security. The primary goal of
    the project is to implement economic reforms by strengthening Government’s capacity. The
    project provides financial resources for technical assistance for well-defined, time-bound
    activities that include permanent improvements in the Borrower’s institutional framework
    and capacity. These changes are expected to translate into significant positive impacts on
    economic governance and the population, including vulnerable groups and women who
    make up a considerable proportion of safety net, pensions and health insurance beneficiaries.
    The project will specifically monitor the involvement and identification of vulnerable
    populations (lower income quintiles) and females during implementation.

    The project is expected to have minimal or no adverse impacts on the environment and hence
    is considered as a category “C” project as per World Bank Operational Policy 4.01
    Environmental Assessment. The project will be mostly financing technical assistance,
    analytical work and institutional capacity building and no direct or indirect physical
    investment is envisaged.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
    in the project area:
    n/a
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
    impacts.
    n/a
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
    assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     No specific measures are expected to be implemented by the borrower in terms of environmental
    safeguard policy issues.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The Integrated Safeguard Data Sheet will be disclosed in the Infoshop
.




    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               ISDS submission date
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure


    Comments: Expected date, tentative
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

.




    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
    finalized by the project decision meeting)
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes []    No [ X ] NA [ ]
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ ]   No [ ]       NA [ ]
    Bank's Infoshop? Please fill up when ISDS is sent to infoshop
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ]       No [ ]       NA [ ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
    to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes [ ]          No [ ]       NA [ X ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in Yes [ ]    No [ ]       NA [X ]
    the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include Yes [ ]    No [ ]       NA [X ]
    the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with Yes [ ]      No [ ]       NA [X ]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?
.
.




III. APPROVALS
.




    Task Team Leader:             Name: Heba Elgazzar
    Approved By:
    Regional            Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed              Date: 02/28/2013
    Coordinator:
    Sector Manager:               Name: Yasser El Gammal                  Date: 02/17/2013
