                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC2614

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tunisia                         Project ID:      P130637
                            Project Name:      TN-Urban Development (P130637)
                            Task Team          Jaafar Sadok Friaa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          00-undefined-0000               Estimated        31-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSUR                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Sub-national government administration (50%), General water, sanitation and
                                               flood protection sector (30%), Solid waste management (2 0%)
                            Theme(s):          Urban services and housing for the poor (35%), Municipal governance and
                                               institution building (35%), Municipal finance (15%), Decentr alization (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                     Total Bank Financing:       100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       100.00
                              Total                                                                       100.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           The project is based on an approach to urban development that places greater emphasis on the role of
                           local governments in planning, financing and delivering municipal facilities and services. Building
                         communes as accountable and responsive local development institutions is at the heart of the
                         proposed project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed Urban Development and Local Governance Project (UDLGP) will be structured
                         around the following components:

                         Component 1: Institutional support and capacity development

                         Sub-Component 1-1: Decentralization and local governance

                         During the lifetime of the proposed project, the Government will be engaged in fleshing out
                         constitutional reforms. One of these reforms will be linked to deepening and strengthening
                         decentralization and local governance processes. To complement and enhance these processes, the
                         project will provide the following institutional support:

                         (i)      Technical assistance for formulating an appropriate and revitalized legal framework for local
                         government in Tunisia, building on new constitutional provisions. This will include an organic law
                         on local government, legislation on fiscal decentralization, and a range of associated implementation
                         regulations. International technical assistance will ensure that Tunisia profits from established good
                         practice in other countries; while national technical assistance will enable the Government to tailor
                         international good practice to the specificities of the local context.

                         (ii)     Technical assistance for establishing a thoroughgoing system through which citizens are
                         regularly informed of local government decisions, budgets, expenditures and service delivery. This
                         will be based on: (a) legal provisions (and enforcement of those provisions) for local governments to
                         publicly disclose such information; and (b) a centrally-managed system that provides such
                         information to citizens on a regular basis.

                         (iii)    Technical assistance for developing ICT-based interfaces for municipal services (such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         vital registration, waste collection, etc.) so as to enhance accountability and improve grievance
                         redress mechanisms.

                         (iv)    Technical assistance for developing and establishing up-graded municipal accounting
                         software.

                         Sub-Component 1-2: Municipal capacity development

                         This sub-component will operate at sub-national levels and will provide support in a number of areas:

                         (i)     Reviewing and revising the current municipal investment planning process, to make it more
                         participatory, actively engage communes throughout the process by turning them into the principal
                         anchors for the identification, prioritization and implementation of investments. This is likely to be
                         incremental, and will require not only a change in the approach taken by municipalities, but also
                         changes in CPSCL modalities and the way in which municipalities access funding from the central
                         government.

                         (ii)     Developing tools, guidelines and training materials to strengthen municipal operations and
                         maintenance (O&M), which has been a neglected dimension of local service delivery. This will entail
                         the introduction of asset inventories, regular maintenance planning, and better supervision/
                         monitoring methods. The primary focus will be on O&M for waste collection and for street/
                         pavement maintenance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iii)    Provision of demand-driven capacity building support for core municipal functions (e.g.
                         planning, financial management, maintenance, asset management, etc.). This will be complementary
                         to the capacity development services obtained by municipalities through the capacity building block
                         grants.

                         (iv)  Expanding the scope of GIS-based management tools and increasing the number of
                         communes using GIS-based applications.

                         Component 2: Municipal investments

                         Sub-Component 2-1: Performance-based municipal block grants and capacity building grants

                         Under the project, central government subsidies to local government investments will be
                         consolidated into annual, general purpose, development block grants. While the overall funding pool
                         made available by the central government to local governments will remain more or less at current
                         (inflation-adjusted) levels, finance will be provided in the form of annual block grants. Each
                         commune will have access to a full “drawing right?, calculated on the basis of a simple and
                         transparent formula (in much the same way as recurrent budget allocations are made to communes
                         from the FCCL). Full “drawing rights? for each commune will be calculated on the basis of a simple
                         formula that will include criteria such as municipal population size and the relative poverty of each
                         commune (in order to take into account inter-regional disparities).

                         “Drawing rights? for communes will be divided into two parts:

                         (i)     Basic Block Grant (BBG)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Defined as a proportion of their total “drawing right?, the BBG will be made available to communes
                         on the basis of their compliance with a set of minimum conditions (MCs). MCs would consist of
                         statutory (or legislative) requirements, as spelled out in the Local Government Code and other pieces
                         of legislation. Full compliance with MCs would allow communes to access their full BBG
                         allocations.

                         (ii)    Performance-Based Grant (PBG)

                         The remainder of each commune’s “drawing right? would consist of a PBG. Municipalities would
                         access their PBG allocations on the basis of their prior performance, assessed on an annual basis and
                         measured with respect to a range of performance areas (e.g. infrastructure and service delivery,
                         financial management, fiscal effort, transparency and accountability, etc.). Communes will be scored
                         on the basis of their performance and allocated a proportion of their PBG allocation. As a
                         consequence, the highest scoring communes would access the entirety of their PBG allocation, while
                         lower scoring communes would access proportionately less.

                         Detailed BBG and PBG modalities (proportion of “drawing rights?, indicators, etc.) will be discussed
                         and decided on during project preparation, based on agreed principles, good international practice,
                         and on-the-ground realities.
                         The use of BBG and PBG allocations will be limited to financing municipal investments, but
                         communes will be largely free to decide on exactly what types of investment they wish to finance out
                         of their BBG/PBG allocations. Communes will be able to combine grant funding with CPSCL loans
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (subject to regular screening and vetting by the CPSCL), as well as with own-source funds, to
                         finance their investments.

                         BBGs and PBGs will provide communes with tangible fiscal incentives to: (i) ensure compliance
                         with legal provisions for local government; and (ii) improve their performance over time. The
                         CPSCL would out-source and oversee the annual performance assessment process. Importantly,
                         assessments will only focus on those aspects of performance that can be directly attributed to
                         communes, and for which local governments are wholly responsible. Assessment outcomes and their
                         implications for budget allocations, once endorsed by an Inter-Ministerial Committee, would be
                         publicly disclosed by the CPSCL, thus allowing local citizens to become aware of the performance of
                         their municipalities.

                         All participating municipalities will be eligible for modest, annual, capacity building grants (CBGs)
                         – irrespective of their eligibility for BBGs/PBGs. Municipalities will be able to use their CBGs to
                         finance a range of expenditures linked to capacity building (e.g. hiring short term consultants,
                         training, ICT upgrades, etc.), especially in the event that they fail to qualify for full BBG/PBG
                         allocations. CBGs will be complementary to other capacity building activities undertaken within the
                         framework of the project (see component 1).

                         This performance-based grant system shares many common features with existing FCCL
                         arrangements for recurrent expenditure grants, and will be introduced in an incremental way.
                         Communes will be taken up gradually, so that by the end of the project all municipalities will have
                         been “enrolled? into the new system of grants.

                         Sub-Component 2-2: Municipal investments targeted at reducing unequal access to public goods and
                         services with a focus on lagging regions/cities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In addition to BBG/PBG funding for municipal investments, the project will also include a demand-
                         driven financing facility that will provide municipalities with access to earmarked grants for
                         improving access to municipal services i.e. upgrading informal neighborhoods (“quartiers
                         populaires?). In contrast to previous informal neighborhood upgrading programs, this will be (as far
                         as possible) demand-driven and targeting lagging regions and cities. The Government will establish a
                         funding facility which will be jointly managed by the CPSCL and the Ministry of Regional
                         Development and Planning. Municipalities will be invited to apply to this facility for financial
                         support to undertake investments aimed at providing residents in informal neighborhoods with basic
                         municipal goods and services (streets, lighting, drainage, etc.).
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will cover the 264 municipalities in Tunisia which house about 7 million people.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Project will be implemented by the CPSCL which was also the implementing agency of the
                         previous Bank funded Third Municipal Development Project (MDP III). The ICR of the MDP III
                         indicated that the safeguard issues were addressed satisfactorily and that the CPSCL staffs have a
                         good understanding of the Tunisian and the World Bank safeguard applications in environment
                           assessment and land acquisition. During project preparation, the CPSCL institutional capacity was
                           assessed: CPCSL senior management is committed to environment and social protection; the
                           environment and social assessment functions have been decentralized in the 5 regional offices and 2
Public Disclosure Copy




                           central offices. A total of 18 technical staff from these offices are familiar with the national EIA
                           legislation and have the basic knowledge of safeguard policy requirements in EA and in land
                           acquisition. The staff is applying the operational manual of PDM III which also includes the
                           environment assessment procedures (screening, preparation of EIA report) and land acquisition.

                           On social safeguards, a determination will be made during project preparation regarding the
                           triggering of OP 4.12 in relation to potential impacts under component 2. Further information is
                           needed to determine better the nature of municipal investments which can be proposed for financing.
                           During project identification, initial discussions with the borrower indicated that its selection and
                           evaluation procedures of sub projects included due diligence on land ownership issues. Due diligence
                           will be carried out in the upcoming mission, including an assessment of the Borrower’s institutional
                           capacity and procedures for social safeguard policies, should OP 4.12 be triggered.

                           The major gaps that will be addressed as a project sub-component are: preparing specific terms for
                           references of subprojects in specific sectors to be financed by the project, training of the CPCSL
                           environment staff and the technical staff of the municipalities, in the operational procedures of OP
                           4.01 and OP 4.12, and establishing a system of monitoring and follow up of the environment and
                           social aspects of the subprojects.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Sherif Kamel F. Arif (GEFVP)
                           Fatou Fall (MNSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             All FI projects are subject to an environment
                           BP 4.01                                              assessment as this project will finance
                                                                                municipal investments under Component 2. The
                                                                                proposed block grants to support municipal
                                                                                investments (Component 2) will be based on a
                                                                                set of criteria to be defined during the
                                                                                preparation of the project. Those criteria will
                                                                                include compliance with social and
                                                                                environmental requirements as defined in the
                                                                                operational manual. Based on the type of sub-
                                                                                projects that were financed under PDM II and
                                                                                III, the majority of sub-projects (such as street
                                                                                rehabilitation, street lightning, green space, and
                                                                                sports clubs) do not cause any significant
                                                                                environmental and social impacts. There are
                                                                                however few subprojects such as
                                                                                slaughterhouses, municipal markets, basic
                                                                                infrastructure that may have significant
                                                                                environmental and social impacts that would
                         require the preparation of sub-project specific
                         environment and social management plan
                         (ESMP). The Environment and Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment Framework (ESAF) that would be
                         developed prior to appraisal will describe the
                         appropriate screening, the eligibility criteria and
                         environment and social assessment procedures
                         that will be included in the project operational
                         manual.

                         Environmental Category: FI
                         This project is classified as financial
                         intermediary (FI) in accordance with OP 4.01
                         (Environment Assessment) for which CPSCL
                         will be the financial intermediary for providing
                         technical assistance and financial investments to
                         small and medium subprojects which are
                         demand driven by the municipalities through the
                         preparation of a Municipal Investment Program.
                         As this project will cover many municipalities
                         throughout Tunisia, a large number of
                         subprojects would not be identified prior to
                         appraisal. Under the FI classification, the
                         responsibility for environmental screening, EA
                         review, monitoring and compliance with Bank
                         policies is devolved to the CPSCL. It is also the
                         CPSL’s responsibility to ensure that the
                         municipalities carry out appropriate EA,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including the appropriate ESMP for sub-projects
                         CPSCL has prepared in August 2002 an
                         environment assessment for PDM3 which was
                         more focused on complying with the Tunisia
                         EA legislation than on the requirements of OP
                         4.01.

                         Before appraisal an Environment and Social
                         Assessment Framework (ESMF) will be
                         updated as this project will use the same type of
                         subprojects and sectors as PDM3, however the
                         requirements of OP 4.01 including screening
                         categories and preparation of appropriate
                         environment and social management plan
                         (ESMP) with consultation and disclosure will be
                         applied.

                         The ESMF will include institutional and
                         capacity assessment of the implementing agency
                                                                 related to environmental and social safeguards,
                                                                 means of addressing any identified deficiency,
                                                                 check list and screening procedures for sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 project selection, categorization of sub-projects
                                                                 according to their anticipated impacts, and the
                                                                 process of carrying out the necessary sub-
                                                                 project level environmental and social
                                                                 management plans (ESMPs). The ESMF will
                                                                 also include tables indicating the program of
                                                                 capacity building of the relevant agencies
                                                                 (through hiring of staff/consultants, and
                                                                 training); tentative/indicative mitigation
                                                                 measures and monitoring plans; and indicative
                                                                 cost for the ESMF implementation. This cost
                                                                 will be finalized by project appraisal and
                                                                 included in the project cost, with a clarification
                                                                 of whether the source of financing would be the
                                                                 Bank funds of the counterpart budget.

                                                                 The Implementing agency (CPSCL) will hire a
                                                                 national consultant to conduct the environment
                                                                 and social assessment framework (ESMF) of the
                                                                 project based on a TORs that was approved by
                                                                 the Bank.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   Based on the track record of the subprojects
                         4.12                                    financed under PDM II and PDM III, in which
                                                                 all subprojects were established on public land,
                                                                 OP 4.12 is not expected to be triggered as
                                                                 CPCSL reconfirmed that new sub-projects that
                                                                 will be financed by the municipalities will be all
                                                                 in public land. This will be confirmed during
                                                                 pre-appraisal. In case of the contrary, CPSCL
                                                                 will be prepared to prepare a resettlement policy
                                                                 framework in accordance with OP 4.12.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A.     Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                                      ISDS would be prepared:

                                              End of May, 2013

                                      B.      For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
                                      stage ISDS:

                                      Not applicable

                                      C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                        The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

                                       A draft environment and social framework (ESAF) will be prepared prior to appraisal by CPSCL.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jaafar Sadok Friaa

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Franck Bousquet (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 14-May-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
