                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/09/2013                                     Report No.: AC6832
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P093765                  Original Project Name: GAS SECTOR
                                              DEVELOPMENT
Country: Turkey                               Project ID: P133565
Project Name: Gas Sector Development Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Kari J. Nyman
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2013 Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2013
Managing Unit: ECSEG                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Oil and gas (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           225
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     389.10
                                                                      389.10
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Project is to increase the reliability and stability of gas supply in
Turkey by implementing critically needed gas storage and network infrastructure; and
support BOTAŞ in strengthening its operations as a financially stable and commercially
managed corporation and in developing a gas trading platform.

3. Project Description
The Project consists of three components: gas storage facility; network expansion; and
gas trading platform. (1) The establishment of a gas storage facility in an underground
salt formation located close to Tuz Golu through the provision of financing for: (a)
surface and subsurface facilities including engineering and construction, solution mining,
the gas pipelines and the compressor facility; (b) water and brine discharge pipelines; (c)
cushion gas; and (d) consultants' services to assist in the supervision and monitoring of
the implementation, environmental monitoring and regulatory aspects of the Project;(2)
Construction of two compressor stations in Erzincan and Corum and other network
infrastructure to assist in transmitting the increasing volumes of gas expected to be
imported into the Republic of Turkey from existing and new sources; and (3) the
development of a gas trading platform. The proposed additional loan would finance US$
200 million of the cost overrun resulting from a five-year implementation delay in the
Tuz Golu gas storage facility and US$25 million of the costs of a new gas trading
platform component. It should also be noted that there has been a design change
regarding the total volume of the caverns to be leached. The change was increasing the
total volume of the caverns (by keeping the total volume of stored gas constant but
increasing the volume of cushion gas), which also resulted in the increased flow rate of
fresh water pumped from the Hirfanli reservoir and increased flow rate of brine water to
be discharged into the Salt Lake.

 Development objectives and the expected results of the Tuz Golu project remain
unchanged except for reflecting the five-year time delay. In addition US$ 25 million is
proposed for the financing of a proposed new project component: a gas trading platform.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The gas storage facility will be in an underground salt formation located close to Tuz
Golu, a salt lake in South Central Turkey. The facility will have 12 underground caverns
which will be solution-mined in two phases of six caverns each. The facility, upon
completion, will have a storage capacity of about 960 Million cubic meters of working
gas and 460 million cubic meters of cushion gas. Water for the solution mining will be
obtained from the Hirfanli Reservoir on the Kizilirmak River. It will be supplied to the
Tuz Golu site by a fresh water pipeline of about 120 km in length. The brine resulting
from the solution mining will be transferred to the Tuz Golu salt lake, using gravity flow,
by a brine disposal pipeline of about 40 km. A gas pipeline connection will be built from
the storage facility to the Kayseri-Konya-Seydisehir line, one of BOTAŞ' main trunk
lines. This connector line will be 19 km in length.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Alessandro Palmieri (TWIWA)
   Ms Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (ECSSO)
   Ms Esra Arikan (ECSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Key environmental and safety issues associated with Tuz Golu natural gas storage project
include: seismic stability of the salt dome storage facilities and general project area
(water supply pipeline, brine discharge area, gas distribution pipeline route), and
environmental impacts from brine discharge into the Tuz Golu salt lake. These issues
were dealt in the EIA report which was approved by WB in 2005. The project has a
Category A environmental rating and accordingly an environmental impact assessment
(EIA) was prepared and disclosed in 2005. Since then there has been the change
regarding the size of the caverns and increase in the flow rates of the fresh water used for
leaching operations and increase in the flow rate of the brine solution which will be
discharged to Salt Lake. Further, the EIA did not fully cover the access roads and
electricity transmission line required for the construction and operation of the project.
The Ministry of Environment and Urbanization has informed BOTAŞ that the existing
EIA does not need to be modified or updated by taking the existing national EIA
regulation as a basis (since there are certain thresholds in the regulation stating the
necessity of any update/revision). However, it was suggested by Bank team that an
addendum to the EIA and a revised Environment Management Plan (EMP) would be
necessary in order to reflect changes in the project design and to assess their impacts. WB
received the initial draft EIA Addendum which indicated that the revisions/updates in the
project will not result in additional significant environmental impacts. The major impact
from the change in the design will be the increase in the use of fresh water for leaching
the salt caverns and the corresponding increase in the amount of the brine solution
discharged to the Salt Lake. Salt Lake is a designated Special Environmental Protected
Area by Turkish Ministry of Environment and Urbanization, therefore the Natural
Habitats policy has been triggered and detailed assessment on the quantity and the quality
of the brine water discharge to the lake has been assessed in the project's original EIA
and the EIA addendum. The EIA and the addendum made it clear that; since the brine
solution has the same characteristics with the natural inflows to the Lake and the total
amount of brine solution discharged is not affecting the amount of water in the lake
significantly (it is resulting in a minor increase in the water level in the lake which is
even accepted as a positive environmental impact considering water losses of the lake
during draught periods), the project is not creating a pressure or a negative impact on the
Lake.The draft EIA addendum (together with the revised EMP) is disclosed in country on
March 4, 2013 and in Infoshop on March 5, 2013.

 The World Bank's Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) was triggered for the original project.
In 2005, two documents were produced and disclosed, a Land Acquisition Plan (LAP),
the equivalent of a Resettlement Action Plan, for Tuz Golu project area and a Land
Acquisition Policy Framework (LAPF), the equivalent of a Resettlement Policy
Framework, to provide guidance for producing subsequent LAPs if land was to be
acquired elsewhere.
  The land acquisition for the natural gas, water and brine pipelines for the Tuz Golu
project was completed in 2007 and 2008, and constitutes a total of 389 hectares of long
term easements. Permanent land acquisition for the pump stations, water storage tanks
and the Tuz Golu Surface Facility were completed in September 2012, with a total area of
40 hectares. Lastly, the land acquisition for the exact location for Well 8 (less than 1
hectares) was completed in November 2012, though the surrounding area of the well
remains to be acquired. The completed land acquisition affected land only, it did not
affect any structures, and it did not physically displace any persons. In the upcoming
months, additional land will be acquired for the remaining wells in the Tuz Golu Well
Area, including a security buffer zone between and around them (324 hectares, of which
191 hectares are private), and long term easements will be acquired for electricity
transmission lines.

 Land for the eight wells to be drilled in the Tuz Golu area was not included in the
original 2005 LAP. A draft revised LAP including this area and updating some other
provisions of the original LAP has been disclosed in country and in Infoshop. The
revised LAP needs to be finalized by adding specific baseline data to be obtained through
interviews with the affected landowners. This can be done for the entire Tuz Golu well
site at one time, but is more likely to be done in steps as the plot(s) comprising each
successive sub-site is required for drilling. The first "sub-site specific LAP," acceptable
to the Bank, should be completed as a condition of loan negotiations. The LAP covering
each plot is to be completed, acceptable to the Bank, prior to acquisition, and
commencement of drilling on that plot.

 A Corum Compressor Station, which was to be funded through the project according to
the original Project Appraisal Document in 2005, was instead excluded from Bank
funding and completed with the borrower's own resources. World Bank environmental
and social safeguards policies apply to all components of a project regardless of the
source of financing, and a Bank-approved LAP was not produced for this Compressor
Station prior to land acquisition. As a result, the Bank will review the Corum Compressor
Station for compliance with the environmental and social safeguards policies and identify
any possible remedial actions to be taken by BOTAS a a time-bound plan. This will be
done through a Bank staff site visit and a third-party environmental and resettlement
audit.

  Since the fresh water necessary for leaching the salt domes will be supplied from an
upstream dam (Hirfanli Dam and Reservoir), the dam safety OP was also triggerred for
the original project. Dam safety specialist suggested some measures in the latest AM of
the project, and since the dam was owned by State Hydraulic Works - DSI-, all measures
were discussed and agreed by DSI. DSI has drafted a report summarizing the actions
taken by them and they are still working on the updating of the Operations and
Maintenance Manual and this will be finalized before loan negotiations and will be made
an annex to the EMP.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Turkey would need more gas storage capacity beyond the project. Potential exists to
develop additional gas storage in the Tuz Golu salt formation. Therefore, similar project
are started to be developed by government/private sector in the same region, therefore
cumulative impacts should also be followed. Regarding this, the EIA addendum also
deals with the possible cumulative impacts of brine discharge to Salt Lake arising from
Botas project and reasonable foreseen similar projects.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not relevant at this time. Alternatives were considered at the time of project investment
decision in 2005. Developing gas storage in the Tuz Golu salt formation was chosen as
the best option available in Turkey. Development of gas storage in salt deposits using the
process of solution mining the caverns is an established practice and has been
successfully employed elsewhere in the world.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An environmental impact assessment (EIA) including an environmental management
plan (EMP) was prepared and disclosed in 2005. As described above, Botas has prepared
the draft versions of the addendum to the existing EIA and a revised EMP. These drafts
were shared with local public and upon finalization (before negotiations) will be
disclosed in country and Infoshop again.

 Botas has also engaged with the environmental monitoring consultancy company who
will be responsible for supervising BOTAS and the constructions contractor for
successful implementation of the EMP including the revised sections of the EMP.

  Land for the Tuz Golu Surface Facility was acquired without keeping the Bank
informed of the acquisition process and without collecting the necessary information on
the project affected people prior to the acquisition. In addition, the project appeared to
lack an acceptable formal Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) as required by the
Bank's policy. BOTAS submitted a draft social audit report in December 2012, which
the Bank reviewed and provided comments and requested for further information on the
timing of the consultations, the compensation payment and the GRM. During a field visit
in January 2013 the Bank team was able to talk to some of the project affected people and
the local Muhtar (village head) about this acquisition and verify that market rate
payments had been made available to those affected.

 Lands for the Tuz Golu Well Area and the proposed electricity transmission lines were
not included in the original 2005 LAP. Therefore, BOTAS has revised the original LAP
to include the additional land, to update information that had become outdated since the
LAP was prepared in 2005 and also to clarify some requirements. A Bank team visited
the project site during January 2013 and provided detailed guidance on what was required
for the revised LAP. The Bank team also delivered a one-day Resettlement Policy
training to BOTAS land acquisition staff to help avoid compliance problems in the
future.

 BOTAS is aware that a revised LAP (acceptable to the Bank) should be in place and
disclosed prior to any further land acquisition. Implementation will be monitored by
Bank implementation support missions. BOTAS has also agreed to hire by loan
negotiations an external monitor to assist with the supervision monitoring and completion
reporting. BOTAS has confirmed that there will be no further land acquisition beyond
which will be covered in the revised LAP.

 The safety of the Hirfanli dam was inspected during project preparation and its safety is
being monitored by DSI. This arrangement is adequate because: (a) Hirfanli is an existing
dam; (b) the dam safety measures do not involve significant and complex remedial
works; and (c) DSI is the national regulator of dam safety and runs an effective dam
safety program including periodic inspections and safety assessments of its dams. As
stated before DSI took some extra measures that the Bank's dam specialist suggested and
they will update the Operations and Maintenance Manual for the Dam before loan
negotiations. Although DSI will be responsible for conducting the dam safety measures,
BOTAS will be following the actions taken and will be responsible for reporting back to
the World Bank.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Following the Turkish Law for Exprorpiation, BOTAS has carried out consultations with
project affected people to inform them of land acquisition procedures. In preparation for
the revised LAP and while collecting the necessary socio-economic information on
project affected people, BOTAS will inform them of the revised LAP and its means of
disclosure.

 Regarding the original project preparation, it was thought that given DSI's capacity, and
given the relatively small impact of the project on the reservoir, a separate panel of
experts may not be necessary. It was decided that DSI's operations department will
monitor the dam's safety and implement the agreed measures. This is still the case for the
agreed actions as stated above. For the measures taken, an independent review will be
carried out by DSI General Directorate for Dam Safety and the relative report shared with
the World Bank.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/19/2013
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/04/2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  03/05/2013
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive     11/07/2005
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/25/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/04/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/05/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The original EIA was received by the Bank on 06/03/2005, discosed in the country on
06/01/2005 and shared at the infoshop on 07/08/2005. Dates provided in this ISDS are
the disclosure dates of the EIA addendum and the revised EMP being a part of the
addendum.

 A revised LAP, for the acquisition of land not covered in the 2005 LAP, has been
prepared, received by the Bank on February 25, 2013, disclosed in country on March 4th,
2013, on InfoShop March 5th, 2013. After agreement between the World Bank and
BOTAS, this revised LAP was conditionally cleared with the understanding that BOTAS
will collect socio-economic data on project affected persons before acquiring the
additional lands. These additional submissions will need to be cleared by the Bank, and
disclosed along with the LAP going forward before any land acquisition takes place.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of     No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                            Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts       N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements         Yes
been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name           Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Kari J. Nyman                03/07/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Esra Arikan                  03/05/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler   03/07/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss                03/08/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ranjit J. Lamech             03/07/2013
  Comments:
