                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/01/2011                                       Report No.: 64617
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P112578                 Original Project Name: Private Sector
                                             Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
                                             Project
Country: Turkey                              Project ID: P124898
Project Name: Private Sector Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Additional
Financing
Task Team Leader: Shinya Nishimura
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11,       Estimated Board Date: November 22, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: ECSS2                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (75%);Energy efficiency in power sector (25%)
Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%);Climate change (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           500.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    150.00
                                                                     150.00
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The original objective of the project is ’to help increase privately owned and operated
energy production from indigenous renewable sources within the market-based
framework of the Turkish Electricity Market Law, and to enhance energy efficiency and
as a result help reducing greenhouse gas emissions’. The objective will remain the same.
The purpose of additional financing is to scale up the activities under the ongoing project,
thereby enhancing the impact already being achieved.

3. Project Description
The proposed additional financing will consist of two IBRD credit lines, one each to the
two development banks in Turkey, Türkiye Sinai Kalkinma Bankasi (TSKB) and to
Türkiye Kalkinma Bankasi (TKB). The FIs will allocate minimum of 25% of IBRD loan
towards energy efficiency, and maximum of 50% towards hydros.
 Renewable Energy - All renewable energy sources are eligible for financing including
hydro, wind, geothermal, biomass, and solar energy, including for heating and cooling
(such as geothermal).

 Energy efficiency - Energy efficiency investments will be eligible for financing under
the proposed project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Specific sub-project locations will be determined during project implementation, as sub-
project proposals are screened and evaluated.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (ECSS4)
   Ms Esra Arikan (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed additional financing will not lead to a change in the environmental
category of the project, nor trigger any new safeguard policies. The projects to be
financed are of the same type as the ones currently being financed (RE and EE), and the
sub-projects may trigger World Bank safeguard polices on Environmental Assessment
(OP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Dam Safety (OP 4.37). Since the
project is an FI operation, individual subprojects are not known at the appraisal stage.
Consequently, the Environment Policy Framework (EMF) and Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) utilized under the ongoing Project are revised by the Borrowers based
upon both lessons learned so far. The draft final versions of these documents were
disclosed in the country and sent to the Infoshop.

 Both EMF and RPF documents are included in the Operational Manual, which will
govern the manner in which the Borrowers will be required to implement the Project.
  The EMF defines the environmental assessment (EA) review procedures under Turkish
laws and regulations and covers the gaps which have to be fulfilled to satisfy the World
Bank requirements regarding environmental screening, documentation, public
consultation, etc.

 Sub-projects will not be eligible for financing under this project if they are located in
Natural Habitats or Critical Natural Habitats (as defined in World Bank OP 4.04) or in
any areas protected under the Borrowers legislation for the purposes of conservation.

 Due to growing trend towards small scale hydropower stations in Turkey, the concern
over potential negative impacts to downstream ecosystems also has gained importance.
In particular, attention has been drawn to the risk of cumulative impacts of multiple
installations within the same river basin. The revised environmental policy framework
introduced an explicit requirement for carrying out cumulative impact assessments in
addition to individual sub-project EIAs under certain circumstances. The scope of
cumulative impact assessments has been introduced to FIs through a workshop conducted
in May 2011. The workshop hosted most of the relevant stakeholders including TKB,
TSKB, Ministry of Environment and Forestry, Ministry of Energy and Natural
Resources, NGOs (WWF) other International Finance Institutions (AFD, KfW, IFC), and
EIA consultants. During the workshop, there was also chance to hear the recent
developments from the Turkish authorities related to downstream ecosystem assessment
requirements and improving the qualities of the EIA Reports.

  The Dam Safety Policy Framework document used under the ongoing Project will be
continue to be used for and is included in the operations manual of the additional
financing. There have been subprojects where the dam safety safeguard policy has been
triggered. In all instances, the project sponsor followed the requirements of the policy
satisfactorily, under the oversight of the FI. A panel of experts was set up, which
reviewed construction progress periodically. The panel will continue to monitor the dam
for safety considerations after its completion.

  The policy on International Waters was not triggered under the ongoing Project because
it was agreed that hydro power projects would be financed only in a specified list of
domestic river basins. This was reflected in the legal agreements for the ongoing project
in the form of a list of the river basins where hydro subprojects could be located. The
same approach and the same list will continue to be used under the proposed additional
financing.

  For any land acquisition involving taking of private land or economic displacement, the
FIs will prepare Land Acquisition Plans (LAP) in line with the OP 4.12 Involuntary
Resettlement safeguard policy and Turkish legislation to mitigate any temporary and
permanent impacts and submit same for World Bank#s prior approval. In cases where
land acquisition has been completed prior to the sponsor approaching an FI with a
proposal for project financing, the LAP will be prepared and submitted to the World
Bank for review at that time, and the financing for the sub-project will be approved only
if it is demonstrated that the land acquisition was carried out in a manner compliant with
OP 4.12. The Operational Manual specifies the process for this. Based on the experience
of the ongoing project, the FIs would also improve project reporting, documentation and
monitoring by elaborating more information in their LAPs.

 All of the issues mentioned above were addressed in the updated Environmental Policy
and Resettlement Policy Framework documents.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project is likely to have significant positive environmental benefits through reduced
GHG emissions, which will have benefits both nationally and globally. Some types of
hydro projects may contribute to cumulative environmental impacts on the river basin,
which will be addressed through appropriate measures based on cumulative impact
assessments.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Alternatives available for project site, technology and operations will be assessed in the
individual environmental assessment reports of the sub-projects.

 As in the ongoing project, subproject activities will avoid where possible private land
acquisition, which may have adverse impacts on people and their livelihood sources. In
situations where this cannot be avoided, the borrower will prepare a Land Acquisition
Plan (LAP) to address the needs of affected persons affected by loss of economic
activities, land acquisition and/or resettlement. The LAP will be sent to the Bank for
review and clearance before it is disclosed publicly in country and on the Bank’s infoshop
prior to commencement of civil works.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment and Social teams established by TKB and TSKB for the first Renewable
Energy Project have been maintained and strengthened throughout the implementation of
ongoing Project. These teams are responsible for implementation and monitoring of the
environment and resettlement policy frameworks as well as dam safety aspects. These
teams have acquired significant experience in the design and implementation of
environmental and social safeguards, and they regularly participate in the Bank’s
safeguards training workshops and other similar capacity building efforts.

 Both FIs are committed to strengthening their teams and it was agreed, as reflected in
the revised Environmental Framework, that each FI will either hire an environmental
specialist who will help with the environmental due diligence documents gap analysis,
review of the documents, advise the investor, monitor from time to time the compliance
of sub projects with EMPs, etc. or, designate an engineer in FI who will be in charge for
environmental issues and will work closely with WB teams environmental specialist and
gain knowledge and experience on the way. In addition, FIs have internal systems for
assessing the safeguard risks of the sub-project applications. These systems will be
updated in line with the revisions/additions to the environmental and resettlement policy
frameworks.

 Both FIs will have the obligation to assist prospective developers to prepare
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)/Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and
Land Acquisition Plan (LAP) (if needed) for their individual facilities in accordance with
Turkish laws and regulations and the safeguards policies of the World Bank Group,
following the guidelines provided in the EMF and RPF. Typically, the private companies
and their contractors will be the implementers for most of the mitigation and many of the
monitoring measures for their investments or subprojects. The arrangements they
propose and their capacities to carry them out will be assessed when their individual
EIA/EMPs and RAPs are reviewed, by FIs, the Bank, and the relevant regulatory
agencies. The OM spells out the respective institutional arrangements and responsibilities
as well as identifies measures for improving the management of the potential impacts of
the project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include the local populations where individual subprojects are to be
located, NGOs, Ministry of Environment and Forests and their provincial offices. For
individual subprojects, the EMF and RPF documents describe requirements and
procedures for public consultation to be conducted during the EA process as part of any
EA document preparation as well as EA regulation allows subproject sponsors to carry
out further consultations if deemed necessary. Individual subproject EA documents (may
include EIA, limited EA, EMP, Cumulative Impact Assessment Report, etc.) will be
regularly disclosed in the FI websites, in local MoEF offices and in municipal buildings
with public access and English language versions will be sent to the World Bank by the
FIs for disclosure in the Infoshop. Prior to land expropriation, the subproject developer
and Energy Market Regulatory Authority (EMRA) carry out upstream public
consultations with potentially affected people.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/04/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 08/26/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  08/31/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/04/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 08/26/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/31/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      Yes
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        No
been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Shinya Nishimura                          08/26/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Esra Arikan                               08/25/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor                        08/29/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss                             09/01/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ranjit J. Lamech                          09/01/2011
  Comments:
