                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/07/2011                                    Report No.: AC5223
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Turkey                               Project ID: P077328
Project Name: Railways Restructuring Project
Task Team Leader: Martha B. Lawrence
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2005       Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2005
Managing Unit: ECSSD                          Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                              Loan
Sector: Railways (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);Other public sector
governance (25%);Trade facilitation and market access (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           184.70
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      36.30
                                                                       36.30
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the project is to (a) improve the effectiveness of railway operations on
the Mersin-Toprakkale and Yenice-Bogäzköprü lines by increasing capacity and
improving service quality; and (b) lay the groundwork for restructuring TCDD by
developing experience with financially viable contract arrangements for loss making
public services and access pricing of infrastructure.

3. Project Description
The total cost of the project is Euro 195 million, of which World Bank financing is Euro
143.7 million.

  Component A: Freight Lines Capacity Increase. This component includes signaling of
Mersin-Toprakkale and Yenice-Bogäzköprü lines and complementary extension to
stations track to permit operation and passing of longer trains. When completed, this
investment will increase the safety, capacity, speed and reliability of service on these
lines.
  Component B: Staff Adjustment and Social Plan. The component supports the
implementation of the restructuring of TCDD through supporting the reduction in TCDD.
In addition to voluntary departures, the project will support staff training through the
technical assistance.

 Component C: Advisory Services to TCDD. The component supports the reform of
TCDD through technical assistance for restructuring, operational process, and marketing.

 Component D: TCDD Staff Training and Re-training. The component supports training
to TCDD staff on railway processes, operational performance, communications, and
safety.

 Component E: TCDD Public Communications and Periodic Surveys. The component
supports periodic surveys on customer perceptions of TCDD and its services.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The signaling and station loop extension activities of the project (Component A) will be
carried out along the TCDD railway lines between Mersin-Toprakkale and Yenice-
Bogäzköprü. TCDD is building a Logistics Park adjacent to the project in Yenice. The
other components of the project are not associated with a particular location.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Naima A Hasci (ECSS4)
   Ms Esra Arikan (ECSS3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental impacts that will arise from the construction works of the project
component for signaling and station loop extension were explained in the Environmental
Management Plan disclosed in 2005. The project restructuring does not add any new
activities or works to the project that would lead to unexpected or additional
environmental impacts. Also, upon a request of the World Bank, TCDD amended the
Environmental Management Plan to include the Logistics Park, which is not financed by
the World Bank, but is adjacent to the World Bank project.

  The project component for signaling and station loop extension will require acquisition
of 30,000 sq. meters of land. The Logistics Park will require acquisition of 224,000 sq.
meters of land, including land for construction of the Logistics Park and land for
relocating an irrigation channel which currently runs through the land that will become
the Logistics Park. In total 41 households will lose land. The three households whose
land would be expropriated for the irrigation channel, requested that TCDD acquire their
entire properties, including houses, rather than just the land needed for the channel.
Therefore, three households will be relocated.

 In cases of rehabilitation/reconstruction of the office buildings in station areas within the
scope of the project, the safeguard policy on the Cultural Property may be triggered, as
potentially some of the buildings may have cultural/historical value, be in very close
proximity to such properties, or may be located in an overall historic area. Irreversible
impacts are not anticipated given strong local ordinances and practices regarding cultural
heritage protection.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
During construction of Component A, the project is expected to have minor negative
impacts on the environment. Inevitably, the digging of trenches for electrical cable and
erection of poles will introduce noise, disturb the ecosystem near railway tracks and may
disturb the public at intersections of roads and railroad, due to the movement of men and
materials. These negative impacts will be limited to the construction phase. Once the
project completed, the improved traffic flow may increase air and noise pollution along
the railroad. However, the reallocation of traffic from road to rail will result in reduction
of road congestion, and higher reduction of pollution caused by hydrocarbons, carbons,
particulates and lead. The net result will be a diminution of pollution caused by traffic.
The construction of the Logistics Park, adjacent to the project, will have similar
construction impacts and increase of noise and traffic resulting from additional railway
traffic being handled at the facility.

 In total 41 households will be affected by land acquisition for the project and the
Logistics Park. The land acquisitions are being handled according to the processes
described in the Resettlement Action Plan, and will be fully compensated. Long term
social impacts are not anticipated. The increased activity on the railway line and in the
Logistics Park could increase employment opportunities, especially around Yenice.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The original design of the Logistics Park included expropriation of approximately 40
houses. After discussion with the World Bank, TCDD redesigned the project to reduce its
footprint and avoid expropriation of these houses.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
TCDD has hired an independent supervision company to monitor the environmental
compliance of the signaling project; The supervisor is providing quarterly environmental
reports to the World Bank. To date, no major issues have been observed either at the site
or in the environmental monitoring reports of the project. For the logistics park, TCDD
hired an independent environmental consultant for the preparation of the Environmental
Management Plan, and the plan was reviewed and agreed with the World Bank. The EMP
also addresses the cultural property issues.

 TCDD has prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) to guide the acquisition of land
and houses. The Real Estate and Civil Works Department of TCDD’s 6th Division is
responsible for implementing the RAP, under the supervision of the Real Estate and Civil
Works Department of TCDD headquarters unit and the PIU. Implementation of the
resettlement are part of their assigned duties and incorporated into their regular plan of
work.


  The local information offices set up for the Project will receive any complaints, take
first actions for resolution, and monitor that satisfactory resolution is reached. Complaints
will be communicated via the TCDD regional offices to TCDD General Directorate
where the response will be coordinated among the concerned institutions. The
information offices are in contact with local muhktars, who are available to assist any
affected people with registering complaints.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the Social Impact Assessment field study carried out between May-July 2010,
owners and users of lands to be expropriated were interviewed to understand perceptions
and interests about the Project activities. By conducting negotiations with impacted
people in SIA Survey, opinions and suggestions of the property owners were taken into
account. In this process, ongoing problems were addressed through briefings with local
representatives, stakeholder meetings and interviews. In addition, a public consultation
meeting on social impacts was held in Yenice municipality on November 24, 2010.

 Upon request of WB, TCDD also held a public consultation meeting for the proposed
logistics park on September 30, 2010 and the outcomes of the consultation meeting were
discussed in the EMP.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 06/03/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             06/06/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/07/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/25/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/20/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/25/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?         Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential       Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Martha B. Lawrence                        05/02/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Esra Arikan                               06/07/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Naima A Hasci                             05/02/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Daniel R. Gibson                          05/02/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Henry G. R. Kerali                        05/18/2011
  Comments:
