INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE- UPDATE
I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/27/2012                       Report No.: AC4090
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Uganda                      Project ID: P1 12334
Project Name: Uganda: Energy for Rural Transformation APL-2
Task Team Leader: Somin Mukherji
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change      Global Supplemental ID: P112340
Appraisal Date: January 26, 2009      Board Date: April 6, 2009
Managing Unit: AFTEG                  Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
Loan
Sector: General energy sector (40%); Power (25%); Other social services (25%);
Telecommunications (10%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P); Other financial and
private sector development (P)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):      0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):      75.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):        9.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):        0.00
GPOBA (US$m.):             5.50
Other financing amounts by source:
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                   13.00
KfW Entwicklungsbank                                  6.50
19.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                 Simple []       Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)  Yes [  No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to increase rural access to modern energy and ICT.
The GEF objective is to increase access to energy and information and communication
technologies in rural Uganda. The Project will increase the use of renewable energy and
promote energy efficiency. Energy efficiency was not originally included in the long-
term program but was added during Phase I when Uganda's unexpected shortage of
power at peak times created an opportunity to promote energy efficient lights.
These objectives will be achieved by accelerated investments and shifting from the case-
by-case approach of ERT I to processing projects through the institutional framework
developed subsequently.


﻿3. Project Description
The Project, as per its original appraisal stage ISDS description below, is being supported
with additional grant of US$ 5.50m through GPOBA. This ISDS is updated to reflect the
following:
The GPOBA grant will fund connections consisting of overhead wiring (drop wire)
installed from an existing distribution line pole to the house, installation of the wire on
the house, and meter or ready board installation on the house. No additional poles will be
erected for these connections. Installations will happen in existing built up areas such as
villages and trading centers where the distribution lines exist or are being put up by ERT
II. Installation work is light duty, carried out by a small work crew by existing service
providers who are already resident in project areas.
Project Components
The Project is designed in-line with the 2001 description approved by the World Bank
Board and the GEF Council. It provides about US$75 million in IDA funds and US$9
million in GEF grants. The project components are shown below with an indicative
financing plan. Several donors are engaged in complementary financing, they include
Norway, Germany and Japan.
Project                 IDA    GEF   GoU   GPOBA       KfW         Total
Component 1             41.0   5.7   10.7  5.5         6.5         69.4
Rural Energy Infrastructure
Component 2              8.0   0.0   1.2   0.0         0.0         9.2
Information Communication Technologies
Component 3             26.0   3.3   1.1   0.0         0.0         30.4
Energy development, cross sectoral links, impact monitoring
TOTAL                    75.0  9.0   13.0  5.5         6.5         109.0
Examples of physical investments under the project components include grid extensions,
independent grids, institutional commercial and household photovoltaic systems, energy
packages for rural health and education facilities, support for renewable power generation
projects, and telecom investments.
The project design and allocation of funds responds to the implementation experience in
Phase I as well as overall changes in Uganda's economy and developments in the
electricity and ICT sectors.


﻿4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project is being implemented country-wide. The specific locations of all future sub-
projects are not known at this time and will be determined during project implementation
based on demand. The above applies to house connections financed by the additional
GPOBA grant.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN)
Ms Mary C. K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Safeguard Policies Triggered
Environmental       Yes OP 4.01 is triggered because the program will support investments with
Assessment OP/BP        potential adverse environmental impacts. Since their location cannot be
4.01                    identified ex-ante, the safeguard instrument used is the ESMF. For activities
with significant impacts, specific EAs and EMPs will be prepared.
Natural Habitats    Yes OP 4.04 is triggered because some subprojects may adversely impact on
OP/BP 4.04              natural habitats. The ESMFs will be used to screen project activities for such
impacts.
Pest Management OP No OP 4.10 is not triggered as there are no known pest issues in the project area.
4.09
Physical Cultural   Yes OP 4.11 is triggered because project investments will involve construction
Resources OP/BP         and therefore may affect physical cultural resources either through known
4.11                    site characteristics, or through 'chance finds,'
Involuntary         Yes OP 4.12 is triggered because the project may support interventions that
Resettlement OP/BP      could entail land taking or limiting access to land and other resources. An
4.12                    RPF has been developed in order to address this policy.
Indigenous Peoples  No OP 4.10 is not triggered as there are no known indigenous peoples in the
OP/BP 4.10              project area of influence.
Forests OP/BP 4.36  Yes OP 4.36 is triggered because the project investments may have adverse
impacts on forests. The ESMF will be used to screen project activities for
such impacts.
Safety of Dams      Yes OP 4.37 is triggered because the project may support mini-hydro power
OP/BP 4.37              development that would involve small dams.
Projects on         Yes OP 7.50 is triggered because the project may support mini-hydro power
International           development that may involve international waterways. Riparian has been
Waterways OP/BP        issued.
7.50
Projects in Disputed  No OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known disputes over the project area
Areas OP/BP 7.60        of Uganda.


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The work to be financed through additional GPOBA grant falls within the original scope
of the project and is covered by the existing and disclosed safeguards instruments (ESMF
and RPF). The GPOBA grant does not have incremental safeguards implications.
The Project has been assigned an environmental risk Category B, because some of the
interventions to be supported like renewable energy power generation facilities are likely
to result into impacts on the ecosystem, and habitat for some endemic aquatic and
terrestrial species. Despite the fact that the project is expected to provide significant
environmental and social benefits onsite, some of its subprojects are likely to have
potential environmental impacts on human populations or environmentally important
areas - including wetlands, grasslands, and other natural habitats. The project may also
affect forests and physical cultural resources. Therefore, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared that was disclosed (October 31,
2008) which addresses these potential impacts and proposes mitigation measures.
Environmental Management Plan (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have
been prepared, and were disclosed on May 31, 2012. At screening stage, the proposed
subprojects are classified as category B, or C, depending on the type, location, sensitivity,
and the scale of the project and the nature and magnitude of its potential environmental
impacts. For Category B: A limited EIA will be adequate, since the projects may have
site-specific environmental impacts, and their mitigation measures can be designed more
readily. Under the Category C: Projects are likely to have minimal or no adverse
environmental impacts, thus exempted from EIA.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None expected.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project supports relatively small investments at sites to be selected throughout the
country. Individual subprojects will include an alternatives assessment in cases where
adverse impact could occur.
4. Describe measures taken by the Borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Under Phase I of the program, the environment and social safeguards have been handled
through the existing government mechanisms. The National Environmental Management
Agency (NEMA) reviewed and approved the sub-projects. In addition, REA provided
oversight for environmental and social due diligence and safeguards compliance for the
larger investments (e.g. the Kakira Sugar Mill cogeneration facility, and the West Nile
3.5 MW hydropower station), some of which were done through IDA technical support.


﻿Overall compliance monitoring, including a database, was done by REA, which was
assisted by a Safeguards Consultant who established a RAP monitoring and tracking
system. To coordinate work between NEMA and REA, an Inter-agency Steering
Committee was established. The coordination between NEMA and REA on
environmental and social due diligence has been satisfactory. These arrangements and
capacities for compliance with safeguard policies and Ugandan regulations have been
working satisfactorily in Phase I and will continue to be utilized under the current phase.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key project stakeholders are the rural communities throughout Uganda that will be
serviced by the new transmission and distribution system, and the households that will be
connected through the GBOPA scheme. In addition, national level stakeholders are REA
and Ministry of Energy, Mines and Mineral Development. Stakeholder consultations
were carried out during the preparation of the original project / safeguards instruments:
(i) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); and (ii) Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF).
All safeguards documents were cleared by the Uganda National Environmental
Management Authority (NEMA) and the Bank. They were then disclosed at the World
Bank's Infoshop on October 31, 2008; and in country on November 10, 2008. The
proposed mitigation measures and their monitoring plans are an integral part of the
project design and costs
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?         Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                         10/24/2008
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     11/10/2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                      10/31/2008
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?         Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                         10/24/2008
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     11/10/2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                      10/31/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?         N/A
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?         N/A


﻿Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?  Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)  Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the  Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of  No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other  Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?  Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential  Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process  Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector  Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints  Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these  Yes
constraints?
Does -the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include  N/A
provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification  N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?


﻿Has the RVP approved such an exception?                             N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's  Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a  Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the  Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the  Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
D. Approvals
Signed and submitted by:                      Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:             Mr Somin Mukherji                       05/16/2012
Environmental Specialist:     Mr Martin Fodor                         05/16/2012
Social Development Specialist  Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo                05/16/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):
Regional Safeguards Advisor:  Ms Alexandra   Bezeredi                 7/27/2012
Approved by:
Sector Manager:               Mr L cio  ona i                         7/27/2012


