               RFG297HDRS INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                              CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                             Report No.:AC6919

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: June 5, 2013

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Uganda                              Project ID: P133318
                                             Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Partial Risk Guarantee for Renewable Energy Development Program
Task Team Leader: Raihan Elahi
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 2,       Estimated Board Date: December 3, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: AFTG1                         Lending Instrument: PRG
Sector: Hydropower (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):           40.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing               Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project        Yes [ ]                 No [X]

B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:

The Program Development Objective is to increase electricity generation by providing credit risk
enhancement to renewable energy based small independent power producers.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:

The proposed Partial Risk Guarantee for the Renewable Energy Development Program (PRG
Program) will support private sector investors to develop renewable energy based power plants
(herein after referred to as “subprojects?) in Uganda under the approved Renewable Energy Feed
in Tariff (REFiT) structure. The REFiT was revised in 2010 by enhancing the Feed in Tariff
based on levelized cost of power of different renewable energy technologies; however it did not
attract expected investment from the private sector. Preliminary assessment carried out by ERA
suggests that current financial performance of the single buyer, the UETCL, does not provide the
required level of comfort to the interested investors to commit their capital and raise commercial
debt for subprojects where revenue will depend on UETCL’s ability to make regular payments
for about 15 years. The proposed PRG Program will enhance the creditworthiness of UETCL by
guaranteeing its obligation to the SIPPs under the PPA.

To create an enabling environment for private sector investment in renewable energy, the GoU is
working with IDA and other development partners to introduce three instruments to enhance the
market. These are: (i) IDA PRG Program, (ii) GETFiT Premium Payment, and (iii) Private
Renewable Energy Financing Facility. While these instruments will be offered independent of
each other, and will be supported by different institutions, they will all work to enhance the
renewable energy market development in Uganda.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):

Project locations are at specific hydropower generation sites throughout Uganda as follows
(subject to revisions during project preparation):

Siti Small Hydropower Subproject (5 MW and 16.5 MW): The proposed Siti small
hydropower development includes two subsequent weirs and power stations at the Kapchorwa
District. Siti 1 Plant will have an installed capacity of 5 MW and an annual output of 25 GWh,
while Siti 2 will have a capacity of 16.5 MW and an annual output of 70 GWh. The load factor
for Siti 1 is 57% and the load factor for Siti 2 is 48%. Both power plants are run of the river
design. The sponsor of this power plant, VS Hydro (Pvt.) Ltd. from Sri Lanka, carried out the
feasibility study for this plant.

Hydrology: The Siti river originates from Mount Elgon which the feasibility states receives the
highest rainfall in Uganda. Hydrology has been studied using three different approaches. The
most conservative of the three concludes that the stream dries out 10% of the time. Flow duration
curves have been derived and a design flow of 2.6m3/s has been selected for Siti 1 and 4.2m3/s
for Siti 2. The value of Siti 2 is on the high side and could likely be reduced by 10%.

Subproject Cost Estimate: The sponsors have decided to rely on an EPC contract that will be
handled by VS Hydro. The engineering and project management costs reflected in the feasibility
study will have to be further reviewed. The subproject cost estimate excluded the cost of
constructing transmission line and interconnection facilities. The length of transmission line and
the cost needs to be properly assessed to complete the feasibility study.

Kakaka Small Hydropower Subproject (5 MW): The proposed Kakaka small hydropower
subproject is a run of river project with a 5 MW power station operating under a 195 m head
with a 3.6m3/s flow. The annual output is 22.8 GWh. The load factor is 52%. The feasibility
study was carried out by VS Hydro (pvt) Ltd. from Sri Lanka who is also proposing construction
management and manufacturing of the turbines.

Hydrology: Hydrology has been studied with two separate methods and they both concur on an
average annual flow of 2.11 m3/s.

Subproject Cost Estimate: The sponsors have decided to rely on an EPC contract that will be
handled by VS Hydro and Greenewus Energy Africa Limited. The engineering and project
management costs reflected in the feasibility study will have to be further reviewed. The sub-
project cost estimate excluded the cost of transmission line and interconnection facilities. The
length of Transmission line and the cost needs to be properly assessed to complete the feasibility
study.

Lubila Small Hydropower Subproject (4.5 MW): The proposed Lubilia small hydropower
development includes a power station with an installed capacity of 4.5 MW and an annual output
of 21.3 GWh. The load factor is 42%. The feasibility study has been conducted by AH
Consulting, a Ugandan based regional consulting firm providing consulting services to the
private sector, public sector, non-governmental organizations and development agencies.

Hydrology: The Lubilia river originates in the high forests of the Rwenzori mountains. There are
no data of historical flows on this river, but there is a good correlation with the neighboring
Kanyampara River and a considerable database of stream flows exist for neighboring streams.
The catchment area is reported to be 42.5 km2with an average annual flow of 1.44m3/s. Further
assessment on a number of parameters including catchment yield needs to be carried out before
finalizing the subproject design.

Kikagati Small Hydropower Subproject (16 MW): The proposed Kikagati small hydropower
subproject is a 16 MW power plant. It’s a trans-boundary project where the benefits will be
shared between Uganda and Tanzania. The sponsors have advanced the project preparation by
concluding the technical, financial and environmental assessments. The sponsor have identified
the EPC contractor to construct the plant and at present are negotiating the EPC contract price.
The sponsor of this power plant is Tronder Power Ltd. which owns other power plants in
Uganda.

Nyamwamba Small Hydropower Project (9.2 MW): The proposed Nyamwamba project is
situated just outside the Rwenzori Mountains National Park in Kasese district. While the project
is on the Nyamwamba River, it lacked hydrological information, and hence the feasibility of the
hydropower project was carried out using hydrological information of two parallel rivers next to
Nyamwamba. Based on this feasibility report, the sponsors applied for the hydropower
generation permit from ERA for a 16 MW power plant. After receiving the permit, the sponsors
installed metering gauges on the Nyamwamba River and as per the hydrological information
obtained from these metering stations, they revised their feasibility report to a 9.2 MW capacity
power plant. The sponsor’s application to revise its generation permit from 16 MW to 9.2 MW
is still awaiting ERA’s approval.

The sponsors for all the projects have outdated ESIAs and RAPs; they have been requested to
update the environment and social documents as per the Performance Standards.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Effective ESMS:

Beneficiaries of the proposed PRG will be private companies (with or without foreign
involvement). These are likely to have varied capacity for effective implementation of
environmental and social management system (ESMS). Their institutional capacity will be
assessed as a part of IDA due diligence and summarized in the Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).
The beneficiary companies will operate under the established Ugandan institutional, legal and
regulatory framework for environmental and social management. This framework is broadly
considered to be consistent with generally accepted global practice, although some procedural
aspects and application vary and are affected by limited institutional capacity and political
commitment. However, the framework has been applied extensively for large and small
hydropower development.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

   Martin Fodor, AFTN3
   Yasmine Tayyab, AFTCS

II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain why)                      Yes          No         TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental                 X
and Social Risks and Impacts

PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                               X

PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention               X

PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                     X

PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement              X

PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                  X
Management of Living Natural Resources

PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                     X

PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                          X


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be
   disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared:

   An ESRS would be prepared, covering each of the sites, for the Phase 1 sub-projects in
   August 2013. Phase 1 sub-projects will be selected based on financial, technical,
   environmental and social considerations after information on candidate sub-projects is
   provided by the counterparts.
B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
   preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:

Not applicable as project is neither Category C nor FI, and does require ESRS.

C. Timeframe for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

       Preparation of safeguard related studies will be determined upon review of the existing
       environmental and social due diligence work prepared for the sub-projects in the course of
       preparing the ESRS.

Riparian Notification per OP 7.50 – carried out by the Bank

IV. APPROVALS

Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                               Raihan Elahi                                                 Date: 06/06/13

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                        Date: 06/07/13

  Comments:
Sector Manager:                                 Lucio Monari                                                 Date: 06/10/13
  Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
