                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                               Report No.: 81949
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
09/17/2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                          Ukraine              Project ID:               P144893
 Project Name:                     Grant for Preparation of the Oblast Health Sector Reform Project
 Task Team Leader:                 Paolo Belli
 Estimated Appraisal Date:         September 17, 2013 Estimated Board Date: Not Applicable
 Managing Unit:                    ECSH1                Lending Instrument:       Grant
 Sector:                           Health (90%), Public administration- Health (10%)
 Theme:                            Health system performance (70%), Injuries and non-communicable
                                   diseases (20%), Public expenditure, financial management and
                                   procurement (10%)
 Financing (in USD Million)
     Financing Source                                                                             Amount
     Borrower
     Total                                                                                     US$470,000
 Environmental Category            B
 Is this a Repeater project?       Not Applicable

 This ISDS is for the ECAPDEV grant which will support preparation activities for the Oblast Health Sector
 Reform Project (P144893).

 B. Project Objectives
 The development objective of the proposed ECAPDEV Grant is to support the Ministry of Health (MoH) and
 selected oblasts to prepare the Oblast Health Systems Reform Project (P144893) and to strengthen their
 implementation capacity.

 The P144893 Project would increase the capacity of selected oblast health systems to effectively and
 sustainably confront their burden of disease by rationalizing their health service delivery model; and to
 improve the stewardship capacity of the MoH.

 C. Project Description
 The proposed ECAPDEV Grant would contribute to quality improvement and faster preparation of the Project
 (P144893) and to building of relevant capacity in the institutions that would implement the Project. The
 institutions include MoH and its health reform steering committee, and governments of selected oblasts
 represented by Health Departments. The Grant design is linked to the key Project components and activities
identified to date. Specifically, the first Project component aims to stimulate improvements in health services’
quality and reorganization of the delivery system through investing into subprojects of selected oblast. The
subprojects would focus on the following priority areas: a) fighting NCDs, with emphasis on prevention; b)
improving quality and effectiveness of care; and c) rightsizing and restructuring hospitals and secondary
ambulatory services, and change their governance structure, towards greater autonomy and accountability for
results. An initial set of eleven candidate oblasts’ subprojects were identified. The oblasts require technical
support to finalize their subproject proposals. Furthermore, the oblasts` authorities need capacity building to
be able to implement their subprojects in compliance with both national and the World Bank procedures and
requirements. The second Project component is geared to improve the health sector governance and
stewardship role of the MoH. Although the MoH is experienced in developing policies and providing
methodological support to oblasts, it lacks capacity to coordinate implementation of reforms on the ground.
By building the Ministry`s coordination and implementation capacity, the Grant would help establish sound
implementation framework for the Project including an efficient feedback mechanism with the beneficiary
oblasts.

The Grant activities would support concerned oblasts in finalizing the subproject proposals such that they are
ready to implement when the Project starts. Furthermore, the Grant would contribute to shaping up
cross-cutting policies that underpin health reforms and to establishing a proper coordination of oblast level
activities as well as implementation with the relevant capacity building. The outputs of the Grant would build
a basis to jumpstart implementation of the Project.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The proposed Grant activities would be implemented in the city of Kyyv and in 11 oblasts of Ukraine, namely
Poltava, Dnipropetrovsk, Luhansk, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia, AR of Crimea, Lviv, Volyn, Rivne, Zakarpattia
and Vinnitsa.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Support under this Grant would be limited to technical assistance and analysis to prepare the new Oblast
Health Systems Reform Project. As the proposed new Project triggers the Environmental Assessment OP/BP
4.01 this safeguard policy is triggered for this proposed Grant.

The Ministry of Health (MoH) is the implementing agency for the Grant. Although MoH has been involved in
the implementation of one Bank-supported operation in the past, it does not have experience in the application
of safeguards policies. The Bank team discussed with the MoH institutional arrangements to close the gap in
human capacity for safeguards application for the new Project and the proposed Grant. It was agreed, that for
the Grant would contribute to building an environmental safeguards capacity in the MoH and would finance
activities to identify potential environmental impacts of the sub-projects to enable participating oblasts to
define appropriate mitigation measures and to develop environmental documents.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Mr Alexei Slenzak, Senior Operations Officer, (ECSEN) contributed to preparing the P144893 ISDS at the
concept stage.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01         Yes       Component 2 of the Project, whose preparation
                                                       is supported by this Grant will support
                                                       rehabilitation of health facilities. At the
                                                       concept stage the Project supported by the
                                                       Grant is classified as Category B. As OP/BP
                                                       4.01 is triggered for the Project this safeguard
                                                       policy is triggered for this Grant too. It is
                                                       expected that most of the sub-projects will be
                                                       Environmental Category C (e.g. procurement
                                                       of medical equipment, small-scale works on
                                                       renovation, rehabilitation and reconstruction of
                                                       existing premises). However, depending on the
                                                       scope and location of possible new
                                                       construction of primary health centers, and
                                                       sub-projects involving oblast hospitals, these
                                                       sub-projects may require Environmental
                                                       Category B. Environmental Category of the
                                                       project and requirements regarding
                                                       environmental documentation will be
                                                       determined at Project appraisal stage. The
                                                       proposed Grant would finance activities to
                                                       identify potential environmental impacts of the
                                                       sub-projects to enable participating oblasts to
                                                       define appropriate mitigation measures and to
                                                       develop environmental documents such as
                                                       EMP and/or EMP Checklist. These outputs
                                                       would be summarized in the respective section
                                                       of the Operational Manual of the Project.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No
 Pest Management OP 4.09                     No
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      No
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               No
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         No        It is expected that the Project whose
                                                       preparation is supported by the proposed Grant
                                                       might have minor new construction of the
                                                       health centers. However at this stage it is not
                                                       clear whether and where it might happen. Any
                                                       projects requiring physical and economic
                                                       displacement will be strictly avoided.
                                                       The borrower's team will be duly informed on
                                                       the provisions of the OP4.12 and on the
                                                       consequences of non-compliance.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No
 Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                      No
 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                          No

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

 A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
     June 2014.
 B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
    specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
     The environmental assessment for the new Project supported by this proposed Grant would be finalized by
     June 2014. The environmental safeguards section of the Operational Manual for the new Project will be
     developed under the Grant by August 2014. The safeguard-related documents developed for the Project
     will be disclosed before appraisal at the InfoShop and within Ukraine at publicly accessible locations.

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:                             Name: Paolo Belli
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:              Name: John R. Butler                                    Date: 09/18/2013
 Sector Manager:                               Name: Daniel Dulitzky                                   Date: 09/18/2013
 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop
 and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
