                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/21/2011                                   Report No.: AC6378
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Uruguay                               Project ID: P124181
Project Name: Sustainable Management of Natural Resources and Climate Change
Task Team Leader: Ayat Soliman
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 16,        Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Climate change (40%);Other environment and natural resources management
(40%);Other rural development (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            49.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       6.00
                                                                        6.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objective of the project is to support GOU efforts to promote farmer
adoption of improved environmentally sustainable agricultural and livestock practices
that are climate smart. This objective would be achieved through the development and
implementation of instruments that would provide farmers with critical and timely
information for the adoption of improved on-farm natural resources management as well
as technical and financial assistance to promote investments in their production systems
aimed at reducing risks and making them more resilient to extreme climatic events.

3. Project Description
MGAP is promoting an innovative approach to management of natural resources and
reduced impact of climate variability in agriculture while improving agricultural
competitiveness. Without such integrated approach, climate change and the
anthropogenic impacts on the country#s natural resources could result in accelerated
degradation. The project intends to make agriculture in Uruguay more productive and
more sustainable as a key to achieve a #green growth# path and contribute to its climate
change adaptation and mitigation priorities. The proposed components would support
policies and actions that make the environment a potential source of growth from
efficiency, innovation, and resilience to climate variability and change. In addition, the
proposed project will support the deployment of a #Climate Smart Agriculture#
approach, which is a core component of such growth, by promoting agricultural systems
that can enhance productivity, improve sustainable development and resilience, and
support low carbon growth. The Project will undertake a holistic landscape approach to
land and water management, forestry, pastures, livestock, ecosystem services and
adaptation to climate change. Accordingly, the project will represent a pioneering pilot
approach and a unique opportunity to disseminate lessons and share country experiences
and information on emerging applications in the areas of climate-smart agriculture and
risk management in the Latin America region.

 The project objective would be achieved through the following four components:

  Component 1 # Establishment of an Agricultural Information and Decision Support
System (IDSS) (Total cost $6.5 million of which $5.2m would be financed by IBRD and
the balance by GOU). This component would finance the creation of an online agriculture
and climate information platform, namely the Agricultural Information and Decision
Support System (IDSS) that will integrate, synthesize, and generate critical and timely
information in relation to natural resource management, short and medium term climate
forecast as well as potential long term changes and impacts. Key outcomes of this
component are: a) integrated climate and agriculture information and decision support
systems accessible to different users; b) expanded overall sector information to enable
MGAP to improve the targeting of its future programs, including activities financed
under Component 2 of the project; c) identification of vulnerabilities and potential
opportunities for natural resources management and agricultural production systems due
to climate variability; d) quantification of uncertainties in climate information to increase
confidence in the use of that information; e) identification of technologies and
methodologies that enhance the outcomes of on-farm investments and reduce
vulnerabilities to extreme climatic events; f) wider use of insurance to cover climatic
risks; g) identification of climate smart interventions and best practices, and h) improved
exchange of Uruguayan experience related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
measures with other countries, mainly through South-South exchanges.

 Component 2 # On Farm Investments for #Climate-Smart# Agriculture and Livestock
Management (Total cost $32.2 million of which $30.9 million would be financed by
IBRD, and $1.3 million by counterpart funds. This component would be implemented by
MGAP#s Rural Development Directorate (DGDR) and would finance demand-driven
subprojects presented by family producers and medium-size farmers, with emphasis on
on-farm investment proposals that would: a) reduce farm vulnerability to extreme
climatic events; b) improve farm productivity and sustainability; c) increase the
availability of water resources for irrigation and livestock consumption; d) promote
adoption of an integrated approach to natural resources management practices in
agriculture and livestock production systems, including improved water use efficiency
and generation of biodiversity benefits in natural pastures; and e) promote the adoption of
energy efficiency measures and the generation of cost effective and clean biomass energy
in the agriculture sector. A comprehensive set of beneficiary and subproject eligibility
criteria to screen investment proposals have been developed and included in the Project
Manual, a condition for Negotiations. In addition to technical assistance, the project
would provide training to farmers, regardless of their size, and to rural workers engaged
in natural resources management activities. Farmers# organization would receive
institutional strengthening to enhance their capabilities to assist their membership in the
implementation of natural resources management and climate change adaptation and
mitigation activities. Key outcomes of this component are: (i) the adoption of integrated
natural resources management practices and adaptation measures, with particular
emphasis on increased on-farm availability of water and improved water resources
management, to improve the long-term sustainability of farmers# production systems as
well as their resilience to extreme climatic events; (ii) the implementation of pilot
investments aimed at mitigating emissions and increasing utilization of biomass for
energy generation; and (iii) by promoting investments that internalize the extreme
climatic variability, the project would minimize long term costs, enhance farm
productivity, and reduce overall vulnerability.

 Component 3 # Capacity Building and Training (Total cost of $11.1 million, of which
$9.3 million would be financed by IBRD and $1.8 million by GOU). This component
would finance activities aimed at strengthening the capacity of farmers to address
integrated natural resource and water management approaches, as well as the institutional
capacity of MGAP, specifically of its Natural Resources Directorate (RENARE), to
implement its natural resources management programs and climate change strategy in the
agricultural sector. Key outcomes of this component are: a) The development and
utilization of modern cartographic information integrated climate and agriculture
information and decision support systems accessible to different users; b) the updating of
the country#s soil use maps; c) The improvement and integration of the existing GIS
system in RENARE, as a critical element of the ISDS, together with the cartography and
soil information to be developed; d) the adoption of modern methodologies for planning
of land use at the farm level; e) the development of an improved policy framework for
water resources management; and f) a comprehensive training program for producers and
service providers on sustainable techniques for improved soil and water management.

 Component 4 # Project Management and M&E (Total cost of $4.1million, of which
$3.6m would be financed by IBRD and $1.2 million would be financed by GOU). This
component would provide the funds required for the efficient coordination and
management of the project, including the implementation of the entire subproject cycle,
as well as financial management and procurement, In addition, the component would
include activities that cut across all project components, including the operation of the
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System, the organization of the training program
described in Component 3, and the design and implementation of a communication
strategy to disseminate results and lessons learned within the country and the region.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The entire country, as proposals for potential sub-projects could be received from all rural
areas of the country. However, based on the current geographical distribution of the main
production systems, and the relative levels of climatic vulnerability, the project would be
implemented with emphasis in the northern and north/central regions of the country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Angel Alberto Yanosky (ECSS1)
   Ms Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project is not expected to have any negative impact on the environment. No
large or significant impact is envisaged. Given the nature of the proposed project, most
project-financed interventions are expected to be small investments at the farm level,
with a substantial positive impact on the environment as a result of better practices on
natural resource management being incorporated into the main production systems,
especially on-farm soil and water management.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Due to the fact that improved natural resources management is a key outcome of the
project, potential indirect and/or long-term impacts would be positive.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Given the nature of the project, no alternatives relevant to safeguards were considered.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In the context of a comprehensive ESMP prepared as part of project preparation, a
detailed assessment of environmental and social aspects was conducted, resulting in
specific sections of a detailed Project Manual, that includes environmental screening
procedures, provisions to address exceptional cases that could involve unforeseen
safeguard issues, a restrictive list of investments not financed by the project, training
activities, and an M&E system that includes indicators and targets relevant to safeguards.
  As part of the implementation of the ongoing Bank-financed project, the PEU, as well as
the Natural Resources Management staff of MGAPs Regional Offices, have received
training in EIA methodology and other safeguard-related matters, and therefore are well
qualified to contract environmental specialist to assist in various phases of the sub-project
cycle. MGAPs capacity in GIS and EIA would continue to be strengthened, and an
adequately staffed PEU would be established to support MGAP in project
implementation, including safeguards.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are Uruguay#s family and medium farmers. The main project features,
including eligibility criteria, investments to be supported and restricted, and screening
/mitigation mechanisms were presented and extensively discussed with individual
farmers, area- and production-based farmer organizations, service providers, as well as
social entities (NGOs, Mesas de Desarrollo Rural) through an extensive consultation
process, mainly supported by the network established by MGAP#s Directorate of Rural
Development (DGDR) and the highly decentralized structure of the ongoing PPR project.
The feedback obtained was duly processed, incorporated into project design, and
reflected in the Project Manual.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/31/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/12/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/19/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Ayat Soliman            09/15/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Angel Alberto Yanosky   09/14/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Angel Alberto Yanosky   09/14/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Lilian Pedersen         09/14/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan         09/15/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Ethel Sennhauser        09/15/2011
  Comments:
