                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6112


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/10/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Uruguay                              Project ID: P118064
Project Name: OSE Response to Climate Change
Task Team Leader: Carlos E. Velez
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17,         Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: LCSUW                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
Theme: Climate change (50%);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (25%);Water
resource management (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            60.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       40.00
                                                                       40.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objective is to support OSE's adaption to climate change by increasing
the resilience of existing and future water supply and sanitation systems.

 The preliminary PDO indicators (values to be determined during preparation) are: (i) OSE has
institutionalized and is implementing a climate change strategy; (ii) OSE has increased its
volume of reliable potable water.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project is based on OSE's need for a holistic approach to respond to climate
change, through looking at adaptation and mitigation measures along a spectrum of
engagements. These engagements include investments in water supply and sanitation systems,
monitoring and planning, and stakeholder involvement. The project also focuses on institutional
and public engagement, as well as knowledge-based activities to strengthen local capacities and
enable sustainability. The investment loan would be centered on strengthening OSE's ability to
adapt to climate change by reducing water supply and sanitation vulnerability while contributing
to the nation's mitigation efforts to reduce green house gasses (GHGs).To that end, OSE will
apply a disaster risk management approach combining climate change science with local
conditions to assess existing systems and new infrastructure investments.

 Considering the project's climate change optic, the new investment loan is more appropriate
than to continue implementing the APL. However, the proposed project will draw from the APL
institutional renewal and unaccounted for water programs, consolidating OSE's modernization
objectives. The total cost of the proposed project has been estimated at US$100 million and the
World Bank loan has been tentatively set at around US$60 million. A brief description of the
components follows:

 Component one - Investing in Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation Measures (about
US$50 million). This component would finance short-term measures (also known as the no
regrets) to improve efficiency and increase resilience of water and sanitation systems. The
proposed actions include: (i) construction and rehabilitation of water treatment plants (WTP)
affected by floods; (ii) optimization of wastewater systems; (iii) optimization of groundwater
extraction systems; (iv) equipment renewal and rehabilitation; and (v) reduction of non-revenue
water. In addition, this component includes adoption of measures to help mitigate the onset of
climate change by reducing energy consumption that contributes to the production of GHGs.

  Component two - Institutionalizing Climate Change into OSE's service management and
operations (about US$25 million). This component would support incorporating climate change
into OSE's planning program by financing the development of a strategy with short and long-
term actions based on vulnerability assessments and cost-benefit analysis, including water
demand management, water reuse, and training of OSE's staff. This component includes
financing for climate change modeling and hydro-meteorological equipment, development of
climate change indicators, and instruments to assist OSE's public communication efforts and
management's decision-making process.

 Component three - Integrated Watershed Management in the Santa Lucia Watershed and the
Sauce Lagoon (about US$18 million). This component would finance the carrying out of
integrated plans, in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fishery
(MGAP), the Ministry of Industry, Energy and Mining (MIEM), MVOTMA, the Laguna del
Sauce Watershed Commission, and other key stakeholders, to support the environmental
sustainability of these water bodies that are Uruguayan's main water source.

 Component four - OSE as a Climate Change Observatory for South-South Knowledge
Collaboration (about US$5 million). This component would finance technical assistance to
document and disseminate best practices and lessons learned from preparing and implementing
the project, as well as a series of south-south and north-south exchanges (conferences,
workshops, field visits, etc) to strengthen OSE and other urban utilities in the region to undertake
climate change. Throughout the implementation of this project and with the support of the Bank
knowledge platform, OSE is well-positioned to facilitate knowledge exchange and disseminate
best practices on climate change adaptation and mitigation not only to national and local
government institutions, but also to the Latin American water utility community.
 Component five - Project Management (about US$2 million). This component would provide
funding for project management, supervision and engineering support, staff exchanges, seminars
and audits. The current APL2 Project Implementation Unit (Gerencia de Programas con
Financiamiento Externo, PFE) will remain in charge of coordinating all external financing,
including project implementation.

D. Project location (if known)
Activities in Component 2 and 4 cover the entire country, and Component 3 covers the Santa
Lucia and La Laguna del Sauce watersheds. The water and sanitation works included in
Component 1 will be conducted in Montevideo and the interior, and specific locations will be
identified during project preparation. Component 1 also includes the construction of four new
water treatment plants in the cities of Durazno, Melo, Treinta y Tres, and Mercedes.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The proposed project will be implemented by OSE through the Gerencia de Programas con
Financiamiento Externo (PFE), OSE's unit in charge of managing projects financed by
Multilateral Development Banks, keeping the same institutional arrangement for the completed
first phase APL (APL1) and the ongoing second phase (APL2). Social and environmental
safeguards will be managed by the social and environmental units within OSE in close
coordination with the PFE. These two units were created during the implementation of APL1,
and they have been further strengthened through support and close monitoring of OSE during the
implementation of APL2. The valuable experience gained during the APL Modernization project
will be taken into account in the preparation of this operation.

 OSE has a solid track record in Bank-financed projects and has the necessary resources, both
human and financial, and adequate processes in place. The APL2 is running smoothly with
satisfactory marks on procurement, fiduciary, and safeguards aspects. In addition, OSE has
received satisfactory ratings in the APL2 QALP-2 and the APL1 ICR.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Carmen Rosa Yee-Batista (LCSUW)
   Mr Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
     The physical interventions foreseen in the project are included in Component 1 and refer to
(i) the construction and rehabilitation of water treatment plants; (ii) equipment rehabilitation and
repairs for the Aguas Corrientes WTP and other water systems in the interior of the country; (iii)
replacement of water distribution pipes, meters, and valves under the non revenue water
program; and (iv) extension of sewage networks and household connections.

     Four water treatment plants will be constructed under this project to replace the ones that
were affected by floods. A water plant in the city of Durazno will be constructed with a design
capacity of 700 m3/h to serve a population of about 50,000 people. This plant will be built in a
disturbed suburban area of the city where natural habitats are not found. The other water
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                    Yes         No        TBD
treatment plants in Mercedes (700 m3/h), Treinta y Tres (450 m3/h), and Melo (850 m3/h), will
be constructed in their existing sites, which are owned by OSE.

     The project will finance minor extensions to the sewerage networks and household
connections to optimize the wastewater systems in selected cities. These sub-projects will be
selected during project preparation based on the same environmental criteria used in the APL
requiring that no sewage work will take place in non-urban areas, sensitive or protected areas
with tangible cultural resources and that the additional sewage will be conveyed to wastewater
treatment plants with sufficient capacity to cope with the planned extension.

     No major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated with this project as works will be
conducted on disturbed land where sensitive natural habitats and cultural resources have not been
found. As in the APL, impacts are considered site-specific and reversible in nature for which
mitigatory measures will be applied. Based on the nature of the works, which are similar to the
APL Category B project, this project is classified as Category B requiring a partial
environmental assessment (EA) in accordance with the World Bank's Environmental and Social
Safeguards Policies. To comply with Bank policy, OSE will prepare an EA that will: (i) ensure
compliance with national laws; (ii) evaluate the existing environmental management plan (EMP),
which includes a construction manual, for the APL2 with specific recommendations for
improvements to be considered in this operation; (iii) identify and assess the potential
environmental impacts of each specific sub-projects; (iv) analyze alternatives; and (v) design
appropriate mitigation, management, and monitoring measures. A recipient executed SFLAC
grant will support the EA preparation.

     The other components involve institutional development, training, and capacity building
activities, such as the development of climate change strategies and integrated watershed
management plans aiming at improving water quality of two OSE's water sources. The studies
will evaluate the benefits and potential adverse environmental impacts, as well as mitigation
measures when evaluating and recommending actions.

     OSE will conduct public consultations with project-affected groups, government
representatives, universities, and local NGOs at least twice during the EA process. The EA will
document the results of the consultations and will take into account the participant's views. The
EA terms of reference and draft EA will be disclosed in the OSE website and the Infoshop. In
addition, outreach activities through the social and communication units provide opportunities to
disseminate the project to the public.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                        X
    Preliminary assessments of the water and sanitation works indicate that natural habitats will
not be affected by the project. This will be closely screened and clearly documented in the EA.
     However, the integrated watershed studies for the Santa Lucia and Laguna del Sauce
watersheds may include natural habitats considerations that will need to be evaluated when
preparing such studies.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
    The project will not support management of forest.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No         TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
    This safeguard does not apply as the project does not require the purchase, application or
storage of pesticides and will not lead to an increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
    Experience in Uruguay gained during previous Bank-projects has led the team to conclude
that excavation and building processes should not uncover any physical cultural resources
(PCR). Nevertheless, during project preparation eligible sites will be screened for potential PCR
by consulting the Cultural Heritage Commission for the Nation, and "chance find procedures" for
PCR will be included in the EMP to safeguard against potentially impacting physical cultural
property while undertaking these works.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
    This safeguard does not apply as indigenous peoples, as defined by the four required
characteristics in OP4.10, are not present.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    Preliminary assessments indicate that there will not be involuntary resettlement. However,
land acquisition of an identified private lot is required for the construction of the Durazno WTP.
This will require a subproject-specific Resettlement Action Plan. In addition, land acquisition
and easements may still be required for other water and sanitation works; therefore, a
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared to guide the resettlement process if this
becomes necessary.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
    The project will not trigger OP/BP 7.50. This is because: (i) the water treatment plants that
will be reconstructed will use the same water sources as their predecessors, which are not
international waters; and (ii) no new wastewater treatment plants will be built. Although sewer
networks and household connections will be constructed to connect to existing wastewater plants
with sufficient capacity to handle the additional load, the plant effluents will not be discharging
to international waters.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 10/31/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The EA and the RAP framework will be completed at least 10 days before the Decision
   Meeting.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Carlos E. Velez                                             04/14/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             04/14/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Guang Zhe Chen                                              04/22/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
