                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/15/2011                           Report No.: 64675
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Oriental Republic of Uruguay           Project ID: P123461
Project Name: UY Institutions Building Technical Assistance Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Amparo Ballivian
Estimated Appraisal Date: Oct. 1, 2011          Estimated Board Date: Dec. 6, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSPS                            Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                                Loan
Sector: General public administration sector (100%)
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Tax policy and
administration (S); Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            10.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.0
                                                                         0.0
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                           Simple []          Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)        Yes [ ]      No [X]

2. Project Objectives
The objective is to improve the Borrower’s public sector performance by: (i) supporting
its public sector modernization program in the areas of monitoring and evaluation,
performance-based budgeting, e-government, tax administration and statistics; and (ii)
strengthening its institutions involved with the design and implementation of public
policy reforms in the areas of taxation, promotion of the business environment, and social
protections.

3. Project Description
The proposed additional financing would help finance the costs associated with a scale-
up of a well performing project in order to enhance its development impact. This will be
achieved through: (i) increasing financing for four components to expand their original
coverage; (ii) adding two components; (iii) slightly adjusting the PDOs to reflect the
changes made to the original components and the inclusion of the two new components;
and (iv) and the revision or elimination of a few activities envisioned in the original
Legal Agreement, which are no longer relevant; and (v) adjusting the project’s results
framework to reflect the identification of a few data limitations, the modifications of the
original components, and the inclusion of new components. Furthermore, the additional
financing will help continue to provide technical assistance to the DPL series on Public
Sector Competitiveness and Social Inclusion, especially in the areas of fiscal reform,
capital markets, and the social information system, SIIAS.

Four original components would receive additional financing: (i) Component 2—
Improving M&E; (ii) Component 4(b)—Support for Institutional Strengthening and
Implementation of Social Protection Reforms; (iii) Component 5.b—Supporting
Corporate Transparency; and (iv) Component 7—Project Coordination and Strategy
Development. Component 2, Improving M&E, would receive US$1 million in additional
funds to begin work on second generation improvements on M&E, focused on increasing
transparency and dissemination of M&E results, supporting rapid evaluations of priority
Government interventions, building capacity for the evaluation of public sector projects,
programs, and policies, and finally designing and implementing impact evaluations.
Component 4b, Support for Institutional Strengthening and Implementation of Social
Protection Reforms, would receive an additional US$1.1 million to fund SIIAS, the
Integrated Social Information System, to increase institutional coverage of social
programs, fund analytical surveys, and provide further institutional strengthening.
Component 5.b, Supporting Corporate Transparency, would receive US$500,000 in
additional funds to strengthen the National Internal Audit (AIN by its Spanish acronym),
centered on the implementation of XBRL, which is a new taxonomy for the digital
communication of financial information to the Registry of Financial Statements (REC by
its Spanish acronym). Finally, Component 7, Support for the Project Coordination and
Strategy Development, would also receive an additional US$3 million in funds to
continue to provide just in time support for carrying out studies and other consultancies
related to Project coordination and strategic development that are proposed by the
Borrower and approved by the Bank.

The two additional components would be Component 8—Supporting Selected
Modernization Efforts of National Tax Directory and Component 9—Supporting
Institutional Strengthening of the National Statistics Institute. Component 8, Supporting
the Directorate of Taxation (DGI by its Spanish acronym), would receive US$3 million to
strengthen tax compliance and risk management at DGI and to support the development
of software for managing electronic accounting, its dissemination and customer support,
aimed at increasing electronic filing (e-filing) and, indirectly, improving tax controls.
Component 9—Supporting the National Statistics Institute (INE by its Spanish acronym),
would receive US$1.4 million, to support institutional strengthening, support for the
coordination of a poverty measurement working group of the Latin American and
Caribbean Economic Association (LACEA), the design and deployment of a panel survey
of the most vulnerable population, and the house income and expenditure survey.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project is located in Montevideo, Uruguay. No infrastructure works or related
activities will be financed by the Project. There are no physical characteristics relevant to
the safeguard analysis.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                   X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
impacts:

The original project (P097604, Loan 7451-UR), was classified as Category C. While
there were no safeguards triggered by the original project, some of the envisaged studies
and consultancies under Component 7.c (Studies and Other Consultancies) of the
additional financing may have some downstream social and environmental implications
through future programs or projects.

Studies and consultancies already financed under Component 7.c (Studies and Other
Consultancies) of the original project have been analyzed, with particularly close
attention to the private public partnerships law and updating of the methodology for
evaluation of the cadastre system. No safeguard issues have been identified.

The new studies and consultancies to be financed under Component 7.c (Studies and
Other Consultancies), which may involve drafting of policies or regulations with
potential environmental and social effects, will be confirmed once their nature and scope
are defined during implementation of the project. The Bank will review the terms of
reference (TORs) for these future activities and comment, if applicable. The TORs will
include a standard section asking consultants to identify any potential social or
environmental downstream implications of their work or the implementation of their
recommendations.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the project area:

Component 7 (Support for Project Coordination and Strategy Development) is not
expected to finance any activity with potential indirect or long term impacts due to
anticipated future activities in the project area. As described above, TORs for studies and
other consultancies financed under Component 7 (Support for Project Coordination and
Strategy Development) will be reviewed to ensure activities defined during
implementation do not have indirect or long term safeguard implications.


3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or
minimize adverse impacts.

Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
described.

The Ministry of Economy and Finance, as the implementing agency, will be in charge of
the environmental and social management of relevant activities of the Project as
described in previous sections. In cases where potential implications are identified, the
adequate environmental and social expertise will be contracted to ensure proper
consideration of safeguards issues within the study or task. This process will be backed
up by the Bank’s review of each TOR.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

This ISDS will be disclosed in country and also through the InfoShop. It is expected that
publication of this ISDS reach key stakeholders of relevant activities of Component 7
(Support for Project Coordination and Strategy Development), which include government
and non government actors throughout Uruguay, and will vary depending on the nature of
the study and consultancies.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s             Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a             Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies


  Appropriate time and budget have been allocated for the safeguards
  assessment of this project. Institutional responsibilities have been defined for
  the implementation stage, as described above, for both the Bank and the
  Borrower.


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                              Date
Task Team Leader:                   Amparo Ballivian                                 9/15/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist       Graciela Sánchez Martínez                          9/15/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Arturo Herrera.                                    9/22/2011
  Comments:
