                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC5947


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/15/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Uruguay                               Project ID: P124181
Project Name: Sustainable Management of Natural Resources and Climate Change
Task Team Leader: Ayat Soliman
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 16,        Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: LCSAR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Climate change (40%);Other environment and natural resources management
(40%);Other rural development (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            49.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                        10.00
                                                                        10.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The development objective of the project is to make investments in agriculture and livestock
production systems environmentally sustainable and resilient to climate variability while
reducing GHG emissions from the sector. The objective would be achieved through developing
instruments that would provide critical and timely information, as well as technical and financial
assistance, to farmers in order to promote investments in their production systems aimed at
reducing risks and making them more resilient to extreme climatic events.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
To further the success of the Integrated Natural Resources and Biodiversity Management Project
(PPR) and expand the government#s natural resources and rural development programs that are
consistent with the national climate change strategies, the GoU has promoted an integrated
approach to management of natural resources and agriculture. Without such integrated approach,
the climate change and anthropogenic impacts on some of the critical ecosystems of the country
could result in accelerated deterioration. To address these potential impacts and reduce its carbon
footprint, the government, through MGAP, is in the process of designing and implementing an
innovative and integrated set of measures and programs. In this context, the Ministry has
requested World Bank assistance to prepare and implement the proposed project to contribute to
its climate change mitigation and adaptation programs.

 Based on the successful experience of the ongoing PPR, the project would provide technical
and financial assistance to demand-driven investment subprojects aimed at reducing the
vulnerability and increasing the long-term sustainability of agricultural and livestock production,
with particular emphasis on the needs of medium- and small-sized farmers. The project would
incorporate also specific support for the development of innovative public instruments to
improve information systems for planning and decision making, as well as supporting private
sector investments to mitigate emissions, increase utilization of biomass for energy generation,
and improve overall resilience to climate variability at the farm level.

  The proposed project would be funded by a Bank loan of US$48.0 million, Government
counterpart funds, beneficiaries# contributions, and a partial blended contribution of GEF funds
(from Climate Change and Land Degradation focal areas). GEF contribution would enhance the
project#s possibilities of achieving the potentially significant global environmental benefits in
terms of GHG (CO2) emission reductions from adopting energy efficiency measures and
investments in biomass energy.

 The project would represent one element of an integrated results-oriented approach that would
also include Bank assistance to MGAP to access other possible sources of bilateral and
multilateral financing for climate change (such as GEF and the Adaptation Fund, for which
Government is preparing an application) as well as analytical support, technical assistance, and
collaboration with MGAP regarding dissemination of experiences, organization of conferences,
and participation in international events related to climate change. The project objective would
be achieved through the following four components:

 Component 1 # Establishment of an Agricultural Information and Decision Support System
(Total cost $7.10m of which $5.0m would be financed by IBRD, and the balance by the GoU ).
This component would finance the generation of critical and timely information to predict
climatic events and their potential impacts, which would be used by decision makers and farmers
to adopt climate resilient investments and practices. The aim of this component is to facilitate: a)
the assessment of the risks involved in different production systems, using different technologies
and under different climate conditions; and b) simulation and evaluation of the expected impacts
of introducing different adaptation policies. The same Information and Decision Support System
(IDSS) will also provide critical information to farmers, advisory service providers, and rural
insurance/rural credit organizations to assess climate related risks and to evaluate the expected
impacts of establishing different resilient investment and decisions. Some of the key outcomes of
this component are: a) identification of vulnerabilities and potential opportunities due to climate
variability for natural resources management and agricultural production systems; b)
quantification of uncertainties in climate information to increases confidence in the use of that
information; c) identification of technologies and methodologies that enhance the outcomes of on
farm investments and reduce vulnerabilities to extreme climatic events; and d) identification of
interventions and best practices.
  Component 2 # On Farm Investments for Agriculture and Livestock Management (Total cost
$49.50m of which $32.0m would be financed by IBRD, $2.6m could be financed by GEF, $8.0m
would be financed by beneficiaries and the $6.9m by the GoU). This component would finance
demand-driven subprojects with emphasis on investments that would: a) reduce farm
vulnerability to extreme climatic events; b) strengthen farm productivity; c) integrate natural
resources management practices in agriculture and livestock production systems,including
generating biodiversity benefits, particularly in natural pastures; and d) reduce GHG emissions
from the agriculture sector. Lessons learned from and pilot activities financed under the
Integrated Natural Resources and Biodiversity Management project (PPR) would provide a solid
baseline for the implementation of this component including replication of some of the
successful on-farm investments. A set of eligibility criteria would be developed in a consultative
process to screen demand driven investment proposals for project financing. During project
preparation, once Government negotiations with GEF and the Adaptation Fund are finalized, the
above criteria would include measures to ensure that co-financing from different sources of
funds is utilized to generate specific benefits. Key outcomes of this component are: (i) the
adoption of integrated natural resources management practices and adaptation measures (e.g.
improved water resources management) that would generate global environment benefits, while
improving the long-term sustainability of farmers# production systems; (ii) through support to
the adoption of sustainable natural resources management and biodiversity conservation, the
proposed project contributes also to GOU#s Biodiversity Strategy (iii) a reduction in GHG
emission through investment in energy efficiency measures as well as in generation of cost
effective and clean biomass energy; (iv) adoption of mitigation measures that would reduce
farmers# energy consumptions from conventional sources of energy, thus reducing their
production costs and potentially generate additional income through the sale of surplus
electricity; and (v) by promoting investments that internalize the extreme climatic variability, the
project would minimize long term costs, enhance farm productivity, and reduce overall
vulnerability.
  Component 3 # Capacity Building (Total cost is $4.0m of which $2.0m would be financed by
IBRD, $1.0m could tentatively be financed by GEF and $1.0m would be financed by the GoU).
This component would finance activities aimed at strengthening institutional capacity of public
institutions involved in the implementation of natural resources management and the climate
change strategy in the agricultural sector, with particular emphasis on staff of MGAP,
MVOTMA (DINAMA) and MIEM. The project would assist also staff of these ministries with
the dissemination of experiences, organization of conferences, and participation in international
events related to climate change. Under this component, the project would provide also
analytical support and technical assistance to MGAP for the design and implementation of a
mechanism to disseminate the Uruguayan experience related to climate change mitigation and
adaptation measures and share their knowledge with other countries through South-South
exchanges. The activities envisaged under this component would contribute to the successful
execution of the proposed project as well as an improved overall implementation of the National
Plan of Response to Climate Change in agriculture.

  Component 4 # Project Management and M&E (Total cost is $2.4m of which $1.0m would be
financed by IBRD, $0.4m could tentatively be financed by GEF, $1.0m is expected be financed
by the GoU). This component would provide the funds required for the successful coordination
and administration of the project (both within MGAP and with other participating agencies), the
implementation of the entire subproject cycle, the operation of the project#s Monitoring and
Evaluation System, and the design and implementation of a communication strategy to
disseminate results and lessons learned within the country and the region.

D. Project location (if known)
The entire country as proposals for potential sub-projects could be received from all parts of the
country.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The PEU as well as the Regional Natural Resources Management Offices of MGAP have
received training in EIA methodology and therefore is in a position to contract environmental
specialist to assist in various phases in the sub-project cycle. The DSAs capacity in GIS and EIA
would continue to be strengthened. DINAMA and DNH are fully qualified to handle the projects
environmental requirements.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Angel Alberto Yanosky (ECSS1)
   Ms Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
    Environmental category. The types of sub-projects to be funded as part of the project are
expected to have an overall positive impact and are not envisaged to lead to any significant
environmental and social impact. Thus, the Project has been given a Category B following the
Environmental Assessment safeguard policy (OP4.01).

     The approach proposed to sustainable integrated natural resource management, is based on
the successful experience over a ten-year period.

     A comprehensive operational manual was developed and improved during the
implementation of the ongoing project. This manual would represent the basis for defining the
procedures to be followed for subprojects, including eligibility criteria, financing, screening and
evaluation procedures, M&E, etc. The demand-driven system has worked already as
demonstrated by the lessons learned from the implementation of the PPR.

      The project would ensure effective environmental screening with introduction and
enforcement of mitigating measures. The design of the environmental impact assessment (EIA)
and procedures would be the same and were drawn from experience gained during past project
implementation of the Integrated Natural Resources Management and Biodiversity Conservation
Project. That experience has been thoroughly evaluated with respect to procedures used for
environmental assessment and the outcome in terms of resource management and demonstrates
significant improvement in the quality of land and water resources and evidence of no
environmental degradation attributable to project-funded activities. Nevertheless, the manual
will include a restrictive list that will specify activities which are ineligible for funding.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes           No          TBD
     All funding proposals from individual farmers or groups would be required to include a
statement on potential environmental consequences. All proposals would be screened by the
PEU on the basis of a #blacklist# (as detailed in the Operational Manual) prior to submission to
relevant government authorities. Based on specific content of individual proposals, when
appropriate the PIU would seek advice from specialized agencies for the review and approval of
subprojects. The PEU would be responsible for final design and supervision in execution of the
EIAs in accordance with DINAMA#s norms and consistent with the project#s environmental
assessment specifications.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                      X
    Although no project activities are envisaged in protected areas, given considerable
biodiversity exists on the lands of project beneficiaries, an assessment will be made during
preparation to determine if this safeguard is triggered.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                 X
    This Project will not involve forest areas. Therefore, this policy is not triggered
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                          X
    Although the previous project did not involve any activities or any financing related to pest
management, the proposed project could expand to address issues related to crop production that
could involve support to improved use of pesticides. This will be determined during project
preparation.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                             X
    The Project will undergo a general screening during preparation and before QER in order to
ensure that the eligibility criteria for potential sub-projects will exclude activities that could
affect physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                      X
    This Project will not involve indigenous peoples. Therefore, this policy is not triggered
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                X
    No resettlement associated with the activities to be funded is foreseen..
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                          X
    This Project will not involve dams. Therefore, this policy is not triggered
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                     X
    This project will not involve international waterways therefore, this policy is not trigerred
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                              X
    This Project will not include disputed areas. Therefore, this policy is not triggered


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 04/28/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   04/28/2011
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD stage ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Ayat Soliman                                                09/14/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             04/01/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Ethel Sennhauser                                            09/15/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
