                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/14/2013                                    Report No.: AC6886
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P118737                 Original Project Name: Energy Efficiency
                                             Facility for Industrial Enterprises
Country: Uzbekistan                          Project ID: P133633
Project Name: Additional Financing Energy Efficiency - Industrial Enterprises
Task Team Leader: Pekka Kalevi Salminen
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 21,       Estimated Board Date: April 25, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: ECSEG                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (80%);Climate change (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            100
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              53.13
         Financing Gap                                                    0.00
                                                                         53.13
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []             Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
Project Objectives. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is and will remain the
same: to improve energy efficiency in industrial enterprises by designing and establishing
a financing mechanism for energy efficiency investments in Uzbekistan.

3. Project Description
Project Description. The changes proposed under the additional financing include: (i)
increase of the current limit on individual sub-borrowers up to US$10 million while the
aggregate amount of sub-loans to the group of affiliated companies out of proceeds of the
Additional Financing shall not exceed US$30 million; (ii) a new closing date for the
Additional Financing, and (iii) The eligibility criteria concerning associated parties will
be revised to: (a) Industrial Enterprises (IEs) should not have more than 10% of shares in
the Participating Banks (PBs); and (b) PBs should not have more than 10% ownership
stake in the IEs. These limitations are in line with the prudential norms and terms of
Central Bank of Uzbekistan (CBU) regulations (No.556 dated February 27, 2009). The
proposed project would support the following components:

  a)    Component A (US$1 million) – scale up the strengthening the capacity of the
MoE and the PCU for Project management, coordinatio and monitoring and evaluation,
through the provision of goods, consultants' services and training, notably further energy
efficiency capacity building for industrial associations, local energy auditors, energy
specialists of the industrial enterprises, and financial intermediaries; post sub-projects
commissioning test on selective basis in order to ensure the sub-projects reach announced
EE; maintain the Project Coordinating Unit under the MoE to coordinate implementation
of the Additional Financing.
  b)    Component B (US$99 million) – operation of a credit facility for the Participating
Banks for the provision of Sub-loan(s) to Beneficiaries, enabling such Beneficiaries to
finance the costs related to the carrying out of industrial energy efficiency sub-projects.
Typical sub-projects include, inter alia: (i) installation of variable speed drives, (ii)
replacement of outdated boilers, (iii) installation of energy management systems, (iv)
recovery and utilization of exhausted gases via installation of the small steam turbines;
etc.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The subprojects location is not known as they will be selected during the project
implementation.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Roxanne Hakim (ECSSO)
   Mr Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
As specified above in point 3, the project will support various energy efficiency
subprojects: (i) installation of variable speed drives, (ii) replacement of outdated boilers,
(iii) installation of energy management systems, (iv) recovery and utilization of
exhausted gases via installation of the small steam turbines; etc. Typical environmental
impacts associated with these sub-projects might include: noise, dust and disposal of
nonhazardous wastes common to the installation of new equipment and possibly waste
management for the energy inefficient equipment being removed from service. There
may be some issues of combustion gas emissions associated with the installation of new
boilers, kilns or other types of heat treating equipment. On occasion there may be issues
of asbestos removal from older equipment that has been insulated. If high voltage
equipment is involved (replacement of transformers, induction furnaces etc.) there may
be some occupational health and safety aspects for workers in the presence of the older
equipment (electromagnetic fields or possibly PCBS) or in testing the newly installed
system. The anticipated adverse environmental impacts will occur mainly during the
construction stage and are likely to be site-specific and manageable. Also, as the
supported activities will be done within the boundaries of the existing industrial
enterprises, it is expected the project will not affect human populations or involve
conversion or degradation of natural habitats, or have a negative impact on forest
ecosystems.
  At the same time, the project would provide large environmental benefits in terms of
improvement of air quality, and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. The expected
outcomes from the activities to be supported with additional financing will be more than
twenty energy efficiency sub-projects with approximately 200 thousand megawatt hours
(MWh) of energy saving potential and about 400 thousand tons of CO2 emissions
reduction cumulatively.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project long term and indirect impacts are positive and related to better air quality at
the local level and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The original project has been classified as Category FI for environmental assessment
purposes and will remain the same for the proposed AF. The new sub-projects under AF
will be category B/C and will have predominantly positive impacts on the environment
and human health from decreased amount of fossil fuels burned resulting from enhanced
energy efficiency, and from reduced air pollution at the local level. As the nature of the
works proposed under the AF will not change, existing Environmental Management
Framework for the initial project will be applied also for the AF. Similarly, the there are
no changes to existing implementation arrangements. The conducted Bank missions in
April and September 2012 concluded overall the project environmental management
performance is at satisfactory level. The Participating Banks (PBs) have adequate
knowledge on EA process. All approved sub-projects have been preliminary assessed
from environmental point of view, providing them an environmental category. For all of
them the applicants filled out Environmental Eligibility Checklists, provided copies of
necessary documents specified in the Project Operational Manual and EMF:
environmental permits and approvals, monitoring reports, results of environmental
auditing, along with decisions issued by the State Ecological Expertise, regarding the
proposed investments. Visited industrial enterprises and discussions with the PBs and
enterprises' Management and Environmental Specialists as well as with the State
Environmental Inspectors, show that industrial enterprises do not have outstanding
environmental issues and operate based on required environmental authorizations,
licenses and permits.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The EMF for the initial project was disclosed in the country and in the WB Infoshop and
consulted with the key national stakeholders. For the selected subprojects the EMF
stipulates if a PB gets an application that is determined to be a World Bank Category B
project, at least one public consultation on the EMP will be required. The PB staff
responsible for safeguards have been trained how to instruct enterprises to conduct a
public consultation and prepare the associated documentation that would be required
according to World Bank guidelines.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/04/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/09/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/09/2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Pekka Kalevi Salminen   03/08/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Arcadii Capcelea        03/08/2013
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss           03/12/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Ranjit J. Lamech        03/13/2013
  Comments:
