                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/12/2012                                   Report No.: AC6814
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P113349                 Original Project Name: Health System
                                             Improvement Project
Country: Uzbekistan                          Project ID: P133187
Project Name: Additional Financing to Health System Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Susanna Hayrapetyan
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 13,       Estimated Board Date: March 21, 2013
2012
Managing Unit: ECSH1                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (88%);Public administration- Health (8%);Compulsory health finance
(4%)
Theme: Health system performance (50%);Other communicable diseases (28%);Child
health (16%);Injuries and non-communicable diseases (6%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             93
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
         Financing Gap                                                 0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The overall Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to (1) improve access to quality
health care at the primary level and at Rayon Medical Unions (RMUs) and selected City
Medical Unions (CMUs); and (2) strengthen the Government's public health response to
the rise in non-communicable diseases (NCD).

3. Project Description
The proposed AF would scale up some of the activities that already constitute the original
project as follows:

 Component 1: Improving Health Service Delivery
 Subcomponent 1.1: Hospital Service Improvement
 Finance an additional fifty-seven (57) RMUs and fifteen (15) CMUs with modern
diagnostic and waste management equipment and medical furniture, and training of
hospital managers and staff on functional hospital design, planning, and management.

 Subcomponent 1.2: Primary Health Care Development
 Expand activities aimed at improving skills and competencies of medical personnel in
early diagnosis, screening and treatment of priority NCDs, including provision of modern
medical equipment to an additional 95 central rayon outpatient clinics, 189 outpatient
General Practitioner (GP) departments within rayon and city outpatient clinics, 79 urban
family medicine policlinics, and 126 rural primary health care (PHC) facilities.

  Subcomponent 1.3: Clinical Quality Enhancement
  Support improvements in clinical quality at 57 additional RMUs and 15 CMUs through
on-site training of pediatric and internal medicine doctors and nurses in new clinical
treatment standards; training in clinical case management and hospital administration;
and establishment of quality improvement mechanisms to monitor implementation of the
new clinical treatment standards.

  Component 2: Strengthening Health Financing and Management Reforms
  Provide support for development of a health information system for the hospital
financing pilot in preparation for potential national level rollout, and expansion of the
training program for PHC facility managers in financial and health care management.

 Component 3: Institutional Strengthening on NCD Prevention and Control
 Support strengthening of capacity in the control and prevention of non-communicable
diseases by expanding surveillance and health promotion activities in selected regions in
preparation for national level rollout.

 Component 4: Project Management
 Strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Health (MOH), the Central Project
Implementation Bureau (CPIB), and the Regional Project Implementation Bureaus for
project management and implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
environmental management pursuant to the Environmental Management Framework
(EMF), and procurement and financial management (FM) through the provision of goods,
consultants' services, training, and incremental operating costs for the additional 24
months of implementation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will support an additional 57 RMUs and 15 CMUs with modern diagnostic
and waste management equipment and will provide training to hospital managers and
staff on infection control and waste management. There can be potential environmental
impacts if project activities are not well managed. As in the original project, World
Bank's Environmental OP 4.01 is triggered as Project would indirectly support
rehabilitation of health facilities financed by the Government budget. The project is
classified as Category B.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Roxanne Hakim (ECSSO)
   Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no large scale construction activities associated with this project. All activities
will be within the existing facilities and most of the activities will be of rehabilitation
works on existing hospital buildings. There could be a few small new constructions on
existing foot print which are not significant nor have irreversible environmental impacts.
The rehabilitation works are financed by government budget, not by the AF project.

 The AF will finance installation of solid waste management technologies, including
incinerators. Project activities related to installation and operation of waste management
equipment in existing health care facilities are expected to have localized and minor
environmental impacts. These include issues related to poor management and disposal of
construction waste, inefficient operations of waste management technologies which can
result in hazardous emissions, including heavy metals, mercury and Persistent Organic
Pollutants, primarily dioxins and furans. However effective mitigation measures and
well-managed operations can reduce the risks related to these environmental impacts and
their associated longer-term public health impacts.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
If construction activities linked to refurbishment and improvement (minor or large) are
properly managed and waste management technologies are operated according to
optimum requirements, there are no potential indirect or long term impacts foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
No project alternatives are considered as the project activities will be in existing
locations.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As in the original project, OP 4.01 is triggered because the Additional Financing will
support the installation of health care waste management treatment and disposal
equipment. The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared for the
original project which provides environmental management guidelines, including those
for health care waste management. Based on the EMF, a site-specific Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) is to be prepared prior to beginning construction at each site.
The same procedures will be adopted for sites to be upgraded using government budget
under the Additional Financing phase. Guidelines for proper operations and maintenance
of waste management equipment will be detailed and followed by beneficiary hospitals.
The EMF prepared under the original project detailed the monitoring methodology and
the respective agencies which will be responsible for monitoring. This format will also be
utilized for the proposed scaled up activities.
 The Government of Uzbekistan has updated the EMF to include mitigation measures
related procurement and installation of medical waste equipment, steps to be taken for
improving occupational health and safety measures and a detailed monitoring plan. The
EMF was disclosed in-country on the MOH's Web site on November 20, 2012 and on the
Bank's Infoshop on November 20, 2012.

  The AF does not finance any new construction of facilities. All refurbishment and
improvement will take place in existing facilities and will be financed by government
budget. There will be no land acquisition, relocation or any impacts on access to
resources or services. Correspondingly, OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement will not be
triggered for the AF. Project activities will target the rural poor, especially those in more
remote areas who have been identified as a vulnerable group with regard to access to
health care. This will be achieved by upgrading the lower end facilities used by these
groups such as outpatient departments and rayon hospitals, as well as improving
transparency in the system.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are hospital employees, patients and local population. Public
consultations were held during preparation of the main project and advertised in the
national newspapers. Participants included representatives of various medical institutions
of Tashkent city and regions of the Republic, State Sanitary and Epidemiological
services, State Nature Protection Committee and citizens of Tashkent. Site-specific
EMPs are shared by CPIB and consulted with local communities and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). A consultation plan has been developed to continuously engage
NGOs and communities on issues related to project activities. The same process will be
followed for sites to be rehabilitated by MOH using government budget under the
Additional Financing project period.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  11/15/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/20/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               12/04/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
n/a


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   No
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           No
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Susanna Hayrapetyan                       10/15/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Johnson Appavoo                           12/01/2010
Social Development Specialist       Ms Roxanne Hakim                             12/03/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Ruma Tavorath                             12/02/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Daniel P. Owen                            12/03/2012
  Comments: Disclosure prior to appraisal duly noted.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Daniel Dulitzky                           12/03/2012
  Comments:
