                                                                                                                                                                                 72279



                                                 INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                                          CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                                                          Report No.:


    Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 8/13/12

   l, BASIC INFORMATION

   A, Basic Project Data

    Country: Vanuatu                                            ProJect ID: P129376                                                                      ----_.-
   Project Name: Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction
   Task Team Leader: Michael Bonte..Grapentin
   Estimated Appraisal Date: nia                                Estimated Board Date: nia
   Managing Unit: EASNS                                         Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                                                Loan
   8ector: Flood protection 60%
           Gen agr/fisblfor sec 40%
   Theme: Climate change 50%
            Natural dis aster management 30%
             Other urban development 20%
. -IBRB-Am-ount·(l:JS$m;):·--------O;OO-·····. ·-······. -·······-_.................. _                                     ....._
                                                                                       . . -..--_.-.......... -.......---..._    .......... _.. _........-...... -.....................
   IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
   GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
   PCF Amount (U8$m.):               0.00
   Other financing amounts by source:
           Polic:l and Human Resource Develonment (PHRD)                                                                            3.00
                                                                                                                                    3.00


   B. Project Objectives. [from section 2 ofPCN]
   The overall goal of the program is to strengthen urban planning and tsunami preparedness in the
   main urban areas of Vanuatu.

   C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
   Component A: Risk Mapping to Support Urban Preparedness and Planning (U8$725,SOO): The
   component will build on the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Finaneing Initiative
   (pCRAFI - WB 2011) and the Catastrophe msurance Pilot Project for Port Vila (SOPAC 2003)
   and develop hazard and risk madels and maps in a scale suitable for urban and infrastructure
   planning. The hazard maps will be as far as possible based on probabilistic hazards models for
   key hazards, sueh as tsunami, ground shaking, tropical cyclone, coastai and river tlooding. The
   hazard models will benefit greatly from the planned acquisition of high-resolution topography
   data thl'ough Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) surveys commissioned for the target areas
   by the Austrillian Department ofClimate Change and anergy Effieieney. High resolution
   bathymetry data is available thl'ough previous surveys by the Secretariat of the Pacifie Islands
                   Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) and Institute for Research and Development (llID)
                   in New Caledonia. The geographic extend is Port Vila, including the urban extension areas of
                   Mele Bay and Teuma Bayas outlined in the Urban Master Plan for Port Vila (ADB 2011), and
                   Luganville,.the two major urban areas in Vanuatu, which conbibute to over 90% of the country's
                   economy. The activity will develop the capacity of the Vanuatu Meteorological and Geohazal'd
                   Department (VMGD) in geospatial data management 'and the development ofhazard and risk
                   mapping products. In particular it wilJ establish a home for the risk exposure database developed
                   under PCRAFI comprlsing of population, building, infi'astructure and crop information. The dsk
                   exposure database \viU be updated and extended for Port Vila and Luganville thl'ough further
                   surveys. Through a consultative pro cess led by the Ministry of Lands integration of climate
                   change and risk information and considerations into planned reviews of the land-use and
                   subdivision policies is proposed to avoid future development in highMrisk areas e.g. by creating
                   buffer zones around rivers and coastai inundation areas.

                                       Component 2: Establish a tsunami warning system for Port Vila and Luganville (US$1,484,OOO):
                                      This component wiU establish an integrated end-to-end tsunami waming system for the
                                       municipality of Port Vila as a pilot for the country. This activity will be led hy VMGD, but
                                       involves a variety of stakeholders, such as the National Disaster Management Office, which is
                                       housed by VMGD, the Municipality of Port Vila, fust responders, media and communication
                                       providers, Lands, Public Works and CSOs, such as represented in the Vanuatu Humanitarian
                                       Team. The following activities will be carried out:
                                                    • Strengthening orthe National Muiti-hazal'd Warning Centre and the National Emergency
................................................................Operation.Centœ, ..including.o.ffice. œfurbishment~."integrating. the.operations..of.weathel:......................................................
                                                                forecast and geohazards units, impt'oved information technology and communication
                                                                equipment and development of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) governing
                                                                warning generation, contextualization and dissemination;
                                                    • Installation of an appropriate and œdundant wal1ling dissemination system comprising,
                                                                for instance, of sirens, radio and TV broadcasting, and mobile phone text messaging
                                                                chatty beetles. The system can he activated by:vMGD.
                                                    • Production of tsunami evacuation maps will be produced in consultation with relevant
                                                                authorities. These will form the basis for the tsunami response and evacuation plan
                                                                outlining evacuation areas, evacuation routes and safe areas, as well as evacuation
                                                                procedures and tsunami response roles and responsibilities of agencies. The tsunami
                                                                response and evacuation plan will be developed in a participatory manner involving the
                                                                relevant agencies, CSOs and community representation.
                                                    • Appropriate signage for evacuation zones, routes and safe areas will be established
                                                                around Port Vila. Once estahlished the tsunami response procedures will be exercised and
                                                                tested. A community awareness program comprising of media campaigns, community
                                                                workshops and road shows will compliment the introduction of the tsunami waming
                                                                system and evacuation procedures. Awareness material, such as brochures, postel's, radio
                                                                and TV shows will be produced and disseminated. A specifie training for media and
                                                                communications providers will be carried out. The community outreach activities will
                                                                 involve local authorities and esos.

                    1 This will include new partitioning of the open office space through flXed aluminum and glass partitions. No
                    structural changes to the building are envisaged,
                Component 3: Strengthen the institutional arrangements for integration ofDisaster Risk
                Reduction (DRR) and Climate Change Adaptation (CCA) (US$225,600): Vanuatu is in the
                process of integrating its institutional arrangements for DRR and CCA. This activity \vill provide
                technical assistance for the integration of the institutional, poliey and legal frameworks relating
                to DRR and CCA. It further supports mainstl'eaming ofDRR and CCA into sectoral plans and
                budgets through advocacy and conduet of workshops and conferences. If will support the
                establislunent of a national platform for DRR and CCA, which is planned for 2012. This activity
                supports the World Bank Increasing Resilience to Climate Change and Natural Hazards projeet
                in mainstreaming CCA and DRR at nationallevel.

                Component 4: Project Monitoring & Evaluation (US$51 ,500): Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E)
                will be undertaken on a regular basis through the Project Management Unit. The Projeet
                Coordinator will colleet, maintain and report the monitoring and evaluation information
                progressively based on an M&E fioamework which will be developed. Individual and Firm Terms
                of References will incorporate a requirement to report against the M&E framework to the extent
                that their activities are relevant. An M&E speeialist will undertake an audit of the M&E
                reporting and conclusions at mid-term and at the end of the project. The audit will be based on
                reviewing projeet outputs, structured interviews with key govemment officiais, selected Bank
                and donor partner mission team members, contracted fums and individuals, and observation of
                field teams in operation .

..................................cQJllp-onent. s.:J~r.oje.ct..Management.'US$241,4.0'O):.Erojectmanagement).monitoring.and . . . . ···_. ···_-._..._        .............................
                                                                                                                                                     ....... _
                                  evaluation will be based in the VMGD of the Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Utilities
                                 where a Projeet Management Unit (PMU) will be established and integrated into VMGD
                                  operations. The PMU will comprise of a project manager, an exeeutive assistance and a junior
                                  technical staff ofVMGD and will be responsible for the exeeution of the projeet, monitoring and
                                  evaluation and ail proeurement. Additional assistance for procurement will be provided by an
                                  international consultant famiJiar with World Bank procurement. Finaneial management will be
                                  provided centrally through the Ministry of Finance, which will be responsible for commissioning
                                  of annual audits.


                D. Project location (if kllown)
                The project activities will take place in Vanuatu and in particular in the two urban areas of Port
                Vila and Lllganville.

                E. Borrower's Institutional Capa city for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
                Not applicable as no safeguard policy action is required

                F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
             II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT l\fiGHT APPLY

             SafeJ{uard Policies Trieeered                                                              Yes              No              TBD
             Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                                       X
                The activities supported by the grant are technical assistance. Hence, direct environmental
             and social issues are not expected.
             . The project is classified as Category C.

             Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                                                X
             Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                                         X
             Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                    X
             Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                                                     X
             Indieenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                                              X
             Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                                                        X
             Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                                                   X
             Pro.teets 011 Intel'national Watenvavs (OPIBP 7.50)                                                           X
             Projeets in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                                                       X

             Ellvironmentai Category: C - .. Not Requil'ed

             m.    SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

. ··--··-----··---··A:--fàrgëfdatë-fOilh-e-Quafff)ï1rnliaîicëmenfRëvië\v{QER}, afWliiëlftiï1ïë-tlfë..PAD=-stage-ISDS--··--_··-··_·-·····__ ··.--
                      would be prepared: NIA

              B, For simple projects that Willllot requÎl'e a QER, the target date for pl'eparing the PAD-stage
                 ISDS: NIA

              C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that May be needed.
              The specifie studies and their timing2 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.




              2 Reminder: The Bankts Disclosure Policy rcquires that safeguard-related documents be discloscd before appraisal (i) at the
              InfoShop and (il) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potel1tiallS' affected
              persons.
IV. APPROVALS

Slgll ed IHld Stlblllilted by:


                                       ~ta:!2kliu
 Tnsk Tcnm LeAder:                                                            August 13,2012


Approverf uJ';
Regloual Sllfcguards CoordinAto .. :     ! ,~   t,.,ruJ-.
                                                                              'S\,è.~\20 cL
                                       PA / ee \ s llvnUl LAksbUllnnrnynnAn
  Corumentsi
                                                                              Angnst 13,2012

                                                     ~~
Sectol' Mnnnger:


  Comments:
                                       Moun Sur                 lc",-
