                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/17/2013                                   Report No.: AC6896
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P118895                     Original Project Name: VU:
                                                 Telecommunications & ICT Technical
                                                 Assistance Project
Country: Vanuatu                                 Project ID: P143465
Project Name: Telecommunications and ICT TA, Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Natasha Beschorner
Estimated Appraisal Date:                        Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2012
Managing Unit:                                   Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                                 Loan
Sector: General information and communications sector (100%)
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (70%);e-Government (30%)
SPF Amount (US$m):                0
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                          0.00
         Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund               2.73
                                                                           2.73
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                            Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                      Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The PDO is to enhance the policy, legal and regulatory environment for ICT
infrastructure and e-Government development by strengthening oversight institutions for
telecommunications and ICT in Vanuatu.

3. Project Description
The Additional Financing of (total) US$2.73 million would support the following
revised components:

 (a) Component 1: ICT Policy and E-Government Support US$0.60 million would
consist of advisory assistance and capacity-building for the Office of the Government
CIO (OGCIO) in consultation with stakeholders across and outside the Government in
the following areas:
 (i)   Support for updating ICT/e-Government sector policy and legislation in line with
industry developments and Government objectives, including second-generation reforms
and application of ICT in other sectors; and monitoring ICT sector development; and

 (ii) Design and development of implementation plans for "quick win" e-Government
applications (as already identified by stakeholders); and high-level design and
implementation planning for longer-term larger scale Government information systems.

 (b) Component 2: ICT Regulatory Support (TRR) US$ 2.05 million would finance
consultant services (sector regulator, legal and regulatory specialists, economist/market
analyst), which would also provide on the job training and mentoring in the following
areas to address continuing as well as emerging regulatory challenges:

 (i)    Establishing and regulating the technical and commercial aspects of the wholesale
access regime, including the interconnection regime; this will be particularly important if
a submarine cable Project goes ahead;

 (ii) Coordinating with OGCIO, as requested, support the consultation, preparation and
drafting of regulations, rules and other subordinate instruments as needed for the
effective management and implementation of the ICT sector, including consumer
protection and consumer codes of practice;

 (iii) Regulating competition and limiting anti-competitive behavior;

 (iv) Conducting market studies, to understand the market and delivery of user benefits
and opportunities (including gender disaggregation);

 (v) Resolving disputes between operators, and establishing resolution frameworks for
disputes between operators and users; and

  (vi) Conducting community and industry awareness campaigns to address consumer
issues related to service coverage and expansion, including increased access for women.

 (c) Component 3: Project Management US$0.08 million. Project implementation
arrangements are already established as a function of the TRR. This funding will
continue the support for this activity for the duration of the Project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project location is in the capital city of Port Vila.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Knut Opsal (EASER)
   Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will finance advisory support, capacity building and regulatory support and
will involve no physical interventions. No safeguard policies will be triggered.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
not applicable

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
not applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
not applicable

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
not applicable



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Natasha Beschorner     03/07/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Gerardo F. Parco       03/07/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Knut Opsal             03/08/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Randeep Sudan          03/17/2013
  Comments:
