                                                                           75027
                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             CONCEPT/APPRAISAL STAGE

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 5 July 2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Vietnam                            Project ID: P131280
                                            Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Support city-wide upgrading process in 20 small and medium cities in
Vietnam
Task Team Leader: Andrea Zeman
Estimated Approval Date: 28 June 2012       Estimated Completion Date: 2014
Managing Unit: FEUCA                        Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector: Urban
Theme: Technical Assistance

Other financing amounts by source: CA MDTF US$524,900


Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing                   Simple [X ]            Repeater [ ]
Is this project transferred to the region         Yes [ ]               No [X ]

B. Project Objectives [from Grant Proposal]:

In the context of the Cities Alliance (CA) global programme - ‘Land, Services and Citizenship
for the Urban Poor (LSC)’, CA has been promoting the setting up of country programmes in
selected developing countries in Africa and Asia. These country programmes aim to better align
policy, planning and investment to help cities and their citizens plan and implement coordinated
strategies for future city growth.

The overarching development objective of the county programme is to support the emergence of
a more effective urban agenda centered upon sustainable, inclusive cities with the focus on
improving relationships and coherence of efforts among national government agencies, urban
local governments, urban poor communities, Cities Alliance members and other partners. More
specifically the LSC programme has the broad objectives of supporting:
 Active citizenship for the urban poor through improved urban governance and formalization;
 Improved qualitative and quantitative access to municipal services for urban poor
    households;
 Effective and efficient inclusive urban development policies and strategies enabling the
    better management of future urban growth, positively affecting the lives of urban poor
    households nationwide.
The LSC country programmes focus on three operational levels, namely, national government,
local authorities and the community - noting that these are primary target levels and that in each
case, significant linkages extend across and between all three. The Vietnam country programme
is structured in accordance with these broad objectives.
Against this background, this project aims to intervene at community level by providing support
to community processes and city processes in order to promote city-wide upgrading in 20 small
and medium cities in Vietnam.
The specific objective of this project is to address urban poverty by strengthening new
development options for the urban poor in a way that will influence approaches to urban poverty
reduction in Vietnam, through which to improve the governance of Vietnam cities by
consolidating emerging practices of participation and civic engagement in urban management
issues.


C. Project Description [from Grant Proposal]:

The project aims to support community driven approach to city-wide upgrading, strengthen
practices for community participation and civic engagement, institutionalize and scale up CDF
network in small and medium towns of Vietnam.

The Project will provide technical assistance for following activities:
1. Strengthening city and community processes through mapping, exchanges, training and small
   scale upgrading projects through:
   1.1. City-wide participatory survey/mapping;
   1.2. Establishing and developing saving groups and networks;
   1.3. Community-to-community exchanges through regular meetings of savings groups, CDF
         at ward and city levels, and community events;
   1.4. City-to-City exchanges between communities of various CDF member cities;
   1.5. Training courses on CDF financial management software for CDF secretary in cities;
   1.6. Seed funding for small-scale community upgrading projects for CDF member cities that
         will be used as revolving fund for more upgrading projects in the city;
   1.7. Annual national workshop for all CDF member cities to review the progress, learn
         lessons and plan for the following year.
2. Mobilizing peoples’ participation through city, regional and national forums that involve:
   2.1. Community forums (for existing community leaders) for 6 cities.
        2.1.1. Inter-city and intra-city forums for 6 cities (3 CA funded city and 3 ACHR funded
               cities)
        2.1.2. Regional Urban Poor Forum (with participation of policy makers)
3. Policy advocacy to support urban poor community by:
   3.1. Documenting and publishing lessons learned and best practices;
   3.2. Cooperating with VTV to broadcast about CDF network.
4. Promoting and Institutionalizing CDF at city level and provincial/national level by:
   4.1. Developing a legal framework to formalize city budget contribution to the CDF;
   4.2. Developing system for financial contribution of community to CDF;
   4.3. Developing management structure for CDF involving city and community;
   4.4. Mobilizing additional resources for CDF;
   4.5. Information about CDF network and its activities/events are published in quarterly
        journal of ACVN.
5. Strengthening ACVN’s capacity in CDF coordination by:
   5.1. Establish a network of community supporters in each of 20 cities (10 funded by CA)
        and a national network of 15-20 community supporters.
   5.2. Strengthening the YP network to support for CDF cities
   5.3. Two training workshops for staff of National Coordination Unit

The project is a combination of non-investment set of technical assistance activities and a
component of financing small scale community infrastructure upgrading projects. They key
deliverables expected are:
 City maps for at least 10 cities;
 A database for all 40 active CDF member cities;
 City-to-city exchanges to learn experience and good practices;
 Community saving groups and networks established in at least 10 new CDF cities;
 Annual national workshops for all CDF member cities;
 Small scale community infrastructure upgrading projects in 10 cities;
 Trainings on CDF financial management Software;
 Community forums and city forums for community leaders in 6 pilot cities;
 Documentation of best practices.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

The project will consolidate the existing CDF network of 30 cities in Vietnam and it will expand
the CDF network to include 20 additional cities. The small scale community infrastructure
upgrading projects are to be carried out in 10 out of these 20 new CDF cities. The small scale
infrastructure projects will include community level water supply, drainage, road paving, street
lights, etc. with an average cost of $4000-$5000.

The project implementation will be guided by CDF Operational Manual prepared by ACVN. The
manual describes how to set up and operate CDF to support community driven initiatives for
urban poverty reduction and community development. The manual also includes safeguard
guidelines for small scale community infrastructure upgrading projects. These community
upgrading projects are not expected to produce any irreversible environmental and social
impacts. The projects are small in scale (community level) and any potential environmental
and/or social impacts which may occur are also expected to be minor, which can be mitigated
through the procedures outlined in the CDF Operational Manual.

No land acquisition or involuntary resettlement is anticipated for the proposed small scale
community level infrastructure activities. If needed, land will be made available through
voluntary land donation from the community. The process and procedure of land donation is
described in the Operational Manual, which will guide the implementation of the projects.
E. Identify Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

The grant recipient is the Association of Cities of Vietnam (ACVN), which has implemented
Cities Alliance grant-funded technical assistance project. In addition to the Cities Alliance,
ACVN has worked in the past with the World Bank in 2005 and 2006 for organizing training
courses on urban planning and urban management for city members. The program was sponsored
by the World Bank and it was implemented in accordance with the World Bank guidelines.

As stated above ACVN developed an operational manual which outlines the safeguards
guidelines for the small scale community infrastructure projects. The guidelines will ensure that
any potential environmental/social impacts are managed and mitigated. Ms. Vu Thi Vinh , Vice
General Secretary of ACVN, will manage implementation of the project.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist:
The project has been classified as OP/BP 4.01 “Category C?, since the project will support both,
technical assistance and small scale community infrastructure upgrading projects at the
community level.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                     Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
     The project will finance small scale community level infrastructure activities. These activities
are typically, road paving, street light, water supply, drainage, etc. These will be guided by the
operational manual which outlines all the processes including safeguards guideline with a simple
list of do’s and don’ts for community upgrading projects.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                         Yes              No             TBD
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                                            X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Andrea Zeman                                             07/05/2012
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Advisor-EAP:               L. Panneer Selvam                                        07/26/2012
      Comments:
    Program Manager:                               William Cobbett                                          08/03/2012
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
