                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/14/2013                                    Report No.: AC6888
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Vietnam                               Project ID: P124702
Project Name: Vietnam - Coastal Resources for Sustainable Development
Task Team Leader: Binh Thang Cao
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity                   Global Supplemental ID:
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28,          Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: EASVS                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (50%);Climate change
(30%);Environmental policies and institutions (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              6.5
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             2.50
         Financing Gap                                                  1.00
                                                                        3.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective of the Additional Financing (AF) project is the same
as that of the parent project: to improve the sustainable management of coastal fisheries
in the Project Provinces.

3. Project Description
The parent project has four components, of which the AF will support Component A(a)
and Component C(a):

  Component A: Institutional capacity strengthening for sustainable fisheries
management: (a) inter-sectoral planning for coastal areas; (b) upgrading of Vietnam
fisheries database system; and (c) conducting selected policy research. The AF will
support activity (a), inter-sectoral planning for coastal areas.
 Component B: Good practices for sustainable aquaculture: (a) improved bio-security
management; (b) improved seed quality management; and (c) improved environmental
management.

  Component C: Sustainable management of near-shore capture fisheries: (a) co-
management of near-shore capture fisheries; and (b) rehabilitation of fishing ports and
landing sites. The AF will support activity (a), co-management of near-shore capture
fisheries.

 Component D: Project management, monitoring and evaluation: (a) project
management; and (b) monitoring and evaluation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed AF, in an amount of US$6.5 million from the Global Environmental
Facility (GEF) grant, would provide additional financing for the Coastal Resources for
Sustainable Development Project (the Original Project, P118979). More specifically, it
would finance parts of Activity A (a) Inter-sectoral planning for coastal areas and parts of
Activity C (a) Co-management of near-shore capture fisheries as reflected in the
Financing Agreement of the Original Project. The AF would use the same environmental
and social safeguards instruments as those of the Original Project (P118979). No changes
are needed because they are still valid and applicable and no new safeguards policies are
triggered as a result of the AF.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Silvia Del Pilar Larreamendy Ricardo (EASVS)
   Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASPS)
   Mr Tuan Anh Le (EASVS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The sections below are those described for the Original Project, which the AF is only
financing parts of it.

 Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)

 The project's overall environmental impacts have been assessed to be positive.It is
anticipated that the project would yield positive impacts on the livelihoods of fishing
communities and smallholder aquaculture farmers (including ethnic minorities) in the
project area and on the sector's capacity for sustainable management of coastal resources
through co-management at local levels. Local beneficiaries would have better access to
information, training, sustainable technologies, improved infrastructure and associated
support services, and opportunities for additional incomes. Local communities will
assume collective rights and responsibilities related to near-shore fishery resources and
will be enabled to apply these in ways to sustain their long term livelihoods.

  Negative impacts are assessed to be limited, localized, manageable and reversible and
can be avoided or minimized through proper design and application of mitigation
measures. The main environmental issues associated with the project include: (1)
improper use and management of chemicals and antibiotics in aquaculture; (2) ineffective
management and improper treatment of solid wastes and wastewater resulting from
aquaculture; and (3) civil works impacts (i.e. increased localized level of dust, noise,
disturbance to traffic and community, safety risks, water pollution risks ) during
construction of new infrastructure or rehabilitation of existing facilities (i.e. upgrading of
fishing ports, landing sites, fish markets, etc).

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

 Although the project will not have a direct impact on critical habitats, it triggers the
Bank's policy on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) as some of its activities will be
implemented in coastal areas. Under Component B where fisheries co-management
arrangements are introduced, it could involve the management of some spawning grounds
of aquatic species. The impacts on natural habitats should be positive rather than
negative.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)

  The project will bring about socioeconomic benefits to fishing communities, and
smallholder aquaculture farmers, including ethnic minorities in the project area. The
social impact assessment of the project is positive overall. Adverse social impact is
limited, primarily due to small-scale acquisition of land for upgrading of existing small-
scale infrastructure financed by the project (i.e., small access roads, landing sites, fishing
ports, and fish markets).
 Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10)

  There are a number of ethnic minority (EM) groups (i.e. Khmer, Hoa, Tay, Nung, etc.)
present in the project area. In particular, the coastal areas of Soc Trang and Ca Mau
provinces have more EM living compared to other project provinces. Free, prior and
informed consultations with potentially affected ethnic minority peoples during the Social
Assessment (SA) as part of project preparation indicated that there is a broad support
from the potentially affected EM communities given to the project. The SA also showed
that the project's impacts on local communities including EM are positive overall because
the project is expected to improve their access to sustainable farming technologies,
reduce aquaculture disease risks, and improve management of coastal resources, thereby
help sustain local livelihoods. However, in some specific circumstances where high
populations of EM are present (i.e. Soc Trang's coastal areas), a few ethnic minority
households may be affected by the project's land acquisition required for upgrading of
infrastructure activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Long term impacts of the project are expected to be positive such as improvement in the
livelihoods and sustainability of fishing communities and smallholder aquaculture
farmers (including ethnic minorities) and the sector's capacity for sustainable
management of coastal resources through co-management at local levels.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
During preparation of the project feasibility study, the project has evaluated and excluded
all investment proposals that go against the project development objective of sustainable
fisheries management. To minimize the potential adverse impacts, the project has also
considered alternatives to the investment proposals prepared by the provinces, prioritized
them based on the anticipated positive and negative impacts, and developed screening
checklists to exclude all investment proposals or elements of proposals that may cause
large-scale (or irreversible) social and environment impacts such as (i) subprojects that
use land of national parks, natural reserves, world heritage, historical/cultural sites,
nationally protected landscapes, biosphere conservation sites; (ii) subprojects that cause
conversion of forests including mangrove forests, watershed protection forests,
waves/wind shield forests, etc., to fishponds or other land uses; (iii) subprojects that
cause conversion of two-crop rice field land with high productivity; (iv) aquaculture on
sand subprojects using 100 ha of land; and, (v) subprojects having project sites in more
than one province.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment: As part of project preparation, MARD, with the help of a consultant, has
prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to guide the
project in screening, assessing and mitigating environmental and social impacts during
project implementation. The ESMF is in accordance with the Bank's safeguard policies
and requirements as well as with the Vietnamese laws on environmental impact
assessment and other environmental laws. The framework covers guidelines for (1)
safeguard screening; (2) impact assessment and development of mitigation measures,
including the Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) for small scale construction and
dredging operation; (3) safeguard documentation preparation and clearance, (4) safeguard
implementation, supervision, monitoring, and reporting, (5) institutional strengthening
and capacity building programs for the PMU staff as well for the relevant provincial
Department of Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE); and (6) institutional
arrangements and budget.

  Regarding safeguard screening, a negative list of subprojects has been prepared, which
will be excluded in the menu of eligible subprojects. These subprojects in the negative
list are those that would have negative impacts on natural habitats (see # 3 above).

 The ESMF also requires that for each type of infrastructure activities, the implementing
agencies will have to prepare standard mitigation measures in the form of ECOP to
mitigate construction and operation related impacts. The ECOP will be part of the
infrastructure subproject's Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and will be included
in the bidding and contract documents and closely monitored by supervision engineers.
Since the first year infrastructure subprojects are small, the implementing provinces will
prepare relevant ECOPs for each type of infrastructure activities, include them into the
bidding and contract documents and ensure effective implementation of these ECOPs.

 The ESMF had been disclosed locally in local language and the English version through
the Bank's InfoShop before the start of appraisal of the Original Project and they are
applicable for the AF.

 Social:

 Involuntary resettlement: To minimize the impact of involuntary resettlement, the
project would try to avoid acquisition of land by exploring various technical design
options. However, where it is unavoidable, compensation including assistance to the
affected people will be made in accordance with the project's RPF which was prepared by
MARD in compliance to Bank's OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). Voluntary land
donation is not encouraged and not expected under the CRSD. The safeguard screening
will help exclude all activities that would result in large-scale impacts on land acquisition
or resettlement.

 For the infrastructure subprojects to be implemented in the first year, the implementing
agencies have carried out screening and confirmed that the upgrading of those schemes
will not require land acquisition because it will take place on the existing structures. In
the following years, if there are subprojects identified involving land acquisition, a
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared for each subproject according to the
project' RPF. All RAPs are subjected to Bank's prior review and approval prior to
implementation.
 Ethnic Minorities: To ensure EM peoples continue to be consulted during project
implementation as well as they would receive equal benefits from the project, an Ethnic
Minority Policy Framework (EMPF) has been prepared by MARD in accordance with
Bank's OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) and it will be adopted during project
implementation. The main purpose of the EMPF is to engage EM in the project area in
subproject planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation as well as to guide the
preparation and implementation of Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDPs) for
subprojects identified during project implementation. EMDPs will include budget,
implementation and monitoring arrangements to mitigate negative impacts on local EM
and to ensure that they would receive socioeconomic benefits from the project in a way
that is culturally appropriate to them.

 In the first year, the project would focus on staff training to prepare EMDPs which will
be implemented in the following years. According to this implementation schedule,
project activities will not be implemented in EM areas in the first year. Screening of the
infrastructure subprojects planned for the first-year confirmed that no EM households
will be affected by the project's land acquisition in the first year.

 Both RFP and EMPF had been disclosed locally and through the InfoShop before the
start of appraisal of the Original Project and they are applicable to the AF.

 Fisheries co-management: Participatory fisheries co-management is a powerful
approach to solve and prevent conflicts among resources users and give voice to the poor
in the decision-making process. The project would facilitate the establishment of
participatory fisheries co-management in about 140 selected communes in the project
area to enable local fishing communities to take more responsibilities in solving their
own local problems (depleting fisheries resources). Communities will be empowered and
provided with necessary resources to make their own decisions through developing a
feasible, collective action plan on the sustainable use of coastal resources.

  Although the co-management can bring about long-term positive impacts on local
livelihoods and environment, it may result in short term impacts on the poor or ethnic.
The impacts may not be significant for the better-off but could be more serious for the
poor and vulnerable groups. To anticipate and mitigate the impacts, necessary resources
will be provided to each co-management group to mitigate any unintended adverse
impact. In some provinces like Soc Trang, public land will be allocated to the poor and
landless fishers to develop other income generating sources. The project will coordinate
with the government's initiatives to ensure that a comprehensive approach for EM will be
conducted to generate additional income for the poor and EM.

 To ensure co-management will be implemented properly during project implementation,
a co-management guideline has been prepared to define the key guiding principles for co-
management approach supported under the project. These principles have been consulted
with potentially affected groups during the SA. Before the Original Project became
effective, based on the guiding principles, MARD has prepared a co-management manual
(part of the project's Operational Manual) to elaborate in detail the co-management
approach and the consultation processes which potentially affected communities could
take part in designing rules and measures to prevent them from being adversely affected
and in implementing and monitoring the activities that may affect their livelihoods. Such
a co-management manual is consistent with the core principles of the process framework
described under Bank's OP 4.12 and will be subjected to public consultations before it is
officially used to guide the preparation of commune specific co-management plans.

 In the first year of the Original Project, no co-management plans have been developed.
In the start-up period, the project only focused on assisting fishing communities get
organized (i.e. establishing fisher organizations) and providing training to project staff to
handle proper consultations with local communities. This implementation schedule will
allow time to build capacity at local levels as well as to assist local communities in the
preparation of their own co-management plans using the stakeholder analysis to define
the types of support relevant to them.

  Implementation arrangements: The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) established by
MARD and the project Provincial Project Management Units (PPMUs) established by the
project provinces would be the executing agencies. Each of them has appointed one
Environmental and Social Safeguard Officer to be responsible for the project safeguards.
The project will provide training to build capacity of the PCU, PPMUs and DONREs on
implementation of the ESMF and related monitoring activities. A technical assistance
team will also be recruited to assist the PCU in managing project implementation,
including environmental and social safeguards. An independent agency will be recruited
to monitor compliance throughout project implementation.

 Capacity: The Borrower possesses adequate capacity for assessing the project's
environmental and social impacts, and proposing mitigation measures, given their
extended experience in previous IDA funded projects. Training has been provided and
will continue to be provided to project staff for implementing the EMPs, RAPs, and
EMDPs prepared during project implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public consultations were carried out under the Social Assessments (from April to June
2011) and the Environmental Assessment (in October 2011). Key participants included
fishing communities and smallholder aquaculture farmers in the project area, central and
local authorities, as well as mass organizations. The consultations aimed to explore the
potential social and environmental impacts of the project so as to, on the basis of the
findings, inform project design/intervention strategy, as well as develop appropriate
safeguards instruments. The draft RPF, EMPF, and ESMF have been circulated to
concerned ministries and project provinces to receive additional comments before
finalization.

 During project implementation, the PCU and PPMUs will maintain consultations at
local levels with the project affected people to allow them to participate in the design and
implementation of the activities taking place in their area. All EMPs, RAPs, and EMDPs
will be prepared in consultation with the affected people. All the safeguards documents
for the Original Project have been disclosed locally (i.e. at the PCU and PPMUs' offices,
DARD's offices, Commune People's Committees, and through Vietnam Development
Information Center (VDIC) and Bank's InfoShop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/04/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/28/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/07/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/04/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/14/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/08/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             01/04/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/14/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                  Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Binh Thang Cao                         02/27/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Josefo Tuyor                           02/27/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Silvia Del Pilar Larreamendy Ricardo   02/27/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Jennifer J. Sara                       02/28/2013
  Comments:
