                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/29/2013                                     Report No.: AC6982
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Vietnam                              Project ID: P124942
Project Name: Mekong Integrated Water Resources Management- Phase II Series of
Project (SOP 2)
Task Team Leader: Toru Konishi
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 19, 2013       Estimated Board Date: September 26, 2013
Managing Unit: EASVS                          Lending Instrument:
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
Theme: Water resource management (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             25
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             2.50
                                                                        2.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Program Development Objective for the overall series is to establish key examples of
integrated water resources management practices in the Lower Mekong Basin (LMB) at
the regional, national, and sub-national levels, thus contributing to more sustainable river
basin development in the Lower Mekong. The project development objective for this
second phase of the program is to develop the capacity of the Vietnam National Mekong
Committee (VNMC) and relevant agencies to manage trans-boundary water resources
and climate risks through river basin approaches and improved water resources data
collection, analysis, and exchange.

3. Project Description
The project consists of the following four components.

 Component 1: Support for River Basin Management in the Vietnam part of the Sesan-
Srepok Sub-basin (US$3.5 million). This component will promote IWRM in the Sesan-
Srepok Basin in the Central Highlands through the development of a river basin
organization (RBO). Activities under this component would include: (a) Establishment of
RBO; (b) Support for River Basin Planning & Studies; (c) Support for Monitoring
through development of a water resources monitoring system; and (d) Capacity
Development on key IWRM issues such as sediment, minimum flows, and embankment
erosion.

 Component 2: Water Resources Monitoring (US$17.4 million). This component will
support Vietnam to improve trans-boundary water resources monitoring through the
development of water resources monitoring networks in the Mekong Delta and Central
Highlands. Specifically, this would include: (a) construction of trans-boundary water
resources monitoring stations and financing of laboratory equipment to measure water
quality at the mainstream and key tributaries and development of an information system
and data dissemination system for information sharing with the general public and
Cambodia; (b) development of an integrated water resources information system for the
Mekong Delta integrating and sharing information on water quality monitored by various
institutions, including MARD and MONRE; and (c) pilot salinity monitoring support for
Kien Giang province through integration of information collected by the provincial
Department of Agriculture and Rural Development (DARD) and the Department of
Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE), construction/upgrading of additional
monitoring stations, salinity modeling, and information dissemination mechanisms.

  Component 3: Hydro-meteorological information network, flood forecasting and early
warning systems (US$7.5 million). This component will support upgrading of the
hydromet data collection system and improved weather forecasting in the Central
Highlands and comprises the following activities: (a) Modernization of Hydromet
Observation Networks and Forecasting Services through the upgrading of existing, and
construction of new, hydromet stations, the integration of the hydromet stations into the
regional network, and technical assistance for improved weather forecasts; (b) Technical
training for the hydromet staff for operation and maintenance of the network and
equipment as well as technical training for forecasting; and; and (c) Regional Integration
of Forecasting and Early Warning Systems in the LMB, supporting regional cooperation
on hydromet data sharing between Vietnam, Cambodia, and Lao PDR through technical
assistance, equipment and capacity building necessary to strengthen regional
harmonization, and interoperability of the observing networks and data sharing.

 Component 4: Project Management and Regional Integration (US$1.6 million). This
component supports the operational costs for the implementing agencies within MONRE
to manage the project. The component would finance: (a) incremental operation costs; (b)
purchase of equipment and vehicles; (c) technical assistance for VNMC for collaboration
with riparian countries, (d) monitoring and evaluation; (e) training; (f) external audits;
and (g) various technical consultancies.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed SOP-2 will focus on the two key areas of the Vietnam territory of the
Mekong Basin: the Central Highlands (Lam Dong, Gia Lai, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, and
Kon Tum provinces) )and the Mekong Delta ((Long An, Dong Thap, Kien Giang, Tay
Ninh, and An Giang provinces). Tay Ninh Province is considered to be a part of the
Mekong Basin as part of the province is affected by the Mekong floods.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Tuan Anh Le (EASVS)
   Mr Khang Van Pham (EASVS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Bank safeguards policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) is triggered because
the project will involve the construction of small monitoring stations. Possible negative
environmental impacts of the proposed SOP-2 would be relatively minor. The proposed
investments under Component 1 include a water resources monitoring network to collect
information on the water quality and which is essential to identify the key water quality
related issues for decision making support. The technical assistance and institutional
support activities planned under Component 2 (River basin management) will support
Vietnam in undertaking multi-sectoral analyses and decision making processes related to
river basin development while considering upstream and downstream impacts on water
quality and/or broader ecosystems health and sustainability.

 The main potential negative impacts of the project include limited land acquisition, dust,
noise, vibration, and construction wastes resulting from small-scale civil works related to
the construction of small water resources monitoring stations. However, these impacts are
assessed to be small, localized, temporary, and can be mitigated through the application
of good construction and management practices and the strict implementation of an
Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP).

  The proposed project would involve investments within the basin of the Mekong River,
an international river shared by Lao PDR, Cambodia, Thailand, Vietnam, Myanmar, and
China. Therefore, the policy on Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50) is
triggered. However, the exception for the notification has been approved on July 5, 2013
as all investments under the proposed SOP-2 are for the purpose of water resources
surveys, and the proposed water resources monitoring stations will not alter the quantity
or quality of the flows in the river. Therefore, these investments would fall under
paragraph 7 (b) of OP 7.50, which stipulates the exceptions to the notification
requirement regarding international waterways.

 With regards to social safeguards, OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) is triggered because
there are Ethnic Minority (EM) peoples present in the project area. A social assessment
(SA) has been conducted as per OP 4.10 to understand the potential impacts of the project
and to inform the EM peoples (in the project area) of these potential impacts (both
positive and adverse). The SA confirms that the project will be positive overall given the
nature of project activities (as outlined in section 3 of this ISDS). However, some
negative impacts (due to land acquisition required to install small water monitoring
stations, and hydromet equipment) are also likely. Efforts will be made to upgrade the
existing stations so as to minimize the need for land acquisition. Given the overall
positive impact and limited adverse impact (which could be managed through the
Resettlement Policy Framework), EM peoples (through free, prior and informed
consultation) confirmed their broad community support for project implementation. An
Ethnic Minority Policy Framework (EMPF) has been prepared (in accordance with OP
4.10 and in consultation with EM peoples in the project area) to guide the preparation of
site-specific Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP), where required, during project
implementation. It is noted that in areas where EM peoples have a clear potential to
receive social economic benefits from the project (at the community level), or could be
unexpectedly adversely affected, consultations need to be done with the target groups in
accordance with the project's Ethnic Minority Policy Framework. Where required and
appropriate as per the EMPF, an EMDP will be prepared accordingly.

 OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is triggered because the project may require
acquisition of land to construct the water resources monitoring and hydromet observatory
stations. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared in accordance with OP
4.12 to guide the preparation of a site-specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), if
needed, during project implementation. However, several options will be considered
against technical requirements to minimize the land acquisition.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Overall, the project impact is expected to be positive, with minimal potential negative
environmental impacts, as the proposed investments will enable the collection and
analysis of the water quality information, which will be shared with various government
agencies for prompt action and planning. The physical investments proposed under the
project – the construction of hydromet and water quality monitoring stations – will not
cause indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area.

 There are no remarkable social adverse impacts anticipated from the implementation of
project activities. All foreseeable adverse impacts (i.e., from land acquisition) have been
managed through the use of the project's RPF. The RBO for the Sesan-Srepok basin, once
established, is expected to function not only as an effective moderator for water use
among the five provinces in Central Highland, but also for the areas downstream of the
Sesan-Srepok. This will include consultation with the MRC in the Cambodia-Vietnam
dialogues on trans-boundary water resources management being supported under the on-
going SOP-1.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During project implementation, the client will prepare environmental protection
commitments (EPC) for the construction of the water resources monitoring stations as
required by the governmental environmental management regulation to address any
negative environmental impacts of the project. In addition, given the small environmental
impacts expected from the project, an ECOP was prepared to manage the adverse
environmental impacts during construction in accordance with the Bank's requirements.
Although the project does not trigger the policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP
4.11), the ECOP includes "chance find procedures." The ECOP will be included in the
bidding and contractual documents and will be closely supervised by the construction
supervision engineer during implementation. This requirement will also be included in
the Project Operational Manual.

 A project resettlement policy frame work has been prepared to help the client develop
abbreviated RAP(s) when land taking is needed for the installation of water monitoring
stations and hydromet. An EMPF is also available to guide the preparation for site-
specific EMDPs, where required, during project preparation.

  The project has also been designed to engage stakeholders, especially Ethnic Minority
families and women. In particular, under the Component 1, consultative workshops are
planned during the implementation to provide information on the basic function of the
river basin organizations; some studies are also planned to support the local communities
in addressing the environmental issues related to the water resources management. Under
Component 2, an activity is planned to engage and inform farming communities in the
Mekong Delta about salinity intrusion.

 Training on safeguard principles and instruments, including ECOP and safeguard
operation manual, will be provided to the project staff and key stakeholders during
project implementation. This is to ensure that: (a) the proposed project activities will be
properly screened; (b) the ECOP is included in the bidding documents and contracts and
supervision and monitoring of the contractor performance is conducted by the
supervision consultant; and (c) close consultation with local agencies and communities is
carried out throughout project planning and implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are as follows: the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
(MONRE), the implementing agency for the project, and the Vietnam National Mekong
Committee Standing Office (VNMCSO), the overall executing agency. Other key
stakeholders include the Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT), the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD), the provincial Department of Natural
Resources and Environment (DONRE), the provincial Department of Agriculture and
Rural Development (DARD), and local communities. Public consultation with the key
stakeholders was conducted by the Vietnam National Mekong Committee (VNMC) to
inform them of the project implementation and social and environmental impacts --
including positive and potential negative impacts as well as measures to enhance social
and environmental benefits and to avoid/mitigate/compensate potential negative social
and environmental impacts. All comments and suggestions from the key stakeholders
have been incorporated into the ECOP, the RPF, and the EMPF.

 The ECOP was disclosed in English in the Bank's InfoShop and the Vietnam
Development Information Center (VDIC), and in the project areas in Vietnamese on
March 11, 2013. The RPF and EMPF were disclosed in Vietnamese locally on May 27,
2013 and at the Bank's VDIC in Hanoi on June 19, 2013, and in English at the InfoShop
on June 19, 2013. During the project implementation, EPCs will be disclosed in
Vietnamese in the project areas.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   03/08/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               03/11/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                03/11/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   02/14/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               05/27/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                06/19/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   02/14/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               05/27/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                06/19/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                     Mr Toru Konishi                            07/23/2013
Environmental Specialist:             Mr Khang Van Pham                          07/24/2013
Social Development Specialist         Mr Tuan Anh Le                             07/24/2013
Additional Environmental and/or       Ms Anjali Acharya                          07/24/2013
Social Development Specialist(s):
                                      Ms Silvia Del Pilar Larreamendy Ricardo    07/24/2013
Approved by:
Sector Manager:                       Mr Franz Gerner                            07/24/2013
  Comments: There Tam,

  This is approved. Kindly proceed with next steps.

  Franz (Acting SD Manager)
