                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/18/2011                                      Report No.: AC6191
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Vietnam                              Project ID: P113949
Project Name: VN - Mekong Delta Water Management for Rural Dev
Task Team Leader: Toru Konishi
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2011       Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2011
Managing Unit: EASVS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (55%);General agriculture,
fishing and forestry sector (45%)
Theme: Water resource management (40%);Rural services and infrastructure
(30%);Climate change (20%);Natural disaster management (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            160.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             46.60
                                                                        46.60
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to protect and enhance the
utilization of water resources in the project provinces of the Mekong Delta region in
order to sustain gains in agricultural productivity, raise living standards, and contribute to
climate change adaptation.

3. Project Description
Component 1: Water Management Planning and Efficient Utilization (Base Cost: US$
10.33 million). The main objectives of this component are to strengthen the water
resources management planning capacity at the sub-regional (i.e. western part of the
MKD) and provincial levels and increase efficiency in the utilization of water. The
component would include the following activities;

 A.     Water Management Monitoring and Investment Planning in the Western Mekong
Delta, aiming at adjustment of the existing provincial water management plans prepared
based on the Mekong Delta Master Plan and incorporating potential impacts from
upstream development and climate change. The output of this subcomponent would
include: (a) revision of the existing provincial water management and investment plans
and (b) development of a regional water analysis framework based on information from
the concerned provinces.

  B.     Water Productivity, Operations and Maintenance: promoting the efficient use of
the water through demonstration of good practices of on-farm water and agriculture
management to increase water productivity, and increased efficiency in the O&M of the
irrigation schemes supported by Component 2. This subcomponent would comprise the
following activities: (a) Pilot On-farm Management for Improved Water Productivity in
(i) An Giang (extensive rice cultivation), (ii) Can Tho Municipality (rice cultivation and
fruit trees), (iii) Hau Giang (rice cultivation and fresh-water aquaculture), and (iv) Bac
Lieu/Ca Mau (combined rice cultivation and saline or brackish-water aquaculture), and
(b) Support for Operations and Maintenance aiming at support for (i) the seven (7)
IDMCs in the project provinces (designing for Surveillance, Control and Data Analysis
(SCADA) system, preparation of business plans and logistical support), and (ii) WUOs
(establishment of about 75 WUOs, initial training and on-farm support) mainly within
the irrigation schemes under Component 2 subprojects would be carried out with priority
focus on the first three cycle 1 subprojects as pilot.

 Component 2: Improvement and Rehabilitation of Water Resources Infrastructure (Base
Cost: US$ 128.93 million). This component would support the improvement and
rehabilitation of water resources in selected water management schemes. The works
would include: (a) major maintenance of existing under-performing infrastructure (e.g.,
canal dredging, re-sectioning and lining repairs, and rehabilitation of dykes), (b)
completion and/or minor upgrading of existing infrastructure (construction of secondary
and tertiary sluices gates, construction of small canal bridges, upgrading canal dykes), (c)
rehabilitation of the tertiary and quaternary irrigation facilities in conjunction with the
activities to establish WUOs under Component 1, and (d) installation of the SCADA
system in conjunction with the support provided to IDMCs under Component 1. This
component will be implemented through a three cycle subproject approach. During
project preparation, the five first cycle sub-projects (with investments totaling
approximately US$ 63.0 million) have been identified as first year subprojects and fully
prepared with detailed designs and safeguards. Other subprojects have been identified yet
more detailed design work would be completed during the period of project
implementation itself.

 This component would include facilities to support civil works such as: (i) feasibility
studies and safeguard documents; (ii) detailed design; (iii) environmental and safeguard
monitoring; and (iv) support for implementing integrated pest management, (v) land
appropriation or other safeguard works if required. The cost for land appropriation,
estimated at US$20.2 million, would be exclusively financed by the Government. Second
and third cycle subprojects would be implemented starting March 2012 and March 2014,
respectively. Prior to commencement of the second and third cycle subprojects,
feasibility studies and safeguard documents would be sent to the Bank for review and
approval.
 Component 3: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (Base Cost: US$32.98 million).
Activities will include upgrading and construction of small piped rural water supply
systems in the seven project provinces/municipalities benefitting about 60,000
households. This Component would include the following subcomponents: (a) support
for rural water supply infrastructure, (b) institutional strengthening program for the
PCERWASs, and (c) provision of sanitation facilities to households and public schools
and hygiene promotion. Similar to Component 2, this component would also be
implemented through a three cycle subproject approach, and two subprojects have been
fully designed for the first cycle. Timing of the second and third cycles would be the
same as for Component 2 and prior to commencement of second and third cycle
subprojects, feasibility studies and safeguard documents would be sent to the Bank for
review and approval.

  Component 4: Project Management and Implementation Support (Base Cost: US$7.07
million). This component would support the incremental operating costs and logistical
support for the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU), Project Management Unit #10
(PMU10), Provincial Project Management Units (PPMUs), and Provincial Center for
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (PCERWASs). The Government will finance: (a)
project staff and associated per diems, (b) office space, (c) fuel and (d) utilities, whereas
the Bank#s funds would be used to finance: (a) office furniture, (b) logistical support
(vehicles), (c) office supplies, (d) communications and logistic maintenance, and (e)
training and workshop.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Mekong Delta covers approximately 5.9 million hectares (ha) of the southern parts of
both Cambodia and Vietnam of which 12 percent are located in Vietnam.The Vietnam
Mekong Delta (VMD) has high temperatures and levels of sunshine with two distinct
rainy (May-October) and dry (November-April) seasons in which about 90% of annual
rainfall occurs in rainy season. Some 90% of the water flows occur in rainy season when
nearly 50 percent of the area is flooded, either temporarily or for more extended periods.
In the dry season, the flow of the Mekong is insufficient to prevent saline intrusion in the
waterways of the lower VMD. An average elevation of the VMD is less than three meters
above sea level; and in many important agricultural growing areas lie near or below sea
level.

  The water resources management challenge in VMD would be (a) the salinity intrusion
from the two directions (from East China Sea and the Gulf of Thailand), and (b) potential
social conflict over land and water use (aquaculture vs. rice cultivation). The area has
been developed for irrigation and there are a number of sluices (mostly in primary canals)
have been installed.

 The Project would focus on the western part of the VMD west to the Mekong (Hau)
River, which is hydrologically distinct from the eastern part. The Project area would
comprise the following six provinces and one municipality: Can Tho (Municipality), An
Giang, Kien Giang, Ca Mau, Hau Giang, Bac Lieu, and Soc Trang. The population of
these provinces are as follows (with decreasing order): An Giang (2.17 million), Kien
Giang (1.69 million), Ho Giang (0.77 million), Soc Trang (1.30 million), Ca Mau (1.21
million), Can Tho Municipality (1.19 million) and Bac Lieu (0.86 million). Within the
region, the average household size is four persons.

 Regarding the location of subprojects, most of the proposed subprojects are located in
the existing irrigation/flood control areas, namely O Mon-Xa No (OMXN); Bac Vam
Nao (BVN); Quan Lo-Phung Hiep (QLPH); Dong Nang Ren (DNR); and Ca Mau.
OMXN and QLPH irrigation schemes were financed by the Mekong Delta Water
Resources Development Project (Cr 3198 VN), which was implemented successfully
during 2000-2007. Locations of the rural water supply subprojects will be scattered in
the six project provinces and Can Tho Municipality.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASIN)
   Mr Tuan Anh Le (EASVS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A regional environmental assessment (REA) has been carried out to assess potential
impacts resulting from implementation of the possible subprojects proposed for the
project in aggregate. In conclusion, the project would not induce significant cumulative
impacts because of the following reasons:

 #      The construction of the secondary and tertiary sluice gates and the dredging of the
existing canals proposed under the Component 2 of the project would not alter the current
water management regime. The dredging works, which are considered to be long-term
maintenance works, would mainly restore the original conveyance capacity, and the
proposed secondary and tertiary sluices gates would not alter the overall water
management regime from the original designed plan. The potential environmental and
social impacts are easily mitigated at the subproject level.
 #      The issue of the disposal of the dredged materials resulting from the planned
dredge works has also been considered to be locally manageable. While the total volume
of the dredged materials would amount to 4 million m3 in total, the disposal of the
dredged materials can well be handled locally as the dredging would be carried out in an
extensive area (about 300,000 hectares) over 4-5 years of project implementation;
therefore the dredged materials would not be induced in a concentrated manner in terms
of time and place. The Mekong Delta has an extensive history of dredging, and the
national and local government agencies have adequate experience. Sampling analysis
made during the project preparation confirmed that content of residual pesticides and
heavy metals are below the national thresholds.

  #     The construction of the bridges, although appears large in number, is intended for
local use by pedestrians, motorcycles and small pickups. They are of small-scale one
lane bridge, crossing over existing irrigation canals to facilitate the transportation of
agriculture products for local communities. The impacts that might be expected during
construction such as pollution of air, noise and dust could be mitigated and can be
adequately taken into account through the project#s safeguard instruments. No road
works (including feeder roads) are planned under the project.

 #      Rural water supply and sanitation. The proposed rural water supply investments
are also considered to be of small scale, and environmental impacts such as increased
drainage could well be addressed through adequate provision of on-site sanitation and
drainage solutions.

 The project#s environmental and social impacts would be mainly at the subproject level.
The main impacts anticipated from the project and mitigation measures, which are
follows:

  (a) Impacts resulting from disposal of dredged materials.
  The main possible impacts on the local environment during maintenance dredging
and/or construction of secondary and/or tertiary sluices would be: (i) contamination of the
lands and water resulting from the disposal of dredged materials, (ii) contamination of the
roads and lands resulting from the transportation of the dredged materials, and (iii) an
increase in suspended solid in water column due to disturbance of bottom sediment.

 Under the project, the total amount of the dredging would amount to 4.0 million m3. In
the MKD, it is a customary that the dredged materials are stored on the land next to the
canal for drying for one or two years and then would be used for basis for roads and
dykes. However, it should be noted that the dredging would take place in extensive areas
and over the whole project implementation period. Important information such as
estimated quantity and likely quality of the sediments, availability of available lands for
disposal, and planned road and dyke investment would be available only at the detailed
design stage. In this context, it is appropriate to develop a detailed plan on the disposal
of the dredged materials at the detailed design stage. Sampling survey suggested that
dredged materials are mainly silt and clay with high organic content and the content of
the heavy metals and residual pesticides are below the national thresholds; therefore, the
risk of contamination of the disposed land and ground water is small.

  The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the
project includes a Section C of the ECOP, which stipulates the preparation of the dredge
disposal management plan (DMDP) for each dredging contract under this subproject.
The DMDP would cover the following aspects: (a) identification of the water users may
be affected, (b) identification of the nearby natural habitats, (c) assessment of the quality
of the sediments, (d) identifying the available land for temporary and permanent disposal
area, (e) transportation plan, if applicable, (f) managing the disposal areas, including
drainage, (g) identification of the disturbance on local businesses and transportation, (h)
identification of the infrastructure to utilize the dredged materials, and (i) monitoring plan
(including final quality assessment at the completion of the contract). The first DMDP
will be reviewed by the Bank in the process of reviewing tender document for approval.

 The Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) prepared for the first Cycle subprojects
include ECOP Section C, including a subproject in Don Nang Ren, which would induce
up to 1.4 million m3 of the dredged materials. DMDPs would be prepared during the
detailed design of the subprojects according to the ECOP. The same procedures will
apply to the future subprojects which involves dredging. The implementation of the
DMDP would mitigate the above-mentioned anticipated impacts associated with the
disposal of dredged materials.

 (b) Noises, Vibration, and other disturbances during construction activities: The civil
works carried out in the process of implementing the subprojects under the project would
generally increase the level of air, noise, vibration, and water pollution. There could be
incremental traffic congestion; additional risks to public safety; and other disturbance to
local residents. However, these impacts would be localized and temporary and could be
mitigated by (a) ensuring that contractors apply good construction practices and
initiate/maintain close consultation with local authorities and communities throughout the
construction period and (b) close supervision of field engineers and/or environmental
officer. A set of Environmental Code of Practices (ECOP) has been prepared with the
following four sections: (i) general provisions, (ii) managing construction, (iii) dredging;
and (iv) construction of very small works. ECOP is part of the subproject EMPs, and
appropriate parts of the ECOP will be included in the bidding and contract documents
and be closely monitored by supervision engineers.

 (c) Increased use of Fertilizers. Upon completion of the subprojects, in the medium to
long-term, an increased use of the agrochemicals such as fertilizer, pesticides, and
herbicides may occur as a result of more reliable supply of irrigation water. This issue
would be addressed through implementation of an integrated pest management (IPM)
Program to be developed for the subprojects. As a guideline to develop the IPM
programs, a pest management framework (PMF), which is a document supplementary to
the ESMF.
  (d) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) Loss of agricultural and residential area
resulting from land appropriation. The project will require acquisition of land (both
permanent and temporary) mainly for the disposal of dredged materials. Detailed survey
and preliminary social impact assessment conducted for five first Cycle 1 subprojects
indicates that approximately 4,700 households would be affected through a permanent
loss of a total 49 ha of land, of which residential lands account for about 20 percent. In
addition, about 31 ha of land (most is agricultural land) will be affected temporarily
during subproject construction. Of the 4,700 households affected, only 20 households, or
0.5 percent of the total project affected households are severely affected (7 households
required relocation and 13 households losing more than 20 percent of their land). Forty
eight (48) graves would need to be relocated in total under the five Cycle 1 subprojects
under Component 2. An additional 2,900 households would be affected by Cycle 2 and 3
subprojects; therefore the project would affect 7,600 families in total. In order to mitigate
the impacts, subproject specific RAPs and EMDPs have been prepared in consistent with
the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Ethnic Minority Policy Framework
(EMPF) summarized in the Section 4 below. The RAPs also set out subproject specific
menu-based income restoration programs for the severely project-affected households
and project-affected vulnerable households including the following activities: (a)
livelihoods training (aquaculture/agriculture) with some demonstrations, (b) provision of
tree plantations (e.g., orchards), and (c) vocational training. In addition, to the extent
possible, the project would encourage contractors to recruit project affected people in
implementing civil works.

 (e) Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) Impact on ethnic minority (EM) peoples: The
estimated ethnic minority population in the Mekong Delta region of Vietnam is
approximately 1.4 million or 8.2% of the total population. A number of households
belonging to three major ethnic minority groups (Khmer, Hoa, Cham) have been
identified in the subproject#s areas during the initial project screening. Therefore, a
series of free, prior and informed consultations were carried among the potentially
affected EM households. The consultations confirmed that EM households when
informed about the project and its potential adverse and positive effects, the EMs
confirmed their broads support. The preliminary social impact assessment that collected
information on the demographic and social cultural and economic of the EM households
indicated that 228 ethnic minority households, mainly Khmer, will be affected by two of
the first Cycle subprojects through involuntary land acquisition of the project. The
adverse effects of the project would lead to loss of agricultural and residential land, and
disturbances to houses and business structures, and loss of crops. In order to minimize
the impacts, mitigate and compensate the loss from the impacts, and ensure that EM
households receive culturally appropriate benefits under the project, an Ethnic Minority
Framework and EM Development Plans (EMDPs) have been prepared for the two first
Cycle subprojects according to the Ethnic Minority Policy Framework prepared ( see
Section 4 below).

 NOTE: The project was categorized as a Category #A# at the time of the Concept
Review but has now been re-categorized as a Category #B#. This is primarily because
major infrastructure investments originally expected to be part of the project (particularly
primary sluice structures, new canals, and major dykes including sea dykes) were
subsequently removed from the project design by the Government. As determined in the
environmental and social impact assessments carried out as part of preparation, the
investments now included in the project will have small-scale impacts and these can be
mitigated through the safeguard instruments and investments included under the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The major land use within the subproject areas is agriculture (rice farming) and
aquaculture (mainly integrated rice and shrimp farming). During the last 10 years, due to
financial reasons, conversion from rice farming to rice shrimp farming has been
increasing. The construction of the secondary and tertiary sluice gates would enable more
subtle control on the salinity of the incoming water, and there would be continued
increase in integrated rice and shrimp farming. The integrated rice-shrimp aquaculture is
one of the better forms of aquaculture from an environmental prospective because of (a)
small scale extensive nature (100-300 m2) run by families, and (b) use of relatively small
amounts of agriculture chemicals. There are certain environmental concerns such as: (i)
disposal of accumulated deposits at the aquaculture ponds, and (ii) possible increase in
the use of chemicals in transit to more intensive shrimp aquaculture. There is no
systematic analysis on impacts of the integrated rice-shrimp aquaculture on the water
quality. Therefore, the project would also support a study to improve environmental
management of the integrated rice and shrimp aquaculture. The Pest Management
Framework includes the outline of the study.

  Upstream development such as hydropower and irrigation development, and climate
changes are the two major factors affecting agriculture and aquaculture in the Mekong
Delta. Overall impacts are unknown as dry season freshwater may or may not increase.
The amount of the sediments and associated nutrients would be reduced by the
construction and operation of hydropower stations in the mainstream Mekong in China
and Lao PDR, and there would be some impacts on agriculture productivity and river
morphology. However, these impacts are expected to gradually materialize over the long-
term; in the medium terms, the proposed investment such as dredging and construction of
sluice gates would increase adaptive capability against these risks by restoring the
original conveyance and storage capacity and increase capacity to control salinity at the
secondary and tertiary canals.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project did not analyze in detail project alternatives since most activities carried out
will be at existing irrigation/flood control areas, and proposed investments are of the
nature of either (a) long-term maintenance (dredging), (b) completion of the original
design (construction of secondary and tertiary sluice gates), (c) rehabilitation and minor
upgrading (reinforcement of canal dykes).

 Nevertheless, in order to minimize the adverse impacts resulting from the construction
of secondary sluice gates, a new technology has been introduced to reduce the required
land acquisition and eliminate the disturbance during construction, as no construction of
diversion channel and coffer dam is required. During dredging, appropriate dredging
methods will also be used to minimize the potential negative impacts on local populations
and the environment.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Documentation. In order to comply with the applicable safeguard policies, the borrower
has developed the following safeguard documents:

 #     Regional Environmental Assessment. A regional environmental assessment
(REA), including social impact assessment, was carried out in the subproject areas. The
REA has assessed potential cumulative impacts as well as identified major impacts at the
subproject levels, and associated mitigation measures.

 #      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). An environmental
and social management framework (ESMF) has been developed based on the REA to set
out a framework to prepare for subproject specific environmental management plan
(EMPs) and deal with the environmental and social safeguards management for the
project. The ESMF has set out four steps: identification, technical screening, safeguard
documentation, and implementation. The ESMF also incorporates an ECOP mentioned
above. A section on Chance Find Procedures has been included in the ECOP Section A
to deal with physical cultural resources incidentally encountered during the
implementation of the project.

  #     Pest Management Framework (PMF): Implementation of integrated pest
management (IPM) program for each subproject would be prepared for mitigating
potential negative impacts of the project due to the potential increase in use of fertilizers
and pesticides. The IPM program is a part of the subproject specific EMP. As a
framework to prepare for an IPM program for subproject, a pest management framework
(PMF) has been developed to provide policy and technical guidance for the preparation
and implementation of the IPM programs. The PMF identifies four priorities for project
support: (a) Strengthening capacity of the IPM farmer groups, (b) Promoting non-
chemical options, (c) Strengthening regulatory measures, and (d) Assisting poor farmers
and vulnerable groups.

 #      Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). It is estimated that the project will
affect about 7,600 families, including 4,700 families to be affected by the first Cycle
subprojects. The RPF has been prepared to set out a framework for involuntary
resettlement issues such as land acquisition related impacts/displacement in connection to
the activities under the project. The RPF has been prepared for the subprojects where the
precise impacts cannot be known at this stage and will provide guidance for defining the
compensation for loss of assets and restoration of people#s livelihoods. The RPF will be
the basis for preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the subprojects. The
RPF under the project particularly features the following:
 o      Land, structure, crops, businesses: compensation to land and structures will be
made at the replacement costs while compensation to crops will be made at the market
price. Businesses affected will be compensated for the loss of structures (at replacement
cost) and income loss irrespective of land status. Vulnerable groups such as women-
headed households, the elderly or disabled, households living below the poverty
threshold (defined by the benchmark set by the Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social
Affairs) , the landless and ethnic minority households, in addition to compensation
payment to the assets affected, will be entitled to additional support under the income
restoration program when 10% or more of their total productive land are affected. The
definition of special support at household level of vulnerable population will be
determined in combination with consultation outcomes, results obtained from the social
impact assessment, and a detailed measurement survey.

 o      Grave relocation: during the preparation of the five subprojects of First Cycle, 48
graves located at individual households have been identified to be affected. The location
of these graves are scattered along the canal. Relocation of graves are expected be
carried out by individual households (as a practice in Vietnam) with exception to graves
whose owners could not be identified which will be relocated properly by the local
government. Rituals for relocation of graves may be different among Kinh, Khmer and
Cham people, so are the associated costs. Affected households will receive compensation
payment to conduct the relocation on their own. Payment to relocation includes costs of
excavation, relocation, reburial, purchasing/obtaining land for reburial (if any), and all
other reasonable costs in accordance with local rituals. Local ritual means relocation of
graves will be done in accordance with local cultural practices, taking into account
cultural preferences typical for each individual ethnic group. Grave relocation rituals
adopted by different ethnic groups will be documented in respective EMDPs based on the
consultation with affected EM during project implementation. Where graveyard - owned
collectively by ethnic groups, are affected, appropriate consultation with affected groups
will be conducted to work out solutions acceptable to them. Relocation of graves will be
carried out prior to the commencement of construction.

 #     Ethnic Minority Policy Framework. An Ethnic Minority Policy Framework
(EMPF) has been prepared based on a free, prior, and informed consultation with ethnic
minority communities to ensure that the affected ethnic minorities have an equal
opportunity to share the project benefits and that their broad-based community access and
support are established for the project and that any potential negative impacts are
properly mitigated. The EMPF provide framework to prepare subproject specific
EMDPs.

 #      Subproject Specific Safeguard Plans (Environmental Management Plans (EMPs),
Resettlement Actions Plans (RAPs), and Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDPs)):
In consistency with the above-mentioned framework documents, the following subproject
specific safeguard plans have been prepared for the first Cycle Subprojects: (a) seven
EMPs (five for Component 2, and two for Component 3), (b) five RAPs (for five
subprojects under Component 2), (c) two EMDPs (for the subprojects in Soc Trang and
Bac Lieu).
 Capacity Assessment. During the preparation of the project, the capacity of the
borrower (both national and local government agencies) regarding preparation of the
safeguard documents has been accessed to be adequate. In particular, on the positive
side, it was found that: (a) the borrower has some knowledge and capacity for preparation
and implementation regarding the social aspects of the safeguard (ethnic minority and
involuntary resettlement) through implementation of the donor funded projects, including
the Bank funded ones in general, and (b) the borrower has good technical knowledge in
managing construction works, including dredging. Extensive collaboration between the
Bank team and the borrower team has also helped the borrower understand the Bank
safeguard policy. However, implementation of the safeguard implementation would be
carried out by the respective provinces, which may not have adequate experience. In this
sense, the project would support the following measures to strengthen the capacity of the
borrower, particularly implementing units at the provincial level, regarding the
safeguards compliance: (i) safeguard training for the provincial staff to increase their
capacity for overall planning and implementation of the safeguard measures., and (ii)
engagement of a team of technical experts by the central government level to monitor the
compliance of the safeguard at the provincial level.

 Information disclosure: All the safeguard documents comprising (a) REA and Social
Impact Assessment (SIA); (b) RPF, EMPF, ESMF, ECOP, and PMP; and (c) seven
EMPs, five RAPs and two EMDPs have been disclosed in the Bank InfoShop (English)
and in country (both English and Vietnamese).

 International waters: The Mekong River is an international river. In line with the WB’s
safeguard policy related to international waters, as requested by the Government, the
Bank has informed the other five riparian countries on February 17, 2011. The Bank has
not received any response from riparian countries.

 Application of the Safeguard Procedures for the technical assistance. The framework
documents mentioned above would be applicable to the TA activities. For all the
project#s technical assistance (TA) activities, the TA will include adequate attention to
identification of environmental and social safeguard issues and will include advice to the
Recipient on the preparation and implementation of adequate safeguard instruments and
procedures.
 The project’s provision of TA will however not imply a commitment of the project or of
the Bank to finance any given feasibility study or physical investment.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultation for Subproject Section under Components 2 and 3. During preparation of
REA and SIA, consultations were carried out; the first was conducted in early December
2010 with local agencies of the six project provinces to inform them of the project and
listen to their views. Representatives from affected households, including representatives
from local mass organizations (e.g., women’s union, farmers’ associations) were invited to
the consultation. Most of the concerns expressed during the consultations were about
disruption of bridges, walkways, canals, erosion/collapsing during dredging and dyking
and mitigation measures had been incorporated during the finalization of the ESMF. The
contractor will be required to provide temporary bridges/walkways before dredging and
prepare the dredging plan in close consultation with local community and these
requirements have been incorporated into the ECOP which will be included in the
bidding and contract documents. The contractor performance will be monitored by field
engineers and PPMU.

  During the preparation of the RPF and EMPF, and subproject specific RAPs and
EMDPs, consultations were carried out with affected population and conducted for all the
first Cycle subprojects. In order to ensure meaningful consultation on the potential
impacts and compensation, consultations involved free, prior, and informed consultation,
and considered culture of the respective ethnic minority.At the consultations, a broad-
based support to the project was expressed as the project would benefit the local
populations. Main concerns raised were level of land appropriation, method of
computing the compensation, and possible support for livelihood restoration. These
concerns have been incorporated in developing the RPF and the EMPF and subproject
specific issues were reflected in the respective RAPs and EMDPs.

 The estimated specific information on compensation and timing will be finalized during
the implementation of the subprojects based on a detailed measurement survey to be
conducted. The project will continue consultations with EM throughout project
implementation, particularly during the detailed measurement survey for the first cycle
projects and identification of the second and third Cycles subprojects, to ensure the
adequacy of the RAPs and EMDPs, satisfactory implementation of the RAPs, and fair
share of the project benefits to the EM households.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   03/13/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               03/17/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                04/13/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   01/05/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               03/17/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                04/13/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   03/17/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               03/17/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/18/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/17/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/17/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/18/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                  Name                     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Toru Konishi                              04/27/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul                      05/01/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Tuan Anh Le                               04/14/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr John R. Butler                            05/06/2011
  Comments: As Acting RSA
Sector Manager:                     Ms Jennifer J. Sara                          05/04/2011
  Comments: approved
