                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/27/2011                                    Report No.: AC6548
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P066051                 Original Project Name: Forest Sector
                                             Development Project
Country: Vietnam                             Project ID: P126542
Project Name: Forest Sector Development Project Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 31,        Estimated Board Date: January 31, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASVS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Forestry (100%)
Theme: Biodiversity (33%);Other environment and natural resources management
(33%);Rural policies and institutions (17%);Land administration and management (17%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             30.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             1.50
         Financing Gap                                                  0.00
                                                                        1.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Development Objective of the Forest Sector Development Project is to achieve
sustainable management of plantation forests and the conservation of biodiversity in
special use forests.

  The Project demonstrates commercially viable and sustainable smallholder plantation
forestry for livelihood improvement in rural areas and provides capacity building and
financing support to biodiversity conservation areas across all of Vietnam. The Project
supports the Government#s National Forestry Strategy by contributing to the objectives
of restoring and increasing forest cover, promoting market-based approaches to
production forestry and increasing roles and responsibilities of local forest owners, and
strengthening protected areas management and conserving biodiversity with the
involvement of local communities.
3. Project Description
The Forest Sector Development Project was originally approved by World Bank on July
8, 2004. It is financed by an IDA-Credit of SDR27.3 million, a Global Environment
Facility grant of US$9 million as well as grants from the Multi-donor Trust Fund For
Forests of Vietnam (EUR9 million) and the European Commission (EUR1.96 million).
The DCA was signed on April 4, 2005 and became effective on August 4, 2005. The
current Closing Date of the IDA Credit is March 31, 2012.

 The FSDP Additional Financing will include a supplemental IDA-Credit of SDR18.75
million and a three year extension of the IDA-financed project components. Project
design will remain unchanged but implementation will be expanded from the current four
provinces (Thua Thien Hue, Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Binh Dinh) to two additional
provinces (Nghe An, Thanh Hoa).

 Project components and activities include the following:

  Component 1-Institutional Development aims to strengthen the policy environment for
plantation forestry and biodiversity conservation. The component is national in scope and
supports capacity development, policy analysis and formulation, and the
institutionalization of technical and management innovations developed and tested in the
field. It also supports the establishment of Farm Forestry Groups as well as independent
forest certification to help improve plantation quality, secure market access and ensure
the sustainability of plantation management. During the extension, this component will
include policy work and studies on forest enterprise restructuring, forest land allocation,
forest farmer group capacity building, and community forestry.

 Component 2-Smallholder Plantation Forest aims at promoting smallholder plantations
in the project provinces. The component supports the allocation of forest land to
smallholders as incentive for productive investment and provides technical support to
land use planning, plantation design, nursery development, and technical extension. It
also provides financing to smallholders for household level plantations through the
Vietnam Social Policy Bank. The component aims at demonstrating the economic
viability and profitability of a smallholder production forestry model to be replicated by
the Government's own programs.

 Component 3-Special Use Forest. This component is co-financed by the GEF and will
continue implementation until March 2013. It is not part of the additional financing
operation.

 Component 4-Project Management and M&E supports institutional capacity building to
plan, coordinate, and manage implementation of the overall project at national,
provincial, district, commune and special use forest levels. It also supports the design
and implementation of an internal monitoring and evaluation system to track progress and
compliance with project technical and environmental prescriptions and financial
arrangements.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The new provinces Nghe An and Thanh Hoa are located in the Northern Central Region
of Vietnam. Nghe An covers 17 districts of which 6 districts (Yen Thanh, Tan Ky, Nghi
Loc, Dien Chau, Do Luong, and Thanh Chuong) would be included in the project.
Project areas are covering upland and lowland areas of about 11,000 hectares, involving
in 43 communes with approximately 11,350 households. Thanh Hoa province covers 24
districts, of which 7 districts (Ngoc Lac, Thach Thanh, Tinh Gia, Nhu Thanh, Ha Trung,
Trieu Son, and Nong Cong) will be included in the project, covering a total area of about
9000 hectares in 44 communes. Ethnic minority people are present in both provinces.
The share of ethnic minority people exceeds 20 percent of total population in Tan Ky
district (Nghe An) and in Ngoc Lac, Nhu Thanh and Thac Thanh, and Trieu Son district
(Thanh Hoa) while ethnic minority households are likely to be present in most of the new
districts and communes as well.

 Proposed project sites in the new provinces include barren and degraded land and, to a
larger extent, existing plantations of various Acacia and Eucalyptus species. Most of
these plantations were established in the early 1990s. Plantations have generally been
regenerated by recurrent coppicing which has resulted in poor growth and very low
yields. Often these plantations are situated on badly eroded, exhausted, and compacted
soils and require replacement and improvement top restore soil fertility and productivity
as well as basic economic and ecological functions.

 In the existing provinces, Quang Ngai has proposed the inclusion of 2 new districts
(Minh Long, Binh Son) with 7 communes, covering a total of 3540 hectares, and Binh
Dinh has proposed the inclusion of 1 new district (Hoai An) with 5 communes, covering
a total area of 2,9000 hectares. In Minh Long District of Quang Ngai, more than 70
percent of the population belongs to the Hre ethnic group. All proposed plantation site
consist of barren land, unproductive cashew or other tree species plantations and coppices
that require replacement.

 Proposed new sites in new and existing provinces have been subject to an environmental
and social screening as part of a supplemental Environmental Assessment process.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS)
   Mr Svend Jensby (EASCS)
   Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen (EASVS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The FSDP Additional Financing will be implemented along the Project's original design
and activities and will not change the originally appraised overall environmental and
social safeguards risks, which are minor. The original environmental categorization
(Category B) remains the same. The Project will be implemented with the same set of
safeguard instruments: Environmental Protection Guidelines, Resettlement Policy
Framework, and Ethnic Minority Development Strategy. During the preparation of the
FSDP Additional Financing, supplemental Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments (EIA/SIA) were carried out covering the new districts (in existing and new
provinces) proposed for inclusion in the project. All safeguards instruments were
reviewed and revised to incorporate changes in domestic policies since the original
project appraisal, project implementation lessons to date, and the conclusions from the
supplemental EIA and SIA.

 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.01). Project implementation to date has not
resulted in any significant or irreversible negative environmental impacts and is not
expected to do so during the expansion of the project. The original Environmental
Assessment (2004) identified a number of potential impacts including the loss of residual
biodiversity resulting from the conversion of successional vegetation communities to
plantations, site degradation and nutrient depletion through multiple rotations, increased
incidence of pest and disease due to overly simplistic plantation design, and increase in
soil and water loss due to poor plantation practices and access track development. None
of these impacts have materialized in any way that would warrant a revision of the
design. Some weaknesses in implementation at a limited number of sites have been
identified during early project implementation, including the lack of attention to stream
buffer zone protection, failure to follow plantation design in some sites, and poor record
keeping on fertilizers and pesticides, which have been addressed through training on
silvicultural practices and certification requirements and through better landscape level
planning.
 The supplemental EIA (2011) confirmed the conclusions of the original EA that impacts
of the smallholder plantations are generally positive. Potentially negative impacts can be
avoided or minimized through the application of the Environmental Protection
Guidelines, which also cover issues pertaining to the Bank's policy on Natural Habitats
(OP 4.04). The plantation component is not located in any natural forest area but limited
to sites that are classified as barren and degraded land or as poor existing plantations. No
conversion of natural habitats or forests is occurring. Measures to address the Bank's
policy on Forests (OP 4.36) have also been designed. These include the assistance to
farmers to move towards meeting the criteria and indicators of independent certification
schemes and eventually allow for the independent certification of plantations (on a pilot
basis) during the project implementation period.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). No involuntary resettlement or land acquisition
has taken place during project implementation to date and involuntary resettlement is not
expected to occur under the FSDP Additional Financing. The Smallholder Plantation
Forest component may include the upgrading of access tracks but these are existing
tracks that are not expected to require any land acquisition. The Resettlement Policy
Framework has been revised to reflect changes in national legislation and to be applicable
in case any land acquisition would occur during the extension. The revisions also reflect
implementation lessons of the Special Use Forest component. Although this component
is not part of the Additional Financing, it is still under implementation and may include
restrictions of access to natural resources in protected areas.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). Ethnic minorities are present in the existing and new
provinces of the FSDP. Ethnic Minorities have benefited from the Project through direct
participation in plantation investments and through the implementation of Ethnic
Minority Development Plans (EMDP). To date, more than 1,500 ethnic minority
households have participated in the plantation program and received loans. A total of 26
commune-level EMDPs have been implemented. A review of EMDP implementation
found that EMDP activities have enhanced the capacity of households to participate in
plantation activities and improve their livelihoods. The assessment also noted that those
EMDP activities that focused on more general livelihood improvements (not directly
linked to plantation investments) could be further enhanced. The Project#s Ethnic
Minority Development Strategy has been revised to reflect these lessons as well as the
findings of the supplemental SIA. Changes in the Bank#s policy (the FSDP was prepared
under the Operational Directive 4.20) have also been considered in the revised strategy.

 The FSDP Additional Financing is expected to continue to have positive impacts on
ethnic minorities as it is demand-driven and participation is voluntary with interest for
participation being elicited during village consultations. Land use planning is designed to
identify land use patterns and critical areas for food production. Land use certificates are
awarded only in areas without conflicting land claims. Capacity building and support
activities for ethnic minority communes all aim to ensure sustainability of ethnic minority
household plantations. Potential adverse impacts in terms of their access to land and
forest areas, food security, and inability to meet loan obligations are being addressed
appropriately in the Ethnic Minority Development Strategy.
 Consultations. Consultations with project stakeholders were undertaken by project
consultants as part of the supplemental EIA/SIA process. Provincial Project Management
Units and District Implementation Units have also undertaken consultations with project
beneficiaries, including ethnic minorities, in both existing and new provinces.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The Project is supporting sustainable smallholder plantation forestry on barren, degraded
or poor soils for long-term economic and ecological benefits. No long-term negative
environmental and social impacts or cumulative negative impacts are anticipated. Instead,
the gradual conversion of plantations into more species diverse forests with indigenous
species, which is also promoted under the project, is expected to result in the recovery of
degraded landscapes over time.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The FSDP Additional Financing is the continuation of an ongoing project and tested
approach and an analysis of project alternatives was not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During preparation of the FSDP Additional Financing, supplemental EIA/SIAs were
prepared and safeguards instruments were reviewed and updated to incorporate changes
in domestic policies, lessons from implementation to date, and findings and
recommendations from the supplemental EIA/SIA. The Bank has reviewed the revised
instruments (prepared by MARD and endorsed by relevant government agencies) and
found them fully satisfactory.

 The Borrower has demonstrated an increasing capacity and ability to implement the
safeguard provisions and address gaps and weaknesses identified during the Bank#s
supervision and through the Borrower#s own assessments, such as internal assessments
of plantation performance and EMDP implementation review. Borrower capacity,
supported by technical assistance, to assess and manage environmental and social aspects
or project implementation is adequate.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key project stakeholders are the farmer households (approximately 35,000 households)
in the project areas that participate in the smallholder plantation program. Additional
stakeholders include the provincial and district-level government agencies as well as
local branches and staff of the Vietnam Bank for Social Policy that support
implementation and are benefitting from training and capacity building.

 As part of the EA process of the FSDP Additional Financing, stakeholder consultations
were undertaken in the new project areas by project consultants as well as Provincial
Project Management Units and District Implementation. During implementation, the
project will follow the established participatory and consultative process with households
as documented in the Project Implementation Manual. The supplemental EIA/SIA reports
and updated safeguard instruments were reviewed by the Bank as part of project appraisal
and disclosed in the project areas, at the central government level in Hanoi, and in the
InfoShop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/10/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/15/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/12/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/20/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/15/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/12/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/12/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/15/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/12/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
NA


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        Yes
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                  Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt   10/13/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Douglas J. Graham         10/13/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Svend Jensby              10/13/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr John R. Butler            10/27/2011
  Comments: As Acting RSA
Sector Manager:                     Ms Jennifer J. Sara          10/13/2011
  Comments:
