                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/25/2011                                      Report No.: AC6304
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Vietnam                              Project ID: P116398
Project Name: Medium Cities Development Project
Task Team Leader: Axel E. N. Baeumler
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 11,         Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: EASVS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%);General
transportation sector (40%);Sub-national government administration (20%)
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (40%);Urban services and
housing for the poor (40%);Other urban development (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            210.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             75.00
                                                                        75.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to increase access to improved urban infrastructure
services in Lao Cai City, Phu Ly City, and Vinh City in a sustainable and efficient
manner.

3. Project Description
The project is comprised of priority infrastructure investments in the three project cities;
the investments in each city constitute a subproject. Each subproject will have four
components:

 #      Component 1: Basic Urban Infrastructure Upgrading and Service Improvements.
This component will focus on improving the infrastructure and service conditions in
existing or newly developed urban neighborhoods, primarily through investments in basic
infrastructure (water supply and sanitation, drainage, lighting, road paving and widening,
etc). For Lao Cai and Vinh, it will also include improvements in sanitation facilities in
existing schools.
 #      Component 2: Urban Water Supply and Environmental Sanitation. This
component will focus on primary and secondary infrastructure for water supply, drainage,
wastewater collection and treatment, and flood mitigation. It will also rehabilitate
existing road networks, mainly in the older areas of the cities.

 #     Component 3: Urban Roads and Bridges. This component will construct new
urban roads, typically to provide access to the cities' expanding urban areas.

 #      Component 4: Project Management and Technical Assistance. This component
will typically include for each city: (i) project management support to the PMU and
construction supervision; (ii) independent social, environment, and financial account
monitoring; (iii) technical assistance for urban planning, asset management, internal audit
capacity building, and other city-specific assistance; (iv) provision of essential equipment
and facilities; (v) training and study tours for relevant city agencies; and (vi) the PMU's
operational costs for the duration of the project.

 Investments for which detailed designs and bidding documents will be ready by credit
negotiations are called Phase 1 investments. Phase 2 investments are those whose
detailed designs and bidding documents will be prepared during project implementation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The participating cities are Lao Cai City in Lao Cai Province, Phu Ly City in Ha Nam
Province, and Vinh City in Nghe An Province. Although the cities are quite different in
many respects, they are similar in that they consist of old urban areas with generally
established infrastructure, much of which is severely deteriorated, and new expanding
areas which have inadequate infrastructure.

 Lao Cai is located on Vietnam's northwest border with China, situated on both sides of
the Red River where it emerges from China. There is no wastewater treatment system;
wastewater is collected and channeled directly into the Red River. The city's master plan
envisages the city expanding to the southeast, along a relatively narrow plain on the right
bank of the river. The new plan is characterized by broad roads, relatively low density
developments, with water and wastewater distribution and collection networks. The
resettlement sites required to accommodate the people displaced by the project will be
located in this new residential area. The new city expansion includes hilly areas. The city
as a whole has 46% of its land covered by forests, of which 57% is for protective
purposes (for watershed protection) and the remaining are production forests. In the
project areas, which are located in 13 of the city's 17 wards, the forest coverage is 33%.

 Phu Ly is located about 50 km south of Hanoi, on National Highway 1, which is parallel
to the main north-south railway. The city is presently small, consisting essentially of an
old urban area clustered along both banks of the Chau Giang River. The city's master
plan provides for relatively modest improvement to the existing urban areas, without
major dislocation of residents, and more substantial infrastructure development in a new
urban area to the north. There are two new wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) being
constructed for the old part of the city and the expansion in the south. Effluent from a
third new WWTP, which will be financed by the project in the new city expansion area in
the north, would discharge to the Chau Giang River. Several small lakes will be improved
to become part of the city's green space and also to serve an important flood mitigation
and retention purpose.

 Vinh, the largest of the project's three cities, is located about 300 km south of Hanoi,
also on National Highway 1. The city is relatively compact, focused on the ancient citadel
area. The city's present master plan envisages the city expanding further, to the
northwest, north, and northeast. The plan envisages an extensive road network into this
area, together with water and wastewater/drainage networks. A wastewater treatment
plant is under construction, with assistance from KfW of Germany. The area around the
ancient citadel, presently run down and affected by highly polluted lakes and drains but
with high heritage value, will be improved under the project through providing
wastewater, drainage, and pedestrian access facilities. The project-financed wastewater
works will connect to the new KfW wastewater plant.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASVS)
   Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 The three cities have prepared city-specific full Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) reports. The EIAs concluded that the project will have mostly positive but some
potentially adverse environmental impacts. The project will enhance environmental
sanitation and basic infrastructure in urban areas though improving existing drainage and
sewer systems, and by developing roads and new resettlement sites with adequate
utilities.

 OP4.01. Environmental Assessment. The policy is triggered due to expected negative
impacts, which will occur during the construction and operational phases. The impacts
will range from temporary and localized disturbances caused by construction, such as
dust, noise, waterway blockage and traffic congestion, to more significant impacts
associated with final disposal of sludge from dredging of the retention lakes, and the
often large amounts of excavation required for the construction of roads and resettlement
sites. During the operation stage, the WWTPs will generate effluent, odors, and sludge.
Following national environmental standards, which are close to the indicative values
provided in the World Bank Group EHS Guidelines, the waste treatment facilities will be
equipped to manage these impacts and a contingency plan will be developed in the event
of WWTP failure. Calculation of the pollution dispersion in case of operational failure
shows that effluents from the to-be-constructed WWTPs in Lao Cai and Phu Ly would
have acceptable level of impacts on the quality of the receiving waters for the Red River
and the Chau Giang River respectively. In another catchment in Phu Ly the proposed
drainage and sewers will be connected to a BTC-funded WWTP which will have enough
capacity to receive the increased wastewater as a result of such connection.

 In the case of Vinh city, the proposed drainage and sewers will be connected to the
WWTP funded by KfW which has a designed capacity large enough to accommodate the
increase of influent resulting from such connections.

 Due diligence assessment have been conducted by the Bank in Vinh and Phu Ly for the
EIAs of the two WWTPs to which the sewer systems proposed for project financing
would be connected. The assessment considered maximum design capacity, discharge of
effluents and sludge management during operations, outcomes of public consultation, and
the EIA approval provided by DONREs. The result of this assessment indicates no
potential reputational risk to the Bank. Although the EIAs were prepared and approved in
2007, they are still valid as no changes in the design and environmental settings are
envisaged. Specifically:

 1. In Phu Ly: the WWTP is being financed by BTC (Belgian ODA). The design
capacity of 5,000 m3 is adequate for accepting wastewater from the population living in
the catchment which covers the downtown area, Liem Chinh and Liem Trung communes;
this is wider than the WB project area. Public consultation in these areas was conducted
sufficiently with the commune people's committees and the local Fatherland Front as
required by GoV regulations. The selected technology provides for treatment of sludge
generated during WWTP operation and the final disposal is arranged with URENCO at
the city sanitary landfill. Effluents will be discharged to the Day River. The EIA report
was approved by Ha Nam Provincial People's Committee, based on the recommendation
of DONRE, on August 2, 2007.

 2. Vinh: the WWTP is being financed by KfW (Germany ODA). The design capacity is
25,000 m3 (2010), 36,000 m3 (2020) and 80,000 m3 (2030) which is adequate for
accepting wastewater from the population living in the whole city, thus wider than the
WB project area. Public consultation was conducted sufficiently with the Hung Hoa (the
location of the WWTP) Commune People's committee and the local Fatherland Front as
required by GoV regulations. The selected technology provides for treatment of sludge
generated during WWTP operation and the final disposal will be arranged with URENCO
at the city sanitary landfill or used for composting, depending on the monitoring result of
the sludge quality. Effluents will be discharged to the Lam River and would meet the
national standards of water usage for fishery and recreational activities. The EIA report
was approved by Nghe An Provincial People's Committee, based on recommendation of
DONRE, on April 10, 2007.

  The EIA reports for Phu Ly and Vinh for MCDP were prepared by the same consulting
firm hired by the Recipient to do the engineering designs. To ensure the independence of
the environmental assessments as per the requirement of the Bank's OP 4.01, an
international individual consultant independent of the consulting firm carried out an
assessment of the EIAs. This was supplemented by a similar assessment by the Bank. It
was concluded that the EIAs satisfied the requirements of the Bank's policy on
environmental assessment in terms of quality and independence.

  OP 4.04 Natural habitats. At PCN stage the policy was triggered by the Lao Cai
component. However, a careful field survey and updated data on land use in the project
areas have subsequently shown that the project will require clearance of about 5 ha of
degraded forested areas accounting for 0.1% of the total city forest cover. The losses of
these small areas of forest are not considered to be significant. Therefore, OP 4.04 is not
triggered. No other significant areas of natural habitat are affected the project, which is
exlusively taking place in an urban environment.

 OP 4.11 Physical and Cultural Resources. The policy is triggered by invesments under
the Vinh component and by relocation of graves in all three cities. The Vinh City
component includes dredging and improvement of the moat and canals which are parts of
the city's Ancient Citadel area and lake improvement next to the important Can Linh
Pagoda. The moat itself has no remaining vestiges of its original construction. In Lao Cai
and Phu Ly, project activities will take place near temples and cultural monuments but no
direct or significant impacts are expected as those premises are located at reasonably far
distance to the project sites.

 In all three cities graves will have to be relocated (more than 1,000 in total).
Consultations showed that affected community members agree with the required moves
of the affected graves and with the mitigation measures that will be implemented.

 OP 7.50 International waterways. The policy is triggered by the Lao Cai component
where the project-financed wastewater treatment plant will discharge into the Red River
downstream of the border with China, which is about 5 km upstream of the plant.
However the calculation of pollution dispersion from the future effluent discharge has
shown that assimilative capacity would be within the national standards and thus no
potential impacts will be expected on the water quality of the Red river within Chinese
territory.

 OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. OP 4.12 is triggered for all three project cities,
although a lot of effort was made during project preparation to minimize land acquisition.
About 123.7 ha of land will be acquired in Vinh with 16.7 ha of residential land and
103.4 ha of agricultural land, resulting in 1995 project-affect households (PAHs) with
408 to be relocated. In Phu Ly, about 36.9 ha will be acquired with 3.0 ha of residential
and 25.9 ha of agricultural land, affecting 715 households with 109 to be relocated. In
Lao Cai, the land area to be acquired will be about 75 ha with 5.9 ha of residential and
56.8 ha of agricultural land. The number of affected households there would be about
523, with 294 PAHs (or 566 family units) to be relocated. Three Resettlement Plans
(RPs) have been developed for the three cities to mitigate the impacts and to ensure all
PAHs would be able to restore their lost assets and livelihood to pre-project levels.

 OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples. Among the three project cities, only Lao Cai has ethnic
minority people living in the project area. These are from the Muong, Dao, Giay, Tay,
and Nung groups. An ethnic minority plan (IPP) has been developed for these groups. As
for all other city residents, they will directly benefit from the project. However, there are
21 ethnic minority households to be affected by the project land acquisition and 12 of
them will be required to relocate. They have been included in the Lao Cai RP. The RP
includes measures to mitigate the impacts on them, and to assist them to fully restore
their lost assets and livelihoods in keeping with their culture.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no indirect or long term impacts of the project due to anticipated future
activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Urbanization and city expansion are taking place in all three cities as governed by their
respective city master plans. The current project implements a slice of the planned
investments in each city. According to national regulations, masterplans are subject to
review and appraisal by the respective people's committees, including environmental
authorities. While alternatives were considered in the preparation of the master plans,
they were further considered where necessary during the project's feasibility study and
related EIA preparation.

 The EIAs were conducted sufficiently early in the feasibility study to influence the
choice of site-specific technical alternatives. Alternatives for Lao Cai and Phu Ly
included the location and the choice of treatment technologies for the WWTPs to ensure
minimal land acquisition, meeting the national environmental standards, and to minimize
investment and O&M costs. For Vinh , the option of a flyover section in the Hung Tay -
Vinh road crossing a railway was selected to minimize direct and indirect environmental
impacts during construction and operation stages. Alternatives for managing future
wastewater from Nghi Phu resettlement site were adopted to optimize plans for managing
wastewater. The width of the proposed roads in Lao Cai was reduced and some
residential land was left out from the proposed resettlement sites in Vinh and Lao Cai to
minimize land acquisition.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
OP 4.01 Environmental assessment. Environmental assessment was undertaken as part
of the feasibility studies. The three cities have prepared city-specific full Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) reports, including Environmental Management Plans (EMPs),
defining the safeguard measures to be followed during project implementation. The EIAs
cover all investments identified at the feasibility study stage, including all those that are
in Phase 1 or Phase 2 (for phasing, see text under Project Description). For the Phase 2
investments, no major changes in the type and scale of the proposed investments are
expected, nor in the expected impacts and needed mitigation measures. However,
following standard practice, changes arising during the detailed design stage, that might
have any unexpected implications for safeguard issues, would require a supplementary
EA and supplementary EMP acceptable to the Bank.

 The EMPs include mitigation measures, a monitoring plan and institutional
responsibilities for its implementation, and capacity building programs on environmental
management for PMU staff and relevant stakeholders. Adequate cost estimate and
indicative funding sources for EMP implementation during construction and operation
phases are provided in the EMPs. The mitigation measures as set out in the EMPs (some
of them are incorporated into Environmental Codes of Practice, ECOPs) will be
incorporated into the bidding documents and contracts for all civil works. The project
supervision consultants for each city will monitor the status of compliance with
mitigation measures in their regular reports to the PMUs. Assessment of impacts on
physical and cultural resources and impacts on natural habits is included in the EIAs.

 Safe disposal at city landfills for the sludge generated during the operation of the
project-financed WWTPs in Lao Cai and Phu Ly will be required and the cost will be
covered by the cities' O&M budgets. For Phu Ly, the city landfill has been constructed as
a sanitary landfill and can accommodate the safe disposal of potentially contaminated
sludge. In Lao Cai, the Tong Mon landfill site is not classified as a sanitary landfill site.
A more detailed assessment of the city's sanitation and disposal needs will be undertaken
as part of the urban sanitation strategy study to be implemented as part of the project
prior to commencement of procurement for the WWTP. If the assessment indicates that
additional provisions at the landfill are required, which may include construction of a
special cell at the site, this will be done with counterpart financing. The financing
agreement will reflect this provision.

 Each PMU will contract an experienced independent environmental consultant for
assisting the PMU in EMP implementation. The consultant will advise on monitoring of
mitigation measures to be implemented by the contractors, and carry out the
environmental monitoring program as designed in the EMPs. The consultant will also
assist the PMU in overall implementation of and external monitoring of compliance with
the EMP. The consultant will also develop and conduct environmental training for the
PMUs, the supervision consultants, and contractors, as well as local communities as
appropriate. The consultant will submit biannual monitoring reports to the PMU.

 The PMUs will include environmental compliance progress reports in their regular
progress reporting, and will share these reports with the provinces' Departments of
Natural Resources and Environment (DONREs). The DONREs will be responsible for
reviewing and approving the EIAs in accordance with the Government's regulations. The
DONREs will also undertake state management of environmental performance of their
respective city's subprojects based on their review of project monitoring reports and
inspections as necessary.

 OP 4.04 Natural habitats. Although the policy was not triggered, special attention and
specific mitigation measures for minimizing loss of trees or vegetative cover are included
in the ECOPs to be attached to all construction contracts and have been developed using
the alignment sheet approach in the EIA for Lao Cai. The technical design of the D1 road
in Lao Cai City has been modified to reduce widths and the EMP provides for specific
monitoring of forest removal to minimize unnecessary forest cutting.

 OP 4.11 Physical and Cultural Resources (PCR). The EIAs identified the presence of
PCRs in the project areas (graves in all three cities and the Citadel moat in Vinh).
Impacts on identified PCRs, associated mitigation measures and monitoring are
addressed in the EIAs and EMPs. No significant or non-reversible impacts on PCRs are
expected. The EMPs also include clear guidance on the chance finds procedures to be
followed, in line with Government regulations and consistent with Bank policy.

 Relocation of a total of more than 1,000 graves will be conducted in full agreement with
affected communities and families. The public consultation also included addressing
adequately cultural and spiritual concerns.

 As no known vestige of the original moat still exists in Vinh, the project's investments
in the citadel area are not expected to generated any negative impacts; the impacts of
cleaning up the very degraded and polluted moat will be positive. The chance finds
procedure would be carefully followed for any works in the vicinity of the Citadel.

 OP 7.50 International waters. As required by the Policy, a notification from the World
Bank on behalf of the Government of Vietnam at the request from the Government of
Vietnam, was sent to the Chinese counterpart (MOF) on July 6, 2011. Any recipient
response, if is received, will be publicly disclosed immediately.

 OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Each city has developed a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and a Resettlement Plan (RP) for all subcomponents of the project that
require land acquisition. The exception is for some possible additional resettlement sites
in Vinh that will be identified during project implementation. The RPFs have been
developed in accordance with Government regulations and the Bank's OP 4.12 on
Involuntary Resettlement. Government procedures require that the RPFs be submitted to
the Prime Minister for approval prior to credit negotiations. The RPs were based on the
RPFs, and have been developed in close consultation with the people affected by the
project. Two resettlement sites are to be constructed for each of the Lao Cai and Vinh
subprojects. For the Phu Ly subproject, relocated PAHs will be settled in sites to be
developed by the city as larger resettlement areas for the entire city.

 To ensure that compensation for all types of affected assets are paid at fair replacement
value, each PMU will engage a professional asset appraiser at the initial stages of the
resettlement implementation to conduct a replacement cost survey for each type of assets.
The survey results will be used as a basis for the PMUs and the Provincial People's
Committees to decide compensation rates to ensure that they reflect replacement values.

 The RPFs, RPs, and the IPP require that an independent Grievance Panel be established
in each city, in parallel with the Government's grievance redress system. The members of
these panels will include, in addition to the members from the PMU and the City
Compensation Board, members chosen from mass organizations, civil society, the
lawyers association, and PAH representatives.

  Each PMU will contract an experienced independent resettlement monitoring agency
(IMA) for external monitoring of resettlement implementation. The IMA will submit its
reports bi-annually to the PMU and to the Bank. The IMA will also conduct an evaluation
of resettlement implementation 6-12 months after the completion of all resettlement
activities to assess whether or not the PAHs have been able to restore their lost assets,
livelihoods and incomes to pre-project levels. If this evaluation indicates that PAHs who
have not recovered their livelihoods according to the project objectives, additional
assistance will be provided to ensure that they can fully restore their pre-project situation.
This provision has been included in the project's RPFs and RPs. The IMA will also
monitor IPP implementation in Lao Cai.

  Linked Projects. Due diligence was carried out in Lao Cai, Vinh and Phu Ly to assess
potentially linked projects. For Lao Cai, some road segments connected to D1 road are
considered linked. For Vinh, the KFW funded wastewater treatment plant is considered
linked. A due diligence review of past land acquisition activities was carried out that
confirmed that compensation, livelihood restoration and resettlement activities followed
national policies and are considered to be consistent with World Bank policy.

 In addition, resettlement sites funded with counterpart funds are part of the project. All
compensation and resettlement activities for land clearance of these sites therefore is to
be consistent with World Bank policy. In Vinh, seven resettlement sites are funded with
counterpart funds and a RP will be prepared based on the RPF. In Phu Ly, three
resettlement sites are funded with counterpart funds (Liem Chinh, Lam Ha and Quang
Trun). For two resettlement sites (Liem Chinh and Lam Ha) where land was already
acquired, a due diligence review has been conducted. For the third site (Quang Trung),
households affected by the land acquisition which has yet to take place, are covered by
the PR which was prepared during project preparation. The basic infrastructure services
will be the same for all resettled households on the three sites, independent of whether
they were resettled as a result of MCDP or other projects.

 OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples. As mentioned above, only Lao Cai has ethnic minority
people living in the project area. These are from the Muong, Dao, Giay, Tay, and Nung
groups. An ethnic minority plan (hereafter IPP, as it is equivalent to an Indigenous
Peoples Plan as defined by the World Bank operational policy) has been prepared in close
and prior consultation with them to ensure that they receive assistance from the project to
facilitate their development and to ensure they benefit from the project. Of these, 21
households will be adversely affected by the project land acquisition and 12 of them will
be required to relocate. They have been included in Lao Cai RP. The RP includes
measures to mitigate the impacts on them, and to assist them to fully restore their lost
assets and livelihoods in keeping with their culture.

  The People's Committees of the project cities, supported by provincial authorities, will
assume overall responsibility for their respective resettlement and, for Lao Cai, ethnic
minority programs. The Provincial People's Committees of the provinces will give the
final approval for land acquisition, allocation and compensation rates. All compensation
and land acquisition costs, and the cost of Lao Cai's IPP implementation, will be financed
by counterpart funds.

 The PMU of each city will be responsible for overall management and reporting of the
city's resettlement and IPP program. Although they are new to the Bank's policies and
requirements, they have staff experienced with compensation and resettlement activities
and committed to fulfill the Bank's requirements. They have been provided with training
in the Bank's social safeguard policies and practices. They will receive further training
under the capacity building component of the project during project implementation.
Working with the City People's Committee and local authorities to implement the RPs
and the IPP, the PMU will monitor the progress of RP and IPP implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project stakeholders are the participating households, local authorities, and local
NGOs. Public consultations included surveys using public opinion questionnaires and
public meetings with key stakeholders such as beneficiaries and affected households as
well as local NGO representatives (e.g. from the Women's Union, Fatherland Front) in
project areas. As required by OP 4.01 for Category A projects, the EIA process included
two rounds of meaningful and participatory consultations with potentially affected
persons and communities, during which the project's impacts and their proposed
management were discussed. Details of the consultation process and feedback from the
public consultations are reflected in the final draft EIA reports. In addition, official
comments from government agencies (e.g. Ward People Committees) and local
Fatherland Front were collected in accordance with the government regulations.

 Consultations with the project affected households and other stakeholders were carried
out during development of the RPFs, the social assessment and RPs/IPP preparation.
Information on the project's objectives and likely impacts, and relevant features of the
compensation and resettlement policy frameworks, and the IPP, was disseminated. A
participatory approach was used to reach consensus on the resettlement policy and
entitlements for various adverse impacts as well as for collecting information during the
social assessment and IPP preparation. A similar participatory approach will be pursued
during project implementation to ensure effective implementation of the project's RPFs,
RPs, and the Lao Cai IPP.

 The draft EIAs/RPFs/RPs/EMDP in Vietnamese have been disclosed locally (at each
city's People's Committee office) and in VDIC in Hanoi since May 23, 2011. The English
versions have been sent to VDIC and to InfoShop in Washington, DC on the same day.
The Executive summary report consolidated for all three cities will be sent to the Bank's
Board of Directors on October 15, 2011 and will be disclosed in the InfoShop. All final
EIAs/RPFs/RPs/EMDP will be redisclosed locally and at the Bank's InfoShop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/23/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/23/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/31/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              10/17/2011
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/23/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/23/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/31/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/23/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/23/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/31/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                  Name                    Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Axel E. N. Baeumler                      10/18/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran                    09/24/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham                        10/17/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Douglas J. Graham                        09/24/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):   Ms Pilar Larreamendy                        10/17/2011

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr John R. Butler                           10/24/2011
  Comments: As Acting RSA
Sector Manager:                     Ms Jennifer J. Sara                         10/18/2011
  Comments:
