                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6423


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/08/2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Vietnam                              Project ID: P125996
Project Name: Distribution Efficiency Project
Task Team Leader: Hung Tien Van
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 5, 2012        Estimated Board Date: September 13, 2012
Managing Unit: EASVS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         400
IDA Amount (US$m.):            48.9
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           313.50
        AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 7.60
        Clean Technology Fund                                          30.00
                                                                     351.10


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objective is to improve the efficiency of Vietnam’s Power Corporations
(PC) in delivering power distribution and retail supply services, through supply and demand side
interventions. As part of this efficiency objective, the project will also support enhancements in
the regulatory framework.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project will comprise the following three components:

  Component 1: System Expansion and Reinforcement. This component will cover construction
and reinforcement of 110 kV, medium voltage (MV) and LV networks, including distribution
lines and substations. The investments under this component will help the PCs to efficiently meet
load growth, address load supply constraints due to distribution system congestion, reduce
losses, and improve reliability and quality of power supply.
 Component 2: Introduction of Smart Grid Technologies in Distribution. This component will
introduce smart grid technologies for the automation of distribution network operations and
advanced metering systems (AMS) at key substations and electricity consumers in PCs. The
adoption of these smart grid technologies will contribute to improving the PCs’ operating
efficiency and optimizing the configuration of the distribution network to reduce overloads;
increasing the accuracy of billing, avoiding loss of revenue; allowing timely detection and repair
of failures in equipment; enabling the load profiling of electricity consumers’ to improve load
forecasting and optimize generation dispatch as well for demand side response programs and
efficient tariffs setting. These, in turn, can lead to the reduction of the investment required for
distribution infrastructure, decrease in operating costs, improve reliability and quality of
distribution services, and avoidance of GHG emissions associated with thermal power
generation. CTF co-financing is proposed for this component.

  Component 3: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building. This component will include
technical assistance and capacity building for the five PCs. Additionally, a grant for technical
assistance to MoIT is proposed to develop and implement new and enhanced regulations for
promoting efficient use of electricity, and monitoring and communication frameworks.

 The preliminary estimated total cost of the project is US$ 330 million, out of which US$ 300
million is expected to be financed from IBRD and US$ 30 million by CTF. The TA support to
MoIT is proposed as a grant, and there are on-going discussions with AusAid on possible
contribution.

D. Project location (if known)
The project areas will be defined during the preparation but would be scattered all over 44
provinces of the country.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Power Corporations, namely Northern Power Corporation (NPC), Central Power Corporation
(CPC), Southern Power Corporation (SPC), Ho Chi Minh City Power Corporation (HCMPC)
and Hanoi Power Corporation (HNPC), will implement the project thorough their Project
Management Units (PMUs). The PMUs will be responsible for the daily activities related to the
project’s compliance with environmental and social safeguards policies. The overall
responsibility for project monitoring and implementation of safeguard frameworks and
guidelines will remain with PCs.

 With the exception of HNPC, all PCs PMUs have implemented a number of IDA credits since
1995. Each of these projects has involved broadly similar safeguards issues and remedies and the
PMUs are experienced with World Bank requirements regarding the preparation of EIA/EMPs,
RPs, EMDPs and the use of frameworks to guide their preparation.
 On the other hand, Hanoi PC does not have experience with Bank-financed projects. However,
the PC does have extensive experiences with projects funded by other international donors,
including the Asian Development Bank (ADB). To improve their capacity with regard to
compliance with World Bank safeguard policies, during project preparation and implementation
additional training will be provided to Hanoi PC staff on this subject, to make sure that adequate
capacity is available.
 MoIT, as an implementing agency will be responsible for the implementation of Component 3
Technical Assistance and Capacity Building, along with the PCs. This component only entails
studies, enhancement of regulations and capacity building activities, and therefore safeguards is
not an issue.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS)
   Mr Van Trung Nguyen (EASVS)
   Mr Son Van Nguyen (EASVS)
   Mr Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    Based on the experiences of the other similar projects and the list of the proposed subprojects
furnished to the Bank by PCs, the impacts are likely to be site-specific, not sensitive or
irreversible, and in every case, mitigation measures can be designed to reduce the negative
impacts. It is proposed therefore that the project be classified as Category B.

      Expected impacts include (i) tree cutting associated with construction of substations and
distribution lines; (ii) increased levels of dust, noise, and other emissions from excavation
activities, land clearing activities, material stockpiles, heavy equipment, and truck traffic; (iii)
construction site waste generation; (iv) rural traffic disturbance and road damage due to the
transportation of building materials and equipment; (v) soil erosion, sediment, and landslide
risks; (vi) unexploded ordnance risks; (vii) leakage or disposal of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs), sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), and fuels; (viii) health and safety issues for workers and
community during both construction and operation phases.

      As most of the impacts are anticipated to be minor and sub-project specific, scattered over
most of Vietnam, it is not proposed to carry out a stand-alone environmental impact assessment.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) providing guidance for individual
subprojects will be prepared by EVN and submitted to the Bank for review and clearance prior to
Appraisal. For those subprojects which are identified prior to appraisal, the appropriate
subproject safeguard instruments will also be prepared in line with the EMF. The EMF will
include the following: i) A description of the types and scale of subprojects and their ancillary
aspects which need to be considered in individual safeguard instruments; ii) Legal frameworks;
iii) Screening procedures; iv) Standard environmental specifications for contractors
(environmental codes of practices [ECOPs] or their equivalent) to manage construction-related
impacts in subprojects; v) Environmental assessment preparation and approval process including
requirements for EMP preparation, specific guidance for PCB management, and specific
guidance on unexploded ordnance; and vi) Budget, institutional arrangements for the review and
approval of safeguard instruments for subprojects, as well as monitoring and reporting for the
implementation of the EMF.

     It is anticipated that about 30% of the first-year subprojects will be clearly defined and with
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                     Yes         No         TBD
safeguard instruments prepared by the project appraisal. Safeguard documents for the remaining
70% of the subprojects will be prepared during project implementation in accordance with the
guidelines provided in the EMF.

     By Project appraisal stage, public consultation and disclosure of safeguard tools for
subprojects identified for the first year of implementation will be completed.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
    Given the type and small size of the activities and location of the different sub-projects, the
project does not foresee the potential for any significant conversion or degradation of critical or
other natural habitats. Each sub-project will be screened to ensure that the policy is not triggered.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
    Given the type and small size of the activities and location of the different sub-projects
would not have the potential of having impacts on the health and quality of forests or the rights
and welfare of people and their level of dependence upon or inter-action with forest or bring
about changes in the management, protection or utilization of natural forests or plantations.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
    The clearance of vegetation for the maintenance of right - of – way, as a good practice, is
done manually. Wood power poles are no longer in use in Vietnam. Therefore, the project will
not use herbicides or any other pesticides for right-of-way vegetation maintenance or chemical
products for wood preservation for poles and associated wood construction materials.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
    The project would not be located in, or in the vicinity of recognized physical cultural
resources. In addition, given the type and small size of the activities and location of the different
sub-projects, the project does not foresee having the potential to have any impacts on physical
cultural resources. However, each sub-project will be screened to ensure that the policy is not
triggered.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
    Since the project involves the preparation and implementation of multiple subprojects in a
large geographical area, it is possible that ethnic minority households may be affected. For
subprojects known by appraisal, where applicable, Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDPs)
will be prepared. In addition, an Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF) will be
developed to guide the preparation of EMDPs for subprojects defined during the implementation
(the depth and scope will be commensurate with the potential impacts of the subprojects). EMPF
and all EMDPs are subject to public consultation and must be disclosed per requirements of the
World Bank's policy.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    Each of the subprojects would have low-intensity impacts involving some temporary or
permanent loss of agricultural, orchard, garden or residential land to transmission tower
foundations, substations and line stringing. Residential or other buildings may be affected but
impacts on houses will be mostly partial and generally are not likely to require relocation of
families outside their residential plots. ROWs will have limitations on land use to ensure safety.
All Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) for
subprojects known by appraisal will be prepared. In addition, a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) will be developed to guide the preparation of RAPs/ARAPs of subproject defined during
the implementation. The RPF and RAPs/ARAPs will include measures to address the direct
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No         TBD
economic and social impacts due to the involuntary taking of land as the result from the project
physical interventions, as well as their ancillary aspects. Potential impacts from linked activities,
if any, will be treated in compliance with OP 4.12. RPF and all resettlement plans are subject to
public consultation and must be disclosed per requirements of the World Bank's policy.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
    No dams will be constructed or involved in this project
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
    This project is not located within international waterways
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X
    This project is not located in or near disputed areas


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 04/27/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   04/27/2012

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The Resettlement Policy Framework, Ethnic Minority Planning Framework, and
   Environment Management Framework are expected to be completed by May 2012.
   Environmental Management Plans, Resettlement Action Plans and Ethinic Minority
   Development Plans will be prepared prior to appraisal for those works to be implemented in
   the first phase of project implementation. All others will be prepared during project
   implementation in accordance with the Resettlement Policy Framework and Environmental
   Management Framework.




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                      Mr Hung Tien Van                                   12/28/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:       Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                 08/08/2012
   Comments: Approval request was received on August 7, 2012.
 Sector Manager:                        Ms Jennifer J. Sara                                02/16/2012
   Comments: I apologize for the delay in approving this ISDS. I understand that it has been reviewed
   and cleared by our safeguard specialists
