                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: AC5557


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Vietnam                            Project ID: P117394
Project Name: Vietnam Science and Technology Innovation - FIRST (Fostering
Innovation through Research, Science and Technology)
Task Team Leader: Emanuela Di Gropello
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 9, 2012      Estimated Board Date: February 23, 2013
Managing Unit: EASHE                        Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                            Loan
Sector: Tertiary education (100%)
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0
IDA Amount (US$m.):           100
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           10.00
                                                                     10.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project will be aligned with the higher level objective of strengthening the National
Innovation System of Vietnam to achieve greater competitiveness and growth for transition to
MIC status. The specific objective of the proposed project is to support technology development
and innovation in Vietnam, through improving the national policy framework for S&T,
enhancing the capacity of R&D institutions, and strengthening linkages between supply and
demand.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project will be aligned with the higher level objective of strengthening the National
Innovation System of Vietnam to achieve greater competitiveness and growth for transition to
middle income country status. The specific objective of the proposed Project is to support
technology development and innovation in Vietnam, through improving the national policy
framework for science and technology (S&T), enhancing the capacity of research and
development (R&D) institutions, and strengthening linkages between supply and demand.
 The proposed Project will include three main components aimed at improving the national
policy framework for S&T, supporting demand-driven R&D institutions, and supporting
technology intermediaries to improve linkages with industry. The following are the proposed
components under the Project:

 Component 1: Strengthening the National Innovation System
 This component will support key aspects of the Vietnamese National Innovation System. It is
composed of four sub-components that address priorities identified and expressed strongly by the
government:

 A. Improving the policy framework for innovation

 There is a strong need to improve over time the formulation, coordination, and implementation
of policies related to innovation. We have seen above that due to the large number of actors and
overlapping responsibilities, the innovation system is deeply fragmented and in need of
improvements. This sub-component will address in detail through technical assistance the
recommendations of the World Bank-OECD innovation policy review currentlyin its initial
phase. The review will offer a comprehensive examination of the innovation system and presents
detailed recommendations in a way that stimulates discussion at the highest policy levels. It will
also analyze how other countries have overcome challenges in their innovation systems and how
Vietnam can customize their approaches to address its own unique situation. It is expected that
completing the policy and legal framework for the successful implementation of GRI reform
(GRI conversion) will focus on addressing tax, labor, IPR, financing and other legal
inconsistencies. B. Strengthening the capacity of national, regional, and provincial S&T
managers

 The vast majority of S&T managers at all levels do not possess the knowledge or skills to
guide, manage, and lead Government Research Institutes (GRIs) toward autonomous status or,
more generally, help develop effective technology transfer mechanisms. Along this line, while
the current Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) law is clear, implementation in terms of protecting
intellectual property is weak due to an insufficient number of and inadequately trained
government officials. To address these gaps, a number of training activities focusing on business
development and administration, networking with enterprises, market analysis, legal, tax, and
IPR policies and procedures, financing mechanisms, financial management, and personnel
recruitment and compensation, among others may be organized under this sub-component to
enhance key skills. The desired result is the development of staff that not only performs
managerial functions but in some cases become entrepreneurs in their own right.

 C. Supporting strategic financing mechanisms for S&T

 Financing for S&T is still too low, heavily dominated by the State budget, and is allocated
inefficiently. The Government is aware of these constraints and plans to reform this approach by
diversifying and increasing resources while using them to support better performance. Although
the overall strategy still needs to defined, some mechanisms are already under discussion and
appear promising such as: the Technological Innovation Fund, to be managed by Ministry of
Science and Technology / State Agency for Technology and Innovation (MOST/SATI), which
the Government is planning to introduce; and a competitive funding mechanism to be applied to
the converted GRIs. The first mechanism would work as a pooled fund with contributions from
all enterprises (though income taxes) to finance applied R&D and technology related activities.
The second would work as a matching grant mechanism which would rewardGRIs for resource
mobilization from enterprises as well as other indicators of good performance. Both types of
mechanisms as well as a possible National Higher Education Innovation Fund (NHEIF) or
technology incubation fund for universities, are new for Vietnam and, beyond a good design,
will require strong credibility, legal arrangements, management and communication capacity,
and solid monitoring and evaluation capacity to be successful. This sub-component will support
these activities through technical assistance and training as well as explore other funding
arrangements.

 D. Strengthening the country's capacity to collect, analyze, and disseminate S&T statistics and
indicators

 Although some efforts have been undertaken by MOST, Vietnam does not currently measure
and benchmark systematically its S&T performance. As the basis of monitoring and evaluating
both the impact of S&T on a macro level and within individual research institutes and firms, and
being able to incorporate findings into programs to improve future performance, it is imperative
for Vietnam to bolster its ability in this area. Building on the results of the OECD-WB
innovation review which will provide a diagnostic of STI data, and identify critical STI policy
relevant indicators and related methodology to generate them, this sub-component will support
R&D and innovation surveys and develop through training activities the capacity of MOST,
especially staff at the National Agency for Science and Technology Innovation (NASATI), to
improve data collection and analysis using OECD guidelines and publish S&T statistics on a
regular basis.

 Component 2: Supporting demand-driven R&D Institutions
 This component will supportthe implementation of two pillars of the Government's S&T
strategy, which have been jointly identified as both critical and high value-added by the World
Bank and the Government. It is composed of two sub-components:

 A. Supporting the transition of GRIs to increased autonomy

 Transition to self-sustained status as per Decrees 80 and 115 will be difficult for the majority of
the selected 465 applied research institutes and in response the component will support the
design of a roadmap that will inform and prepare GRIs during the transition towards autonomy
and higher responsiveness to the needs of the private sector, as well as its implementation. The
roadmap will include specific guidance on key aspects of establishing and operating an
independent GRI, including governance arrangements (management, boards, etc.), financial
sustainability, business development, legal issues, and performance monitoring. Support will be
in the form of capacity building, support services, and selected facility improvements (no civil
works, only goods and equipment, some of them for laboratories). The challenges faced by the
GRIs having already made a transition, in particular in the Ministry of Industry and Trade, could
usefully be examined here, as well as successful transitions such as the one completed by Korea.
While the roadmap itself would be general, support to its implementation could be focused on
GRIs in some national priority areas. These areas may include 1-2 sub-sectors in manufacturing,
agriculture, and services such as biotechnology, information technology, automobiles, and
specific export commodities.

 B. Supporting the higher education-firms technology nexus

  Vietnam's higher educationsystem is still not a source of technological capability and
innovation as it is in other countries. It is timely for Vietnam#s universities to leave behind their
state of isolation and start engaging the private sector world in a more strategic and systematic
way. In line with this objective, this sub-component will support selected leading universities to
establish greater and deeper linkages with enterprises, by developing support services (e.g.,
business development, marketing, applying for patents, legal advice, networking, IT, training,
etc.) and, as appropriate, business technology incubators. The cases of Taiwan, China, Hong
Kong, SAR China and China will be particularly useful to look at when developing incubation
services in universities. The specific universities will need to be identified on the basis of
rigorous criteria, including quality, capacity for research, field of expertise, existing and potential
strategic role in industrial development, and extent of current linkages with firms, etc.

  Component 3: Supporting technology intermediary organizations to improve linkages to
industry
  This component will address the demand side of research by diagnosing and supporting key
intermediary organizations working at different levels of the system to help diffuse knowledge. It
is composed of two sub-components:

 A. Supporting technology intermediary organizations

 Organizations that provide support in management and technical training, business
development, information technology (IT), and marketing are few and often poorly qualified.
Similarly, while there are some intermediary services to support increased demand for
technological upgrading by firms through creating awareness of technological needs, available
technologies and role and potential of R&D institutes, their capacity and scope is still limited. In
this context, this sub-component will focus particularly on the experience of existing
organizations that facilitate linkages between supply and demand and promote the adoption of
global and local knowledge, including the centers for promoting technological transfer and
information under the DOST offices, the State Agency for Technology Innovation (SATI), the
Vietnam Chamber of Commerce (VCCI), the Vietnam association of small and medium
enterprises (SMEs), technology transfer support centers, technology business incubators,
agricultural promotion centers, etc. and support further development of some of these
organizations through technical assistance, training, networking, exchange programs, and other
varying support services. Particular focus will be put on establishing through the intermediaries
stronger linkages in rural areas and to SMEs. Due to its current success in launching new
businesses within the country and its potential impact in the future, the role of the Vietnamese
diaspora will also be explored. The sub-component will interface closely with Financial and
Private Sector department's inclusive innovation project to maximize synergies and collaboration
and address related challenges identified by the WB-OECD innovation policy review, the
Technology Foresight study currently being prepared by UNIDO, and studies on SMEs launched
by the Innovation Partnership Program.

 Further discussions have confirmed that, to improve links between demand and supply, this
sub-component will also focus on piloting the Technology Innovation Fund. Piloting technology
innovation fund will include the following activities: (a) Matching grants for a demand-driven
technology development and/or transfer activity, to be matched by the applicants (targeted to:
GRI/university and SMEs/ farmers in a consortium on technology development and transfer, and
GRIs-university collaborative partnerships on technology development and transfer); (b)
Capacity building for fund administrators; (c) Additional services: sub-sector specific
consultative multi-stakeholder platforms; and (d) Selectedgoods/equipment for the pilot fund.

 B. Supporting science parks

 This sub-component will provide technical assistance and training to the high-tech sector, a key
priority for Vietnam, by supporting the design and management of science parks, especially Hoa
LacHigh Tech Park (HHTP). HHTP, which focuses on R&D based on national priority areas, is
designed to serve as platform to implement GOV's S&T policies and to push the S&T agenda
further. It is also designed to function as a one-stop shop that will offer the entire range of
services and infrastructure desired by investors. Technical assistance will be essential to further
design the master plan for the park, introduce international experience and expertise on such
topics as technology incubation and investment promotion, andstrengthen the capacity of
management within the park.

 Further update confirms that the project would only support development oforientation,
planning, and road-map for the development of the Hoa Lac R&D Quarter. This activity is likely
to entail support in the design of laboratories and other R&D facilities (but not the overall
infrastructure of the park).

 Component 4: Project management
 This component will support the operations of the project committee and implementation units.
Most importantly, it will support any technical assistance needed in project monitoring and
evaluation and fiduciary requirements.

 N.B. The project will not accommodate the borrower's request for more infrastructure.

D. Project location (if known)
Vietnam (nationwide)

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Borrower's capacity for safeguard policy should be satisfactory, in particular for this project
which has limited safeguard implications. MOST has experience in managing laboratories and
their environmental implications.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Thanh Quy Nguyen (EASVS)
   Ms Thuy Cam Duong (EASVS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    Op/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project includes some laboratory design and laboratory
research which involve waste management issues. An EMP with generic
guidelines and risk mitigation measures on laboratory design and waste management will be
prepared.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
    The project will not convert or degrade any protected area, known natural habitats or
established critical protected habitats. Thisis clear from project design which will not entail civil
works and only support existing institutions and science parks within existing premises built in
urban or peri-urban areas (none of which protected or a natural habitat as verified with the
Ministry of Science                                   and Technology).
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
    The project will not affect the health, quality or management of forests, forested areas or tree
plantations. This is clear from project design which will not entail civil works and only support
existing institutions and science parks within existing premises built in urban or peri-urban areas.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                      X
    The project is unlikely to trigger OP 4.09. However this requires further verification that any
demand-driven test or pilot laboratory research under component 3.A will not involve
chemicals/pesticides. This cannot be confirmed yet and as such a TBD is put at this stage.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
    The project will not adversely affect known sites with archeological, paleontological,
historical, religious, or unique natural values. This is clear from project design which will not
entail civil works and only support existing institutions and science parks within existing
premises built in urban or peri-urban areas (none of which cultural or historic sites as verified
with the Ministry of                                 Science and Technology).
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
    The project does not involve any regional component nor target any particular community.
No indigenous community, as per OP/B4.10, will be affected by the project.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                              X
    The policy on involuntary resettlements is not triggered. No civil works are involved.
Support to the design of facilities will only be provided in one science park which has already
been established within fixed premises with no resettlements therefore involved.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
    The project will not include activities involving dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
    No project components involve international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X
    The project is not located in any known disoputed area as defined under the policy.


Environmental Category: C - Not Required
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 01/31/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   01/31/2012

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Environmental assessment: September 2011-May 2012

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                  Ms Emanuela Di Gropello                                                    08/29/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr John R. Butler                                                          12/14/2011
      Comments: Acting Regional Safeguards Advisor
    Sector Manager:                    Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo                                                  09/07/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
