                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC5407


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/11/2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Vietnam                          Project ID: P117393
Project Name: Vietnam School Readiness Promotion Project
Task Team Leader: Christian Bodewig
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 9, 2012   Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2012
Managing Unit: EASHE                      Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                          Loan
Sector: Pre-primary education (100%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0
IDA Amount (US$m.):          100
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                         30.00
                                                                   30.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
Raise readiness for primary school of children aged 5 through supporting interventions
particularly focused on disadvantaged children.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The operation would support the implementation of the Government's program on universalizing
early childhood education (ECE) for 5-year old children (preschool program) by focusing, in
particular, on the needs of the most disadvantaged children and their improved school readiness.
Component 1 (US$ 96 million) will co-finance the Government's preschool program. It will
support efforts to promote school readiness through: (i) expanded full-day preschool enrolments
of 3-5 year old children, (ii) improved preschool quality to achieve the basic quality level 1 in the
new quality standard system, (iii) strengthened teacher and staff qualifications, and (iv) more
inclusive ECE provision through ethnic minority teaching assistants. Component 1 identifies a
set of disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs), consisting of key indicators selected from a result
chain that incrementally leads during the implementation cycle to the achievement of the Project
Development Objective. Each indicator is linked with a disbursement amount, which will be
disbursed in the form of a reimbursement of up to US$ 96 million (the Component 1 share of the
loan amount) of the Government’s expenditure in Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEP). The
EEPs will include lunch expenses for children aged 3-5 training expenses for ECE staff and
salaries and remuneration for contract teachers and teaching assistants -- expenditures closely
aligned with the DLIs and targeted to disadvantaged children and preschools. Component 2
(US$ 4 million) will be centrally implemented by MOET through a standard off-budget
arrangement and support technical assistance and capacity building for the implementation of
Component 1, including (i) strengthening of planning and reporting systems, (ii) strengthening
professional development for ECE personnel, (iii) establishing early childhood development
policy and regulation (including through financing the setting up of four small community-based
model ECE service centers) and (iv) project management and audits.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will support the Government's preschool program which is providing funding to a
majority of provinces in Vietnam and is targeted specifically to remote areas with high ethnic
minority concentration, and children from classified poor households, which are often ethnic
minorities. The program supports universalization of early childhood education for five year old
children through provision of lunches for disadvantaged children at kindergartens; professional
development for ECE teachers, education managers and teaching assistants; and salaries for
contracted teachers and teaching assistants.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Safeguards will be managed by the Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) which has
experience from previous and parallel World Bank operations with similar safeguard policy
issues.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Huy Toan Ngo (EASHS)
   Mr Tuan Anh Le (EASVS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    The SRPP will not finance any major civil works and is, therefore, not expected to have any
significant, irreversible or major environmental impacts. The only civil works it will finance are
repairs and physical adaptation of existing facilities in four small community-based model ECE
service centers under Component 2. These activities are of a small-scale nature. No land
acquisition or resettlement concerns were identified as all civil works will be conducted on
existing early childhood development service centers. The lessons learnt from the ongoing
School Education Quality Assurance Program (SEQAP) and the recently closed Primary
Education for Disadvantaged Children (PEDC) shows that this nature and scale of investment
have minor or no adverse environmental impacts. The potential minor impacts included dust and
generation of construction waste associated with civil works of classrooms can be minimal,
localized and mitigated by incorporating good civil works practices, including proper
housekeeping measures, proper storage and disposal of excavated earth materials, and pollution
control. MOET is responsible for setting construction standards of educational facilities and
monitoring implementation activities. MOET also has experience in the application of mitigation
measures against civil work impacts during the implementation of the PEDC and SEQAP
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No           TBD
projects. To support MOET in mitigating any potential environmental impacts due to the minor
civil works activities in the four ECE service centers, an Environmental Code of Practice
(ECOP) will be prepared. The ECOP provides guidelines which outline simple rules and
procedures regarding identification, monitoring and mitigation of possible environmental
impacts associated with small civil works activities.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
    The project is proposed to take place in existing school premises. As such, the project will
not convert or degrade any protected areas or known natural habitats.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
    The project is proposed to take place in existing school premises. As such, the project will
not convert or degrade any protected areas or known natural habitats.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
    The project will neither procure pesticides nor result in an increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
    The project will not adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological, historical,
religious, or unique natural values
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
    Given that the majority of direct project beneficiaries are from ethnic minority groups,
elements of an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) will be included in the overall
project design and a stand-alone EMDP will not be prepared. A summary of how this project
complies to OP 4.10, in particular to EMDP requirements, will be presented in an annex of the
project appraisal document. This summary will be individually disclosed locally in Vietnamese
for public consultation prior to appraisal. Its English version will be disclosed at the Infoshop
and Vietnam Development Information Center.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                              X
    This policy is not triggered because there are no project activities that require acquisition of
land, or resettlement.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
    There are no known project components involving international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X
    The project is not located in any known areas under territorial dispute.


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 02/21/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   A social and needs assessment study conducted in eight provinces - representative of
   Southern, Central and Northern regions of Vietnam - was completed. Findings from this
   study, based on extensive consultation with target groups (including ethnic minority groups
   and Kinh ethnic group) have been incorporated in project design for implementation,
   monitoring and evaluation.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Christian Bodewig                                           01/11/2012
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             01/11/2012
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Luis Benveniste                                             01/11/2012
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
