                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/07/2012                                    Report No.: AC6700
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Vietnam                             Project ID: P125996
Project Name: Distribution Efficiency Project
Task Team Leader: Hung Tien Van
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 5, 2012       Estimated Board Date: September 13, 2012
Managing Unit: EASVS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           400
IDA Amount (US$m.):             48.9
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                         313.50
         AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 7.60
         Clean Technology Fund                                       30.00
                                                                    351.10
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to improve the performance of Vietnam’s Power
Corporations (PC) in providing quality and reliable electricity services, and to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions through demand side response and efficiency gains.

3. Project Description
The proposed project consists of the following three components:

 Component A: System Expansion and Reinforcement. This component will cover
construction and reinforcement of 110 kV, medium voltage (35kV and 24kV) and low
voltage (0.4kV) distribution networks, including lines and substations, of the PCs . These
investments will help the PCs to efficiently meet load growth, address load supply
constraints due to distribution system congestion, reduce losses, and improve reliability
and quality of power supply.

 Component B: Introduction of Smart Grid Technologies in Distribution. This
component will focus on the automation of distribution network operations and
introduction of advanced metering infrastructure systems (AMI) at key substations and
electricity consumers of PCs, supporting the first phase of the roadmap for smart grid
technologies in Vietnam power distribution. The component will assist to increase
efficiency, reliability and effectiveness of the PCs’ and optimize distribution system
configuration by providing real time data both from supply side and demand side. The
component will include the infrastructure for load profiling and customer two-way
communication, combined with technical assistance under Component C, will enable
efficient pricing of electricity and demand response programs to encourage reductions in
electricity consumption. These, in turn, should lead to reduction of investments in the
distribution system, decrease in operating costs, improve reliability and quality of
distribution services, and avoid GHG emissions associated with thermal power
generation. Under this component, CTF co-financing is proposed for implementation of
AMI subprojects for 3 PCs.

 Component C: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building. This component will
include technical assistance and capacity building for the five PCs and the Electricity
Regulatory Authority of Vietnam (ERAV) in MoIT. Building on technical assistance and
capacity building provided in other on-going Bank projects, this component complements
the investment in the previous two components, through building capacity and
implementing regulatory arrangements to maximize improvements in PC efficiency and
demand reductions, to achieve development objectives and indicators.

 The preliminary estimated total cost of the project is US$ 800 million, out of which
US$400 million is expected to be financed from IBRD, US$48.9 million from IDA,
US$30 million by CTF, and US$7.6 million from AusAID for Component C.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Project locations are scattered all over 44 provinces of Vietnam.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Son Van Nguyen (EASVS)
   Mr Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment

 OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The policy is triggered due to expected negative
impacts, which will occur during the construction and operational phases of the project.
The potential impacts could be caused during construction in Component A
corresponding to typical civil works at the subproject area such as new construction,
rehabilitation, and expansion of distribution lines (power towers, poles, and wiring) and
substations (transformers and other electrical equipment).

  Potential negative impacts of the project during construction include (i) for
communities, land acquisition; tree cutting associated with construction of substations
and distribution lines; increased levels of dust, noise, and other emissions from
excavation activities, land clearing activities, material stockpiles, heavy equipment, and
truck traffic; construction site waste generation; rural traffic disturbance and road damage
due to the transportation of building materials, equipment and fuels; and (ii) for workers,
health and safety. There is also safety risk related to unexploded ordnances (UXO) which
is considered low since the subprojects will involve construction in UXO cleared areas.
In case of uncertainty, as indicated in the Environmental Management Framework EMF,
the PC is required to contact relevant army unit to confirm and/or clear the site before the
commencement of the construction. As the subprojects mainly involve small construction
and rehabilitation of existing power lines and substation, and are scattered in many
provinces, impacts are assessed to be moderate, localized, and temporary, and can be
mitigated through measures contained in the EMPs, the application of good construction
and management practices and the strict implementation of the environmental code of
practice (ECOP) which will be included in the bidding documents and the program of
work of the contractor under a close supervision of contractor performance by field
engineers and in close consultation with local communities.

  The potential negative impacts during operation of Component A subprojects would be
the effects associated with exposure to electric and magnetic fields from power lines and
substations but, because the project voltage levels are only 110 kV and less, the potential
impact would be marginal. Noise is not an issue for LV and MV transformer in
substations, for 110 kV as usual substations are in confined area. The potential risk of oil
leakage from transformers is addressed by construction of emergency oil collection and
storage tank as required by the Vietnamese regulation and included in the EMPs of such
type of sub-projects. The potential risk of the PCB will be treated strictly as in the
paragraph 6.2 of the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) prepared for this
project.

 OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. The screening of Component A during the first phase for 39
subprojects has indicated that most distribution lines and substations are expected to take
place along existing lines and roads. Given the type and small size of the activities and
location of the different subprojects, the project is not expected to have the potential for
any significant conversion or degradation of critical or other natural habitats. Therefore,
OP 4.04 is not triggered. As a precautionary measure, an exclusion list has been
developed to exclude any subproject that could potentially have significant adverse
impacts on natural habitats. Each subproject will be screened by the PCs and the Bank to
ensure that the policy is not triggered.

 OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The project would not be located in, or in the
vicinity of recognized physical cultural resources. In addition, given the type and small
size of the activities and location of the different subprojects, the project does not foresee
having the potential to have any impacts on physical cultural resources. Subprojects
located in, or in the vicinity of, cultural heritage sites, and subprojects designed to
support the management or conservation of physical cultural resources would not be
eligible for funding under the project. Nevertheless, should eventually a subproject
chance find, the EMF includes procedures and the steps that will be undertaken.

 OP 4.36 Forests. The type and small size of the activities and location of the different
subprojects would not have the potential of having impacts on the health and quality of
forests or the rights and welfare of people and their level of dependence upon or inter-
action with forest or bring about changes in the management, protection or utilization of
natural forests or plantations. As a result, this policy is not triggered.

 OP 4.09 Pest Management. The clearance of vegetation for the maintenance of right of
way (ROW), as a good practice, will be done manually. Wood power poles are no longer
in use in Vietnam. Therefore, the project will not use herbicides or any other pesticides
for right-of-way vegetation maintenance or chemical products for wood preservation for
poles and associated wood construction materials. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.

 Social

 OP 4.10 Indigenous People. It is expected that the project would adversely impact
indigenous people, referred to for the case of Vietnam as Ethnic Minorities (EM). Some
of the subprojects agreed for Component A have already identified that EMs would be
affected. However, given that other subprojects are still to be defined after the project
starts implementation and that the geographical distribution area of the PCs covers all
provinces in the country, it is possible that other EM households may be affected.
Although the impacts will be very local and affect primarily individual households, other
social impacts may include: (i) the re-grouping of a large number of outside workers to a
locality at a time, particularly EM locations may cause social disorder or disputes
between the local community and the workers; and (ii) the improvement and building of
new medium and low-voltage lines will acquire land currently used by the local and EM
people.

 OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Component A subprojects would have low-intensity
impacts involving some temporary or permanent loss of agricultural, orchard, garden or
residential land to transmission tower foundations, substations and line stringing. As
typically found in distribution project, the social impacts are scattered over large project
areas and large numbers of Project Affected Households (PAH), but the impact on an
individual PAH is normally marginal and limited in the acquisition of a few m2 of land,
or cutting down of a few trees. In a few cases, residential or other buildings may be
affected but impacts on houses will be mostly partial and generally are not likely to
require the relocation of families outside their residential plots. The ROW will cause
limitations on land use to ensure safety. Land acquisition and resettlement process
including public consultation and satisfactory compensation and livelihood restoration for
the population residing in the project areas are the main social issues for the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential impacts related to operation of the subproject infrastructure are described in
previous section. No other negative potential indirect and/or long term environmental
and social impacts due to future activities are anticipated in the project areas. The long
term positive impacts of the project include improved quality of distribution services,
reduction in consumption of targeted electricity consumers, and contribution to business
effectiveness and poverty reduction in the project areas.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
During preparation of the project, screening has been carried out for all first phase
subprojects to exclude all investment proposals that would go against the project
development objective. To minimize the potential adverse impacts, the project has also
considered alternatives to the investment proposals prepared by the PCs, prioritized them
based on the anticipated positive and negative impacts, and developed screening
checklists to exclude all investment proposals that may cause significant or irreversible
social and environmental impacts such as (i) subprojects that use land of national parks,
natural reserves, nationally protected landscapes, biosphere conservation sites; (ii) that
use land of world heritage, archaeological, paleontological, historical, architectural,
religious or cultural significance such as reserved areas recognized by traditional local
communities (e.g. sacred groves); and (iii) that cause conversion of natural forests
including mangrove forests, watershed protection forests, waves/wind shield forests.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To address the project negative environmental impacts the following safeguard
documents have been prepared by the PCs and reviewed by the Bank environment and
social specialists and found to be satisfactory:

 Environment

 •      Environmental Management Framework: As part of project preparation, the client
has prepared an Environmental Management Framewor (EMF) that establishes the
requirements for sub-project screening, and assessing and managing environmental and
social impacts during project implementation. The EMF contains the applicable Bank’s
safeguard policies’ requirements as well as the Vietnamese regulation on environmental
impact assessment and other related laws and regulations. The framework covers
requirements for (i) safeguard screening; (ii) impact assessment and development of
mitigation measures, including the Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) for small
scale construction activities; (iii) safeguard documentation preparation and clearance; (iv)
safeguard implementation, supervision, monitoring, and reporting; (v) institutional
strengthening and capacity building programs; and (vi) institutional arrangements and
budget. The EMF indentifies the requirements for the preparation of an Environmental
Management Plans (EMP) for a subproject to comply with the World Bank’s and
Government’s regulations on EIA. The EMF also includes a standardized ECOPs to be
applied to subprojects. The ECOPs will be incorporated into the bidding and contract
documents and be closely monitored by supervision engineers.

 •     Environmental Management Plans (EMPs): The EMPs for the first phase
subprojects have been prepared following the EMF. These EMP have also been reviewed
by the Bank and found satisfactory. The same procedures will apply to the second phase
subprojects during implementation. EMPs for the second phase subprojects would be
prepared during the first year of project implementation.

 •     Subproject EIAs/EPCs: The Government’s regulations on EIA require the
preparation of an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) an Environmental Protection
Commitment (EPC) for an investment project. Accordingly, the EIA/EPC for the first
phase subprojects have also been submitted for Government approval. The second phase
subprojects and other project activities will comply with the Government’s regulations on
EIA and will also be prepared as specified in the EMF.


 Social

 •       Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). During the preparation stage, a RPF has
been prepared in accordance to OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, which addresses
the various types of land acquisition and assets loss that may occur during subproject
preparation and implementation. It lays down the principles and objectives, eligibility
criteria of displaced persons, modes of compensation and rehabilitation, potential
relocation of these persons, and participation features and grievance procedures. It further
describes the planning and documentation requirements for such activities under the
project.

       Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF). Since the project involves the
preparation and implementation of multiple subprojects in a large geographical area, it is
possible that ethnic minority households may be affected. The EMPF was prepared,
conforming to the OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, ensuring that the development of
subprojects fully respects the dignity, human rights, economies, and culture of affected
ethnic minority peoples. Broad community support obtained for the subproject through a
process of free, prior, and informed consultations with the affected EM communities will
be confirmed by PCs. In this regard, the EMPF sets out guidelines to: (a) ensure that the
EM people receive social and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate; (b) avoid
potentially adverse effects on the ethnic minority communities; and (c) when such
adverse impacts cannot be avoided, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for such effects.

        Resettlement Plans (RPs) and Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDPs). In
consistency with the above-mentioned frameworks, RPs and EMDPs were already
prepared for subprojects of the first phase. 36 RPs and 8 EMDPs have been prepared in
accordance with Bank’ OP 4.12 and OP 4.10. The implementation of the RPs and
EMDPs will be the responsibilities of the respective PC through its PMBs and in
collaboration with relevant governmental agencies. EVN will be responsible to ensuring
funding to cover the costs for land acquisition, resettlement and other mitigation
measures associated with the implementation of the RPs and EMDPs to ensure that
income generation activities of affected households are restored to the pre-project living
standard, and that ethnic minorities in the project areas receive social and economic
benefits that are culturally appropriate to them. A social staff will be appointed at every
PMB to ensure social safeguards implementation and monitoring are in accordance with
project frameworks (RPF, EMPF). An independent monitoring agency will also be hired
by the project to carry out periodic and ad-hoc monitoring to ensure the full compliance
of social safeguards implementation.

 Safeguard implementation and capacity building

 The Electricity of Vietnam (EVN), which is responsible for the overall coordination of
the project, will be responsible for coordinating and monitoring the implementation of the
EMF and other safeguards instruments such as RPF and EMPF of PCs. The Project
Management Unit (PMU) in the PC will be responsible for preparing and ensuring
effective implementation of safeguard measures contained in the RPs, EMDPs,
EIAs/EPCs, EMPs/ECOP, and regular liaison with the local authorities and communities.
Reporting of safeguard implementation will be done every six months. Together with
consultants, EVN’s project environmental staff will provide training to the PC PMU’s
environmental staff in environmental planning and programming process. Environmental
staff of EVN will carry out spot-checks during the course of project implementation to
ensure that the procedures set out in the EMF are being followed. The Bank will conduct
regular safeguard supervision and post review both at the subproject and project levels.

 The project will be implemented by existing PMUs of the PCs, which have experienced
staff. Except PC Hanoi, the other four PCs have long working experience with the Bank
since 1995 including on safeguard issues. EVN has experience in implementation of
several projects funded by the Bank and other donors. Capacity building has been
provided to PCs’ staff on World Bank safeguard policies, and additional training will be
provided during implementation to the PMU and relevant PC staff.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
In addition to the EVN PCs and its project PMU responsible for the implementation of
the project, other key stakeholders are people’s committees, local authorities, local
communities, mass organizations, and general public.

  Consultation: Two public consultations were carried out in the process of preparing the
EMF, one in September 2011 and the other in December 2011. Participants included
potentially affected people, mass organizations’ representatives, staff of implementing
PCs, representatives of MoIT, EVN, and local consultants. Opinions and concerns
provided during the consultations were taken into account in the preparation and
finalization of the EMF. Public consultations with the people and households directly or
indirectly affected, local authorities, and mass organizations at the subproject level were
also conducted in the process of preparing the first phase subproject EMPs in December
2011. Feedbacks from all the consultations were taken into account in the preparation of
the final documents and for subprojects’ design.

 Disclosure: Prior to project appraisal, all safeguard documents (EMF, EMPs, RPF,
EMPF, RPs,) have been disclosed in Vietnamese at the Vietnam Development
Information Center, the Electricity of Vietnam (EVN), the PMUs of the five PCs, and
subproject areas in the project provinces. They have also been disclosed in English at the
Bank’s InfoShop in Washington DC.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     04/25/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/04/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  05/09/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     04/25/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/07/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  05/09/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     04/25/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/07/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  05/11/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                  Name             Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Hung Tien Van                     05/07/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Son Van Nguyen                    05/10/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Nghi Quy Nguyen                   05/10/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Jennifer J. Sara                  05/30/2012
  Comments:
