                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/25/2012                                    Report No.: AC6658
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P083588                 Original Project Name: Mekong Delta
                                             Transport Infrastructure Development
                                             Project
Country: Vietnam                             Project ID: P126605
Project Name: Mekong Delta Transport Infrastructure Development Project - Additional
Financing
Task Team Leader: Dung Anh Hoang
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1,        Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2013
2012
Managing Unit: EASVS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (55%);Ports, waterways and
shipping (40%);Central government administration (2%);Sub-national government
administration (2%);Tertiary education (1%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (40%);Trade facilitation and market access (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            156
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             57.00
         AusAID-World Bank Partnership for South Asia                   15.00
                                                                        72.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objective of the parent project (which does not change with the
additional financing) is to improve access to markets by businesses, farmers and the poor
with lower logistics costs resulting from the alleviation of key physical and institutional
bottlenecks of the main transport corridors in the Mekong Delta region. To this end, the
project will (a) improve the main inland waterways and road corridors in the target
region; (b) provide year round basic access to these corridors; and (c) strengthen the
effectiveness of transport institutions to plan and manage multimodal transport
infrastructure and logistics.
3. Project Description
As originally approved, the parent project comprises four components:

 Component A – National Road Corridor Improvements aims to widen and upgrade an
aggregate 98.2 kilometers of national highways (13. kilometers of NH53, 40.8 kilometers
of NH54, and 43.9 kilometers of NH91), including construction of bridges, provision of
culverts, and road level increases in flood-prone areas.

 Component B – National Waterway Corridor Improvements aims to improve the
standard and connectivity of two waterway freight corridors in the Mekong Delta: the
Northern Trans Mekong Corridor (253 kilometers, known as Corridor 2) and the
Southern Coastal Corridor (148 kilometers, known as Corridor 3). Works include
dredging, widening, bank protection, a ship lock, bridge improvements, and the provision
of 24-hour aids to navigation.

 Component C – Connecting the Poor to the Supply Corridors aims to improve the
connectivity of the secondary road and waterway network to the main transport corridors
in the Mekong Delta, by upgrading provincial roads (315 kilometers), feeder canals (58
kilometers), and selected landing stages. It also provides subproject implementation
support and capacity building at the provincial level through the establishment of the
Regional Support Center (RSC) advisory services in Can Tho.

  Component D – Institutional Support to the Ministry of Transport (MoT) aims to
strengthen MoT capacity by (i) providing state-of-the-art advisory and knowledge
transfer on measures to increase the efficiency and competitiveness of multimodal
transport and logistics; (ii) advising the Vietnam Inland Waterways Administration
(VIWA) on institutional reorganization and policy formulation; (iii) delivering training
on project management, asset preservation, and multimodal transport to MoT staff; (iv)
providing Integrated Project Implementation Audit and Project External Financial Audit
services; and (v) supporting the preparation of future transport projects.

 Additional Financing (AF) is necessary to cover cost overruns incurred during the
implementation of the parent project, resulting from: (a) double-digit inflation in Vietnam
during 2007-2008 and 2010-2011; and (b) revised technical specifications of civil works
during the detailed design stage. Without the help of additional financing, the project's
ability to meet its development objective would be severely limited, resulting in much
reduced development impacts relative to original targets.
 The proposed AF will allow for the completion of original project activities with
selected reductions in scope, which: (a) are necessary to partially offset the project's cost
overruns; and (b) do not undermine the project's ability to achieve the original project
development objective (PDO). The proposed changes in scope are as follows:

        Component A. Due to significant increases in the cost of NH91, the financing
allocated to this segment will be revised to cover only seven out of the original 43.9
kilometers. The proposed reduced section is entirely located within Can Tho city, and is
the most economically and socially critical portion of the original scope for NH91. This
section will alleviate urban congestion, improve road safety, and provide heavy traffic
(e.g., container trucks) with more efficient access to and from Can Tho port.
Improvements to the remaining 36 kilometers of NH91 will be completed by the
government outside the project at a later date. Government has confirmed that Bank
safeguard policies will be applied over the entire 43 kilometer stretch of NH91.

        Component B. The Cho Gao canal section of inland waterway Corridor 3,
comprising Km35 – Km80 (45 kilometers in length), will b excluded from the project due
to increased costs.

      Component C. Improvements to 58 kilometers of feeder canals in An Giang and
Ca Mau provinces will now be excluded from the project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located in the Mekong River Delta region and is being implemented in
locations across a well-defined area of 4.2 million hectares. All 13 provinces comprising
the Mekong River Delta region participate in and benefit directly from the project's
investments. These provinces are: An Giang, Bac Lieu, Ben Tre, Ca Mau, Can Tho, Dong
Thap, Hau Giang, Kien Giang, Long An, Soc Trang, Tien Giang, Tra Vinh, and Vinh
Long.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed AF activities.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The proposed AF activities will not cause any
significant outstanding environmental and social impacts because (a) the scale of
activities is not large, (b) the activities do not take place in or near any sensitive sites, (c)
applicable technology is well-known, and (d) proposed mitigation measures are viable. In
general, impacts associated with the proposed AF activities are insignificant and typical
of construction activities. Specifically, the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the parent project, cleared by the Bank and
the Borrower's Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE), had already
fully covered assessment and mitigation measures for environmental and social impacts
related to construction activities of all project components, including the proposed AF
activities. A site-specific EMP, developed based on the project-wide EMP, is required for
each civil works contract to thoroughly address site-specific environmental and social
impacts which arise during the implementation phase of the proposed AF activities.

 OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The Social Assessment (SA) conducted for the entire
project during the preparation of the parent project indicated that the project's social
impact is overall positive. This is because the project will improve access to markets for
businesses and local people in the entire Mekong Delta region. Despite the positive
impact, some adverse influences are inevitable, which are primarily due to the additional
acquisition of land to allow for the widening and/or rehabilitation of existing roads and
bridges to improve existing road surface conditions and accommodate increasing traffic
volumes.

 Efforts have continuously been made over the four years of the parent project
implementation to minimize the need for land acquisition and to avoid physical
relocation, wherever possible, by exploring various engineering design options that
minimize the need for resettlement. The project's mid-term review (conducted in
February and March 2011) indicated that as a result of this effort most affected
households (83 percent of total affected population) have been only marginally affected.
98 percent of households who had their houses affected did not have to resettle to other
areas and chose to only move their houses backward. This has helped the affected
families remain within their existing communities and as such maintain their existing
social networks and livelihoods.

 Under the proposed AF project, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which was
cleared by the Bank and has been effectively applied under the parent project, will
continue to be used to guide the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) at the
subproject level, called Sub-project Resettlement Plans (SRPs). All subproject RAPs are
subject to Bank's prior review before compensation payments are made to ensure the
compensation and assistance to affected households is in accordance with the RPF.
 Lessons learned from the parent project suggest that regular support from the Bank-
policy experienced implementing agencies, such as Project Management Unit-Southern
Inland Waterways (PMU-SIW), Project Management Unit 1 (PMU-1), and the Regional
Support Center (RSC), to Provincial Project Management Units (PPMUs) is critical to
strengthen the quality of subproject RAPs and their implementation at the local level.
  Linkage: during subproject implementation, due diligence review (for the possibility of
linkage) will be done by the Bank's Task Team to ensure RAP implementation under
linked subproject(s) are in compliance with Bank's OP4.12.

 OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. A number of ethnic minority groups reside in the project
area. The Khmer is the largest group (about 6 percent of the region's population),
followed by the Hoa (about 1 percent). Other minority groups in the region include the
Cham, Tay, Ngai, and Gia Rai, but the populations of these groups are very small. An
Ethnic Minority Policy Framework (EMPF) and a project-wide Ethnic Minority
Development Plan (EMDP) were prepared for the parent project. These instruments will
continue to be applied under the proposed AF. EMDP instruments for all relevant
subprojects under the AF project will be prepared in accordance with the EMPF, and will
be closely monitored by the Bank.

 Public Disclosure. The RPF, EMDF, EIA, and EMP prepared for the parent project were
disclosed locally and in the InfoShop at the parent project's appraisal stage in 2007 and
have been re-disclosed on August 19, 2012 to ensure transparency to all project
stakeholders.

 All safeguards instruments for activities under the proposed AF are under preparation
and will be disclosed locally at the project area and at the Bank's office (VDIC) in Hanoi
following the Bank's policy on disclosure.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None are expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project, including all activities benefiting from additional financing, focuses on
improving existing transport corridors and alignments, rather than on constructing new
ones. This option minimizes environmental impacts. Furthermore, by widening the
corridors to the degree possible only on one selected side, impacts on habitats on the
other side are minimized. In the case of waterways, this approach can be highly
applicable in areas where the canal banks provide ecosystems for the spawning and
nurturing of juveniles of aquatic species along the waterways.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Direct responsibility for project implementation and day-to-day management has been
delegated to 15 operating sub-organizations: (i) PMU-1 for Component A (reporting to
the Directorate for Roads of Vietnam [DRVN]); (ii) PMU-SIW for Components B and D
(reporting to VIWA); and (iii) 13 PPMUs (reporting to their respective Provincial
Departments of Transport [PDoTs]) for Component C. Among the various implementing
agencies, PMU-SIW has adopted the role of Project Coordinator, responsible for
delivering a consolidated Monthly Project Implementation Report and for addressing
urgent needs and potential sources of implementation delays.

 Both PMU-1 and PMU-SIW had experience implementing World Bank projects prior to
the start of the parent Credit. Their familiarity with and ability to implement the project's
safeguards instruments have strengthened throughout the implementation of the original
project. Implementing agencies at the provincial level (PPMUs) have also benefited from
the advisory and capacity building services on safeguards instruments preparation and
implementation provided by the project-financed Regional Support Center Advisory
Consultants (RSC). This critical support and risk mitigation resource will continue under
additional financing.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project's key stakeholders are MoT, PMU-1, PMU-SIW, Provincial People's
Committees, PDoTs, PPMUs, the project's supervision and monitoring consultants,
design engineers, and contractors, and local communities living in the project areas—
especially households directly impacted by the project activities. Consultations with
relevant stakeholders, especially affected groups and local NGOs during the preparation
and updating of safeguards instruments such as EIA/EMP, site EMPs, SRPs, and EMDPs
have been conducted to comply with World Bank policy requirements.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08/09/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  08/09/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08/19/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08/09/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  08/09/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08/19/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08/09/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  08/09/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08/19/2012
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                  Name                    Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Dung Anh Hoang                           09/21/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Khang Van Pham                           09/17/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Tuan Anh Le                              09/18/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan          09/28/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Jennifer J. Sara                         09/26/2012
  Comments:
