                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6413


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/06/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Vietnam                               Project ID: P123961
Project Name: Vietnam Road Asset Management Project
Task Team Leader: Fei Deng
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15,         Estimated Board Date: July 19, 2013
2011
Managing Unit: EASVS                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);Central government administration (5%);General
transportation sector (5%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%);Administrative and
civil service reform (30%);Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (20%);Trade
facilitation and market access (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            250.80
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            121.00
                                                                       121.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed PDO is to improve the quality, accessibility, disaster resilience, and sustainability
of selected sections of the national road network. The objective would be achieved through (i)
introducing robust design standard and methodologies for managing road assets in pilot flood
prone areas; (ii) comparing alternative maintenance methods and identifying the most effective
and sustainable preservation strategy for Vietnam; and (iii) enhancing the capacity of Vietnam’s
road agencies to enable better planning, budgeting, constructing, and monitoring of road assets.

  Expected major project results will include: (i) NH1 in flood prone zones rehabilitated to a
standard that is more resilience to climate change impacts especially heavy floods, with reduced
travel time and closed days during flood season; (ii) approximately 350 km of roads maintained
with greater effectiveness, better quality and improved safety, measured by lower projected life
cycle cost, better roughness and decreased accident rate; and (iii) enhanced effectiveness and
capacity of DPI-MOT and DRVN in planning, budgeting and monitoring of road assets, with
available short- and mid- term national preservation plan, increased level of resources allocated
for maintenance, and better monitoring of road asset performance based on scientific criteria.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed VRAMP project has four components: Disaster Response and Climate Change
Adaptation Program (DRCCAP); Network Preservation Program (NPP), Network Improvement
Program (NIP); and Institutional Strengthening Program (ISP). The total IDA amount
corresponding to the four components proposed by MOT is USD250 million.

  Component A. Disaster Response and Climate Change Adaptation Program. [Total US$165
million, out of which US$127.5 million to be financed by the Bank, and US$37.5 million to be
financed by counterpart part funds including the land acquisition compensation and project
management fees].

  Changing climate patterns have a significant impact in Vietnam, especially through coastal
regions. National Highway No. 1 (NH1), the backbone of Vietnam#s transport network and
development, has been seriously damaged by floods with an increased level of severity and
frequency. This component will include rehabilitation, flood resilient design and construction,
and maintenance work. The sections included under the project are those of the highest priority
for rehabilitation and preservation based on consideration of existing road conditions, current
and projected traffic volume, and impact by natural disaster. Beyond directly benefiting the
selected sections along NH1, this component will set a standard and robust methodology for how
to design and implement road asset management in flood prone areas, as well as how to adapt
climate change in the transport sector.

 Component B. Network Preservation Program and performance based maintenance contracts
[Total US$100 million, out of which US$65.3 million to be financed by the Bank and US$34.7
million to be financed by counterpart part funds].

 This component shall support the financing of: B1.) Periodic maintenance with asphalt overlays
of approximately 150 km of national highways, as well as the routine maintenance of these
roads, totalling US$49 million. Specifically, this component includes NH18 Quang Ninh (km
46.0 to 118.0), and road(s) to be selected among the ones of highest priority according to the
government#s yearly maintenance plan. B2.) Performance based maintenance contracts totalling
193 km, with a total cost of US$51 million. Specifically, this subcomponent includes (i) NH5 Ha
Noi # Hai Phong (km 11.0 to 93.0), with a total cost of US$24 million and (ii) NH2 Ha Noi #
Doan Hung (km 0 to 111.0), totalling US$23 million. These will be five-year performance based
maintenance contracts involving routine maintenance and necessary periodic maintenance.
Component B is designed to include maintenance and rehabilitation through both a traditional
input based method and Performance Based Contracts (PBCs); it will compare alternative
maintenance strategies and lead to practical policy advice on the most effective and sustainable
preservation strategy for Vietnam.

 Component C. Network Improvement Program
 [Total US$86.8 million, out of which US$44 million to be financed by the Bank, and US$42.8
million to be financed by counterpart funds including the land acquisition compensation and
project management fees].

 This component will support C1.) the financing of rehabilitation and widening of four bridges
along NH38B (Trang Thua, Cong Neo, Trang, and Cap), and C2.) upgrading of NH38 and
NH39-1. The road along NH38B is currently being upgraded under the Road Network
Improvement Project (RNIP), and widened to 12 m. The rehabilitation of these four bridges
along NH38B, initially included in RNIP, could not be materialized under the project and
therefore have become bottlenecks of the road, with a narrow point of only 5m. NH38 linking
Quan Goi - Cau Yen Lenh (km33+963 # km52+600) and NH39-1 linking Trieu Duong # Hung
Ha (km44+000 # km64+000) will be upgraded from the current width to 12m, with 14.5m in
urban areas. Both roads are among MOT#s top priority for improvement works.

 Component D. Institutional Strengthening Program
 [US$15 million, out of which US$14 million to be financed by the Bank, and US$1 million to
be financed by counterpart funds].

  This component will support well targeted activities to build the capacity of Vietnam#s road
agencies and enable better planning, budgeting, constructing, and monitoring of road assets.
Specifically, it includes (i) training and study tours on road maintenance and road asset
management (planning, budgeting, monitoring etc,), (ii) capacity building of maintenance
contractors and supervisors for achieving more efficient and better quality maintenance
activities, (iii) a study on effective management and sustainable operation of maintenance funds,
(iv) a study on alternative and more efficient/innovative techniques for maintenance, (v) a study
on a rigorous flood-control and climate change adaptation strategy for Vietnam, particularly
along NH1 (funded separately through a GFDRR grant in the amount of US$200,000), (vi)
design reviews, (vii) all supervision activities, and (viii) technical and financial audits.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will be implemented in pre-identified highways and trunk roads of the national
network. Most proposed works will be carried out on existing right of ways.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Project Management Unit No. 2 (PMU2) under the Directorate of Roads of Vietnam (DRVN)
has been assigned implementation responsibility for all procurement and civil works related to
all project components, including supervision. The overall project monitoring and policy
guidance, including safeguards, will rest with PMU2.

 The capacity of PMU2 and DRVN to comply with the Bank requirements has improved since
the restructuring period of PMU2 (formerly PMU18) and during the course of the current Bank
project Vietnam Road Network Improvement Project (RNIP). Public consultation and
information disclosure practices are timely and satisfactory. The Bank’s routine supervision still
indicates the need for further attention to consistently apply good environmental practices
(materials storage practices, site safety, minimizing disturbances to communities, etc.).
Independent environmental monitoring reports have been submitted regularly for the Bank’s
review and are of appropriate quality. The Bank is satisfied with the overall level of resources
and the results of the current environmental monitoring activities, which will be maintained until
RNIP’s completion. In addition, PMU2 and local authorities have gained considerable
experience and capacity for planning and implementing resettlement following Bank procedures
during execution of RNIP.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Youxuan Zhu (SASDI)
   Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASCS)
   Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The road infrastructure to be rehabilitated or maintained will be mostly located alongside the
existing alignments requiring only the expansion of the right-of-way (ROW) and acquisition of
additional land. Most of the impacts can be easily managed using sound engineering judgment
leading to practical and sustainable designs and construction.

      Perhaps the most sensitive works will be along the National Highway No. 1 (spot
rehabilitation improvements, implementation of climate resilient drainage structures. Due to the
increase of elevation of specific sections along National Highway No. 1 to relieve the roadway of
the rampant flooding that it regularly endures, a more thorough safeguard analysis will be
performed for the elevated sections. Particularly impacted are the people living near these
proposed elevated sections. As a result, a site specific environmental assessment will consist of:
      1. Additional drainage infrastructure to control the damming effect: (i) additional drainage
including enlarged box culverts and (ii) evaluation of material sourcing for elevated sections to
include nearby quarries and identification of potential borrow pits shall be pursued.
      2. Pedestrian safety and protection of housing structures near the elevated sections: (i)
assessment of using enlarged box culverts with additional safety features as pedestrian crossings;
(ii) evaluation of walkways and the proximity of traffic; and (iii) inclusion of safety barriers at
elevated sections where housing structures are located at lower elevations relative to the new
elevated sections shall be pursued
      3. Motorist safety features: (i) guardrails along all sections with high guardrails at elevated
sections; (ii) improved signage at elevated sections to alert motorists to the right-of-way (ROW)
restrictions; and (iii) traffic calming measures at elevated sections shall be pursued.

     Environmental issues in other components can be managed through good engineering
practices ensuring engineering codes of practice are included in bidding documents and contracts
and properly supervised during the execution of the works.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                        X
    The area of the project is well developed and all works will be on existing right of ways.
There are no natural habitats or critical natural habitats along the existing or proposed works.
However, this policy will be revisited when considering site criteria for any currently unknown
ancillary facilities. Further, all possible efforts shall be made to avoid site selection in sensitive
areas, which might cause impacts on natural habitats.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No          TBD
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
    There are no forests within the project#s area of influence.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
    No insecticides or similar chemical agents will be used as a part of this project within the
project#s zone of influence.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
    There is no evidence of paleontological or archeological resources within any of the
proposed corridors. However, chance finding procedures will be incorporated in engineering
codes of practice. This policy will be revisited when considering site criteria for any currently
unknown ancillary facilities that may trigger OP/BP 4.11. Further, all possible efforts shall be
made to avoid site selection in sensitive areas, which might cause impacts on physical cultural
resources.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
    There appear to be no indigenous peoples (IP) within the area of the project#s influence. The
team#s social development specialist will certify this. However, this policy will be revisited
when considering site criteria for any currently unknown IP communities. Further, all possible
efforts shall be made to avoid site selection in sensitive areas, which might cause impacts on IP
communities and their lands.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    OP/BP 4.12 is triggered for Components A and C. A specific plan for enacting this
safeguard as it relates to the VRAMP follows.

     For Component A, the main scope is to improve NH 1 by raising sections of embankment
and upgrading the pavement damaged by recurrent flooding. While most of works will be
carried out within the current right of way, depending on detailed technical design, some works
might involve additional land acquisition beyond the existing right of way. For Component B,
since maintenance works will be carried out within the existing right of way, no resettlement
impacts will be involved. For Component C, it includes rehabilitation of four long bridges and
sections of related roads along NH 38B and upgrading of both NH38 and NH39-1. A certain
amount of land acquisition and resettlement will be required for both rehabilitation of four long
bridges along NH38B and upgrading of NH38 and NH39-1, due to widening of the ROW on the
existing alignment and construction of new bypasses at certain locations. Both components will
be managed by PMU2 under the direction of DRVN.

      For such impacts, a set of resettlement instruments shall be prepared by PMU2 with support
of consultants. For component A, RAPs will be prepared for all sites with final technical designs
finalized by appraisal. Since some sections may not be defined during the project appraisal a
resettlement policy framework (RPF) will be developed to cover potential resettlement impacts
The RPF shall be based on OP4.12 and most recent national laws and regulations as well as a
recent Bank resettlement review mission.

     For Component C, RAPs (one for each of the three roads) have already been prepared under
the previous Road Network Improvement Project (RNIP). These three RAPs shall be updated
based on detailed impact survey, updated compensation policies of RPF, lessons learned from
recent experiences including RNIP, and recommendations of Bank review missions, which will
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No          TBD
be completed and submitted to the Bank for review by the end of July 2011. The social
assessment will be undertaken during project preparation to assist in the preparation of the
RAPS.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
    This investment does not involve dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
    This project is not located within international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X
    This project is not located in or near disputed areas.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 11/30/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
   ISDS would be prepared:
     B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS:
     C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
   needed:

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Fei Deng                                                    04/21/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             05/05/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Jennifer J. Sara                                            05/01/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
