                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/30/2011                                    Report No.: AC5819
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P075407                 Original Project Name: Third Rural
                                             Transport Project
Country: Vietnam                             Project ID: P113498
Project Name: VN- Third Rural Transport-Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Phuong Thi Minh Tran
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 1, 2011 Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011
Managing Unit: EASVS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             97.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           10.00
                                                                      10.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed development objective of the parent project (which does not change with
the additional financing) is to improve rural access for communities to markets, off-farm
economic opportunities, and social services, by: (i) Increasing the number of
communities connected to new and improved all weather roads access; (ii) Improving the
management and maintenance of the network to ensure sustainable improvements in
access; and (iii) Increasing the capacity within government and the private sector to plan,
implement and maintain improvements in the rural transport network.

3. Project Description
The parent project consists of three components.

  Component A: Rehabilitation of the core rural roads network. This component is to
finance the rehabilitation and improvement of the core rural roads network (district,
commune and village roads) in 33 provinces (now 32 provinces as two provinces were
integrated in 2008). In line with the GoV strategy the focus is to connect communes
which lack all weather motorized vehicle access and to support improvements of the
network including upgrading economically justified roads to a paved standards plus the
provision of bridges. The focus is on developing cost effective, coherent networks with
maximum connectivity.

  Component B: Maintenance of the district roads network. This component is to provide
finance to augment provincial and district budgets for the maintenance of district roads
and small bridges. Support will be provided for maintenance of District roads based on
approved annual maintenance plans and will be subject to the implementation of simple
systems for the collection of road condition data so that changes in network condition can
be monitored over time.

 Component C: Institutional and capacity building program.
 This component provides technical assistance, implementation support and capacity
building to strengthen the coordinating and advisory role of the Ministry of Transport and
the implementation capacity of local transport departments. The aim is to provide greater
clarity over the role of central government while at the same time providing the guidance,
tools and training for local transport departments to implement in a decentralized
environment.

  The proposed additional financing is to cover (i) Component A: the cost over-run of the
rehabilitation activities under the Third Annual Work Program (AWP3) in 32 provinces,
which will result in completion of the original rehabilitation target of 3,150 km; (ii)
Component B: the increase in the total number of road kilometers being maintained in
five pilot provinces from 12,000 km to 13,470 under the parent RTP3 and to 13,970 km
under the AF including appropriate responses in road design specifications to climate
change issues; and (iii) Component C: increased sustainability of the road network
through improvement of the institutional arrangement and capacity building.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
As Ha Tay province was integrated into Hanoi in 2008, the 33 provinces covered under
the original project are now 32 and will be benefitted by the proposed additional
financing. The project provinces are located in the northern mountainous, northern
highland, red river delta and central coast of Vietnam. The names of the provinces are as
follows:
  * Northern Mountain area: (12 provinces): Bac Giang, Bac Kan, Cao Bang, Dien Bien,
Ha Giang, Lai Chau, Lang Son, Lao Cai, Son La, Thai Nguyen, Tuyen Quang, Yen Bai.
  * Red River Delta area: (7 provinces): Bac Ninh, Ha Nam, Hai Duong, Hung Yen, Nam
Dinh, Ninh Binh, Thai Binh.
  * Middle Lands area: (3 provinces): Hoa Binh, Phu Tho, Vinh Phuc.
  * North Central area: (3 provinces): Ha Tinh, Nghe An, Thanh Hoa.
  * South Central area: (7 provinces): Binh Dinh, Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Quang Ngai,
Quang Tri, Thua Thien Hue, Phu Yen.
 Roads to be rehabilitated are located in well-defined rural settings in which the main
activities are agricultural, small household businesses or plantations. Most of the
alignments following existing degraded paved or unpaved roads.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS)
   Mr Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.01, Environmental Assessment. Overall, the project will have positive
environmental and social impacts by improving mobility and basic connection of rural
road networks, reducing erosion and dust by the provision of sealed surfaces overlaying
earthen or degraded surfaces and the provision of improved drainage.

 The key potential negative impacts/risks of the proposed road construction are: (i),
clearance of vegetation along the right of way (ROW) at borrow pits and quarries, (ii)
increased dust, noise, and vibration levels in localized areas along the road; (iii)
disturbance to traffic and daily activities of local residents along road alignments; access
roads and temporary materials storage areas;; (iv) increased turbidity in irrigation canals
and water bodies adjacent to roads due to soil spillage;(v) damage to road-side crop lands
due to construction work; and (vi) traffic safety. These potential impacts and risks are
temporary, site-specific, at low levels and immitigable through the Environmental
Management Framework (EMF), therefore the AF Project is proposed unchanged at
Environmental Category B.

 OP 4.04, Natural Habitats. The proposed rural road rehabilitation is being implemented
in well-defined rural settings while the alignment is generally not changed nor newly
opened, so it is not expected to involve any impact on natural habitats nor
environmentally sensitive areas. Further, environmental screening procedures have been
developed that will, inter alia, ensure that natural habitats are not impacted. Therefore this
policy is not triggered.

 OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement. The AF project will improve mobility and
connectivity to road networks and other public services. Negative impacts are expected to
be minor and mainly related to land acquisition due to road widening. Lessons learned in
the parent project show that voluntary land donation by affected people needs to be
carefully reviewed and verified in order to ensure that informed consent and the power of
choice has taken place and is fully documented. In general, donations are acceptable if
the impact is minor (less than 10%) of any holding per person and requires no physical
relocation, except in the case of vulnerable households and individuals. Consultation with
affected people and relevant stakeholders (local authority agencies) should be conducted
before land donation procedures are adopted. Grievance mechanisms will be established
and information on the process involved for submitting claims will be provided to
affected people.

 OP 4.10, Indigenous Peoples. As the AF and its parent project cover areas where ethnic
minorities are settled, thus OP 4.10 is triggered. During the implementation of the parent
project, requirements for preparing Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDPs)
differed among provinces. In the preparation of this AF project, the EMPF of the parent
project has been updated to clarify and ensure that the instrument is in line with
regulations and the World Bank#s policies. The procedure and requirements to develop
EMDPs have been updated and reflected in the policy framework.

 Public Disclosure. All English versions of the final drafts of the updated EMF, RPF,
EMDF etc. were sent to Infoshop in Washington DC on 15 August 2011 for disclosure.
The Vietnamese versions of these documents have been disclosed at provincial level from
15 August 2011. The Vietnamese safeguard documents (EMP, RAP, EMDP) of pilot
sub-projects have been disclosed in project communes from 15 August 2011.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None are expected.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
As the project is dealing with rehabilitation of existing rural roads in often steep, rocky
terrain, alternatives are limited. During implementation to date, localized alternatives
have been considered for individual road links such as, one-sided road widening as a
mitigation measure to reduce loss of land and property.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment. MOT has adopted the updated Environmental Management Framework by
a decision dated 12 August 2011. EMP for AF#s pilot sub-projects (Trung Mon-Chan
Son, Duc Ninh-Hung Duc, and Thai Hoa-Hong Thai in Tuyen Quang province, and Dong
Thanh road in Hung Yen) were prepared in accordance with the updated EMF and take
into account the Bank#s comments given on draft documents.

 Social. During the project preparation, an international consultant team with social
development expertise was hired to assist PMU6 and PPMUs to develop or/ and update
the following: i) a Resettlement Policy Framework; ii) an Ethnic Minority Development
Policy Framework; iii) Abbreviated Resettlement Plans for roads in Dong Thanh
commune, Hung Yen province; and iv) an Ethnic Minority Development Plan for Trung
Mon # Chan Son road link, Yen Son district, Tuyen Quang province. The
recommendations and lesson learned have been reflected in the design of the proposed
AF project.

 Implementation arrangements. Under the parent project, an environmental and social
unit within PMU6 was established to manage and supervise safeguard implementation;
Each participating PPMU has appointed staff in charge of environmental and social
safeguard implementation. An Independent Monitoring Consultant (IMC) has been hired
to monitor compliance throughout project implementation. This institutional arrangement
will be maintained during the implementation of the AF project.

 Capacity. The Borrower possesses adequate capacity for assessing the project#s
environmental and social impacts, and proposing mitigation measures for these. This has
been determined through the supervision missions of the World Bank and through the
reports of the independent monitoring consultants.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project#s key stake-holders are MOT, PMU6 and their TA consultants, PPMUs, the
People#s Committees at provincial, district and commune levels, design engineers,
supervision consultants, contractors and local communities living in the project areas.
Consultations with relevant stake holders during the preparation/updates of AF safeguard
instruments and Sub-project EMP, RP, EMDP were conducted to comply with the
Bank#s policy requirements.

 Further details on disclosure of safeguard documents are described below.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/15/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/15/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/17/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/15/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/17/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/15/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              08/17/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Phuong Thi Minh Tran                      09/01/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu                            09/02/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Nghi Quy Nguyen                           09/02/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Douglas J. Graham                         09/05/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Dean A. Cira                              09/06/2011
  Comments:
