68633
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Ipdated: 15 June 2011
I. BASIC INFORMA7EON
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Vietnam                       Project ID: P115762
I Additional Project ID rof ay
Project Name: HCFC P ase-out Project Stage I
Task Team Leader: Qing Wang
Estimated Appraisal Da e: September 2011 Estimated Board Date: December 2011
Managing Unit: EASV/EASER             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
 Loan
Sectors: Other industry 90%); Central government administration (10%)
Themes: Pollution management and environmental health (50%); Environment policies
and institutions (50%)
1BRD Amount (USSm.)
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amount by source:
Ozone Trust Fund: US$ 9,763,820 (approved at the April 2011 Executive Committee
Meeting of the Montreal Protocol Multilateral Fund)
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing          Simple [             Repeater [
Is this a transferred proj ct   Yes PXJ               No(]
B. Project Objectives  rom section 2 of PCNJ:
1.    The project development objective is to assist the Government of Vietnam to comply
with its Montreal Prot col phase-out obligations for HCFCs with (i) a reduction in HCFC
consumption to meet a freeze in consumption at the 2009-2010 average baseline level by 1
January 2013; and, (ii) a subsequent reduction of 10% of the freeze level by 1 January 2015.
C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCNJ:
2.    HCFC Consumption Baseline and Phaseout Obligations in Vietnam. The HCFC
consumption baseline mas calculated by averaging the actual 2009 HCFC consumption data
reported by Vietnam to :e Ozone Secretariat of the MP with the estimated 2010 consumption,


﻿which is 221.2 ODP tons and serves as the target for the 2013 freeze in consumption, Therefore,
the levels at which Vietnam's consumption of HCFCs would have to be capped according to the
MP phaseout schedule are estimated in the table 2 below. The estimated starting point for
gradual HCFC phase-out by Vietnam as per the MP decision for Article 5 countries is estimated
in the table 3 below.
Table 2: Estimated MP Obli ations for Vietnam (HCFC Phase-Out Tar ets in Vietnam)
EstmaedBaseline* (2009-2010 average)             221.2
2013 - Freeeobaeieevs212
2015- 90% of the baseline                          199.1
2020 - 65% of the baseline                         143.8
2025 - 32.5% of the baseline                        71.9
2030 -2.5% of the baseline** 5.5
Z00-Nocnuption                                   0
* Estimated using 2009 actua and 2010 projected amounts.
**Per the .MP, the sum of calculated consumption levels from 2030 to 2040 should not exceed
2.5% of the baseline and this quantity is allowed only for the purpose of servicing the remaining
fleet of HCFC dependent equipment.
fSubstance    Annex        Group     Starting.Point for Aggregate Reductions
in Consumption     (ODP tonnes)
HCFC-22          C            1                                     166
HCFC-123         C            1                                    0.02
HCFC- 14lb       C*219.8*
* This figure includes 55.2 ODP tonnes oftcontrollcd HCFC-141b and the 2007-2009 average figure of
HCFC-14 Lb contained in imported pre-blended polyol imported by Vietnam (164.56 OD, tons),
**The starting point is based on an estifmated consumptlioi baseline Which is an average of the 2009 and 2010
consumption of Annex C Group I chemicals in line with Executive Committe Decision 60/44 plus the 2007-2009
average HCFC-14 lb content of imported pre-biended polyol.
3. Project Components (HPMP Stage I). The proposed project covers only the Stage I of
the HPMP in the foam sector in brder to meet the 2013 and 2015 phase-out targets. It can be
considered as a continuation of the National CFC and Halon Phaseout Plan in that it will employ
the infrastructure and capacity established under the previous project to deliver the required
assistance to beneficiaries and stakeholders. The proposed project proposes a combination of
policies, regulations, technical assistance activities and financial incentives at the sector level to
the foam industries, which are embedded in an overarching framework that leads to global ozone
and climate co-benefits while permitting the country to meet its development objectives of
sustained levels of economic growth and industrial modernization and expansion. The project
consists of the following four components:
Component 1: Investment in HCFC Consumption Reduction (MLF USS 8,876,200)


﻿4.    This compone t will consist of a series of investment activities in twelve foam producers.
In response to Decision XIX/6, the Stage I HPMP will promote the adoption of hydrocarbon
technology in the foam sector, except in the manufacturing of integral skin shoe sole, where the
water blown (C02) sYstem was found as the most cost-effective conversion method. In this
regard, an analysis of eligible incremental capital and operating costs of this proposed plan has
been developed on the basis of a conversion cost structure relevant to hydrocarbon/water blown
(CO2) and approved by the Executive Committee for the Montreal Protocol Multilateral Fund.
Component 2: Supp rting Policies and Regulations (MLF USS 150,000)
5.    It is proposed that an import quota system to curb the supply of HCFCs be established
and operational by 2012. This is critical for ensuring sustainable phase-out of HCFCs
particularly in the fo  and air-conditioning sectors. In addition, a ban on the use of bulk
HCFC-141b in the foan sector and HCFC-22 in the air-conditioning sector will be put in place
in 2015 or 2016 when enterprise conversion activities are completed.
Component 3: Technical Assistance Activities (MLF USS 205,048)
6.    To support implementation of investment interventions, awareness campaigns on the
need to phase out HCFCs and on future regulatory measures to eliminate HCFC use will be
carried out with target groups. Capacity building of customs officers will be carried out in order
to ensure effective c)ntrol of import of HCFCs and products containing HCFCs. Training
activities will be cond cted to increase the technical capacity of local authorities to allow them to
become more effecti,e agents in identification and delivery of needed assistance to foam
enterprises in their loalities. TA activities to assist Vietnam in strengthening its capacity to
implement energy conservation and energy efficiency programs in the residential air-
conditioning and refrigeration manufacturing and servicing sectors will also be undertaken to
control the demand of HCFC-22, although there will be no phase-out investment activities to be
financed by the MLF .
Component 4: Project Management (MLF USS 532,572)
7.    The project management unit (PMU), set up under the National CFC and Halon Phaseout
Plan, will continue to be financed under the project to implement and coordinate the work
program under the HPMP Stage I and to assist MONRE to put into place both overarching
regulations and sector specific policies.
D. Project location a d salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
The project covers 12 oam enterprises. They are located in Hanoi, Da Nang, HCM city and
Long An Province. Seven enterprises are located in the industrial area and five in the residential
area. The five enterprises in the residential area have intentions to move to industrial areas before
or during the project inplementation stage expected from January 2012 to December 2015.
E. Borrower's Insti tional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:


﻿The Recipient would be the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment. The project would
be implemented through its ozone office. MONRE and the ozone office are experienced with
safeguard issues under the CFC phase-out project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Douglas J. Graham    75790    Environmental Specialist                ASVS
Ngen Van Trung       141 08   Social Safeuard Specialist            Consult
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X 7±
The project will have a positive impact on the global environment by reducing the use of HCFCs - ozone-
depleting substances. HCFCs are also greenhouse gases with a global warming potential (GWP) ranging
from several hundred to several thousand times that of CO2. While HCFCs have  impact on the global
environment, they have no adverse local impacts as these chemicals are stable and not considered toxic or
otherwise dangerous for the environment.
The project will include a series of investment activities with 12 foam producers. No closure of these 12
foam enterprises is expected, but about 5 enterprises currently located in the residential area have
intentions to relocate to the industrial area. These relocations are taking place independently of the
project - either because of the local government's request or the enterprise's own arrangements. It is
expected that the five enterprises will carry out the HCFC phaseout sub-projects after relocating to
industrial zones.
Hydrocarbon technology has been selected as a blowing agent to replace HCFC- 14 b that is being used in
the foam sector.  Hydrocarbon has a Global Warming Potential of less than 25. Hydrocarbon
(cyclopentane) is classified as a Volatile Organic Compound (VOC), but its use results in very low levels
of emissions of about 2-3% of the blowing agent, which is minuscule compared to emissions from two-
stroke motorcycle traffic in countries such as Vietnam. Therefore, there is no si ificant environmental
impacts from the chemical-Hydrocarbon itself.
The other chemicals involved in the foam production are MDI, amine catalysts and fire retardants. The 12
foam enterprises normally purchase pre-formulated polyol (blended with or without HCFC-141b) and
polymeric MDI (isocyanates) for their rigid foam production. The probability that a spill of polymeric
MDI (PMDI)- a liquid at room temperature- contaminates the soil and water is very low, because the
floor of the foam production areas normally consists of cement coated with an anti-leakage low
permeability\chemical layer such as epoxy. In the case that PMDI leaks into the soil, it will react with the
moisture/water, and the reaction would.result in CO2 and insoluble polyurea co pounds, which are not
biodegradable but chemically inert. Fire retardant and amine catalysts (very limited amount) are
mixed/pre-formulated in the polyol at the System Houses (pre-blended polyol su pliers), from which the
foam enterprises normally purchase pre-blended polyol and MDI, so the foam entrprises will not handle
these toxic chemicals directly. Fire retardant and amine catalysts will remain in be final foam products
and not likely to be emitted to the environment during the foam production or La er. Therefore, there are
no legacy environmental contamination issues that are associated with the 12 foa enterprises.


﻿Safeguard Policies TAggered                                  Yes         No         TBD
However, safety requirients associated with hydrocarbons due to its flammability may still present
operational challenges  r smaller enterprises. For all operating sites, occupational health and safety
(OHS) measures (such is prevention from inhalation of MDI vapors which may cause skin irritation);
spill prevention, control, and countermeasures; and fire risks (particularly due to the presence of
flammable chemicals) will be identified and appropriate emergency preparedness and response measures
will be prescribed as i entified in The World Bank Group EHS (Environment, Health and Safety)
Guidelines. Staff will be trained as needed.
To address the environ ental (if any after a due diligence review) and health and safety issues noted
above, one environmen I management plan (EMP), with site-specific mitigation measures for each of the
12 sub-projects, will be prepared prior to appraisal. Each participating enterprise will be required to
follow the provisions of the EMP in order to participate in the project activities and receive access to any
funding. The EMP will nclude requirements for appropriate handling of other chemicals used in minor
amounts for the foam production. As noted above, the World Bank Group EHS Guidelines will be
followed when preparing the EMP.
For the 5 enterprises that are likely to relocate from residential areas to industrial parks, a due diligence
review will be undertaken to confirm that the sites are free from any past environmental liabilities. In that
event, actions needed to )repare these areas for different land uses will be identified. All the participating
enterprises will need o be in compliance with national and local laws/regulations relating to
environmental protectior
Natural Habitats (O/BP 4.04)                                              X
As the project will take F lace in existing industrial facilities, protected areas, known natural habitats, or
established or proposed critical natural habitats will not be affected.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      x
The project will not fina ce activities that would involve significant conversion or degradation of critical
forest areas or related cri ical natural habitats as defined under this Policy.
Pest Management (0 " 4.09)                                                X
The policy is not triggered since the project (a) will not procure any pesticides, nor (b) will
the use of pesticides in rease as a result of the project.
Physical Cultural Reources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
The project will taie place in existing enterprises or in existing industrial parks. As such, the
project will not advers,ly affect sites with archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or
unique natural values.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
All project investment ac tivities will be developed within urban or industrial areas with no ethnic
minorities as defined un er the Bank's policy. Therefore, OP 4.10 on Indigenous People is not triggered
in this project.
Involuntary Resettlenut (OP/BP 4.12)                                                X
Based on the HCFC con umption survey, five of the 12 foam enterprises are located in residential areas,
the rest are located in industrial parks. All of the five foam enterprises currently in residential areas
already have relocation plans to industrial zones and their relocation is expected to take place in the
period from June 2011 to 2013. The project activities for these five enterprises are expected to take place
on the new sites.
The TT will review when and how the land was acquired or being acquired for the Industrial Park and the
enterprise relocation plan during project preparation stage. For each sub-projects which require
involuntary resettlement if the land has been acquired before the sub-grant agreement is signed, a due


﻿SafegMard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No       TBD
diligence review of the land acquisition process will be undertaken by the TT to confirm whether there is
any legacy issues.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                           x
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
There are no known project components involving intemational waterw ys.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 u    X I
The project is not located in any known areas under territorial dispute.
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)
Ill. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time he PAD-stage ISDS
would be prepared:
A QER meeting as stated in the PCN Decision Note is expected to be in July/August 2011. If
the QER meeting is not necessary anymore because the project now covrs only the foam
sector, the PAD-stage ISDS will be prepared in August/September 2011 as indicated below,
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
ISDS: August/September 2011
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing' should be specified in the PAD-s ge ISDS:
If needed, Project information will be disclosed to local population. The affected population
will participate in the identification and assessment of impacts, developrent and
implementation of the mitigation measures. The environment and sociai safeguard
documents (summarized version) will be distributed among the affected population, placed in
local public libraries and in the Bank InfoShop.
The safeguards instrument (EMP) is to be disclosed locally (in local lan uages) and in the
InfoShop prior to departure of the appraisal mission.
I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.


﻿IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted b
Task Team Leader:                  Name: Qing Wang_7
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards C;ordinator:   Panneer Selvam
Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Jennifer Sara
Comments:


﻿
