                                                                                      64436

                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 

                                  CONCEPT STAGE 

                                                                                      Report No.:

 Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/28/2011

 I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data

rCountry: West BaIlk and Gaza       ..~.=_rP~()ject ID: PI012.~~_.mm
! Project Name: GZ-Gaza Water Supply Re~abilitation &B~p'a_n_si_o_n_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _---;
: Task Team Leader: Ze ad Abu-Hassanein
  Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15,      Estimated Board Date: March 30,2012
. 2011
I Managing Unit: MN~_SD            .~         t~:~ing Instrument: Specific Investment

:~~~~tor~~Water(50%) S~nitation (50o/~_~ ___'~' _____'_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _--1
 Theme: Urban development, Urban services and h2l:1 S!I1g for.!h~0..2I·_ - - - - - - - - 1
 IBRD Amount (US$m.):                                                     0.00
 IDA Amount (US$m.):                                                      0.00
 GEF Amount (US$m.):                                                      0.00
 PCF Amount (US$m.):                                                      0.00
 Islamic Development Bank (US$m.):                                       10.00
         Borrower                                                         0.00

        Total
     --------~--- ..
                                                15.00
                                  --------------­
 B. Project Objectives

 The project development objective is to improve the water supply efficiency and the water
 service provision quality in the middle and southern governorates in Gaza via (i) rehabilitation,
 and expansion of water supply networks and facilities and, (ii) providing technical and
 operational assistance to the Coastal Municipality Water Utility (CMWU).

 C. Project Description

 The Project would support the rehabilitation and expansion of basic physical water supply
 infrastructure in Gaza including capacity building and operational assistance to CMW1J. The
 network investments financed by the Project will rehabilitate and expand capacity of the water
 supply networks to support transmission of additional supply resources, restore operations of the
 networks to acceptable quality standards and improve the efficiency and operational
 management of the networks while operating under stressed water supply conditions. The final
 scope of the investment schemes and technical assistance financed by the proposed project will
 be further assessed and finalized during project preparation and appraisal.
The total cost of the Project is estimated at SUS J 5 million and will include the following two
components:

   • 	 Component I (US$ 10 million):       Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Supply and
       Sanitation facilities.

       o 	 Subcomponent I: Networks Rehabilitation, Expansion, and Reconfiguration. This
           component wi II finance: (1) construction and installation of four water reservoirs,
           associated pumping booster stations, and transmission lines to connect to the supply
           distribution networks. Those reservoirs will be added to the network at four
           predetermined locations according to the water supply master plan, namely a 4000
           cubic meter reservoir serving Deir El"Balah, 3000 cubic meter reservoir in AI­
           Mogbraka to serve the middle area, 2000 cubic meter reservoir to serve Khozaa
           municipality, and 2000 cubic meter reservoir to serve AI"Shoka municipality in Rafah
           governorate. The reservoirs will be connected to the major well fields supplying the
           middle and southern governorates, will be used to blend the water supply from the
           wells and desalination plants to improve the water quality, and will improve the
           performance of the networks and help the utility cope with demand and improve the
           quality of service, (2) replacement of old transmission lines in the middle and
           southern governorates, especially asbestos lines, to reduce losses and improve service
           quality.

       o 	 Subcomponent 2: Rehabilitation of water wells. This will finance the upgrading 30
           water wells and the relocation of 5 additional wells in the middle and southern
           governorates to improve yield, reduce specific energy demands and unit production
           cost, and reduce stress to the aquifer.

       o 	 Subcomponent 3: Upgrading and Expansion of Deir-Elbalah Seawater Desalination
           Plant. The existing plant is an old module with production capacity of 600 CM/day,
           currently being upgraded to reduce energy requirements. This subcomponent will
           install an additional module of 2000 CM/day capacity utilizing the existing seawater
           carrier and intake; connect the desalination plant with the proposed reservoir to blend
           the desalinated water with other water supply to bring the water quality to acceptable
           standards. The proposed expansion of the plant will serve the communities of Deir­
           Elbalah and Al-Zawaida municipalities in the middle governorate suffering water
           supply of low quantity and quality.

       o 	 Subcomponent 4: Service connections and district meters replacement. This
           subcomponent will finance the supply and installation of 20,000 water meters, in
           addition to bulk meters and pressure gauges on selected areas in the network. This
           component will be designed with proper targeting to improve utility billing, reduce
           network losses, and improve collection.

      o 	 Subcomponent 5: Upgrading and maintenance of wastewater pumping stations. This
          component will finance adding additional pumping capacity, maintenance of existing
           pumps, and improvement of electromechanical systems to improve efficiency and
           safety, and reduce cost of operation.

   •    Component 2 (US$ 5 million): Utility Capacity Building and Operational Support

       o 	 Subcomponent I: Supply of Vehicles, Tools and equipment This component will
           finance the procurement of 3 jitters, loader, and an excavator to replace the old ones
           and to cope with the expansion of networks and increased demand for maintenance of
           wastewater networks in the governorates of Rafah, Khanyounis, and Deir EI-Balah.

       o 	 Subcomponent 2: Technical Assistance for CMWU. This subcomponent will include
           the provision of technical assistance to improve the administration, tariff regulation
           and efficiency of CMWU.

       o 	 Subcomponent 3: Operational Assistance for CMWU. This component will support
           the operations of CMWU by financing purchase of chemicals, chlorine, regents to the
           desalination plant, fuel to run the water and wastewater facilities, and PMU expenses.
           The operational assistance will be provided on a descending scale to encourage the
           utility improve on collection and achieve better operational cost recovery.

The proposed Project will be implemented by the existing Project Management Unit (PMU)
within the Coastal Municipalities Water Utility (CMWU), which is currently responsible for the
implementation of other Bank and donor financed projects.

D. 	 Project location (if known)
The Project would support the rehabilitation and expansion of the basic physical water supply
infrastructure in the Gaza Strip. Infrastructure investments are concentrated within the middle
and southern governorates in Gaza Strip. However, the operational assistance will cover
operation of facilities in North Gaza and Gaza governorates. Subcomponent 5 of the first
component will finance the rehabilitation and upgrading of sewage pumping stations in all five
governorates in Gaza Strip. The final scope of the investment schemes and technical assistance
financed by the proposed project will be further assessed and finalized during project preparation
and appraisal.


E. 	 Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies Ifrom PCN)

The Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Coastal Municipalities Water Utility is
currently responsible for the implementation of the ongoing Gaza Emergency Water Project that
is similar in scope to the proposed project. The PMU will also be responsible for the overaIl
management of the proposed project including procurement, financial management, contract
management, safeguards, as well as reporting to the Bank. CMWU will therefore be responsible
for ensuring compliance with the safeguard policies during project implementation.

The proposed Project will be implemented by the existing Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) at
CMWU, which is cU1Tently handling the implementation of other Bank and donor financed
    projects including the GEWP and its additional financing. The PMU is fully staffed with a
    director, procurement, financial management, accountant, environmental specialist and other
    relevant staff. Key members of the PMU are experienced in implementing similar projects under
    the Bank's fiduciary and safeguards guidelines, policies and procedures. Therefore, the PMU
    will be responsible for handling all safeguards, procurement and financial management issues
    related to the proposed Project. The PMU will also be responsible for coordination with
    COGAT, World Bank and government authorities on the supply of equipment and materials and
    contract execution. World Bank staff based in Gaza will also provide intensive supervision
    during project implementation.


    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

    Tracy Hart, Sr. Environmental Specialist
    Nina Bhatt, Senior Social Development Specialist

    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

I Safeguard Policies Triggered                                    I    Yes          No          TBD
! Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                           i     X                  I
  Construction-related impacts include both rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure as well
  as expansion of new infrastructure in the form of reservoirs, water booster stations, desalination
  plant, pumping stations, water mains, transmission lines, and water wells. Replacement and safe
  disposal of asbestos lines will be handled and managed through the EMP. The expansion of new
" water supply infrastructure, i.e., the expansion of the desalination plant and the rehabilitation and
  relocation of the water wells are expected to have an overall positive impact on local water
  balance, including the groundwater. Negative impacts are expected mainly in the construction
. phase and can be minimized or eliminated with careful planning and implementation of the
  EMP. Category B environmental classification is assigned for the project.

: The borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment to investigate the
! environmental and socio economic impacts, mitigation measures, and prepare an Environmental
I and Social Impact Management Plan (ESIAJESMP). The scope of the ESIA will further
i investigate the issue of land acquisition for any of the proposed facilities, reservoirs, wells,
: pumping stations, water mains and transmission lines, and the appropriate resettlement
  instruments will be prepared as necessary based on the findings of the environmental and social
I
  assessment. The borrower will also undertake consultations with relevant stakeholders and
I include a summary in the ESIA report. The ESIA and any relevant resettlement instruments will
  be available prior to project appraisal and will be disclosed at the Infoshop and in-country in
, Arabic and English.
                                                                                                                                                -

  Safe uard Policies Tri ered                                           Yes                      TBD 

LNatural Habitats (QPIBP 4.04) 

l Forests OPIBP 4.36) 

 J)est Management (OP 4.09)                       _________"'"" 

i Phy_s~cal Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4. UL 

i Indigenous Peoples(OPf!1~"~.lO)_ " 


llnvoluntary Re~ettlement (QPIBP 4.12} _ _                               X

, It is not expected that the expansion of the desalination plant wi 1I entail any acquisition of private
: land; the existing site for the treatment plant will be utilized to accommodate the expansion .
. Furthermore, the existing infrastructure of the plant for seawater intake and disposal of brine will
! be utilized. The sites for reservoir construction are owned by the utility and concerned
: municipalities. The ESIA will however further investigate the issue of land acquisition for any of
  the proposed facilities, reservoirs, water mains and transmission lines. Potential resettlement
I impacts will be reviewed based on this and the results of the ESIA and the appropriate
L!esettlement instruments will be prepare_d_._ __
I Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)
j Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.~QL_""

,J>rojects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)

    Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

    III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

    A. 	 Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
         would be prepared: December 5, 2011

    B. 	 For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
           N/A

    C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing ' should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

    The environmental and social safeguards instruments will be prepared, reviewed, approved and
    disclosed in-country and at the Bank's Info shop prior to project appraisal.




    I   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal        (I)   at the
    !nfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and   In   a form and language thai are accessible to potentially affected
    persons
IV. APPRO V ALS

r                                                          .         :;2/ '1
!~:;;~;:~~}!~d         by:     __      Z,yadAbU-HaSSan,;nE,>!A   /~g!L;I'·;c II 8"~ r(
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Hocine Chalal       ~              

      Comments: 

    Sector Manager:                    Francis Ato Brown           6b /1)1/ U   I' 

      Comments: 

