                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6322


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/05/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: West Bank and Gaza                    Project ID: P116199
Project Name: GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab
Task Team Leader: Husam Mohamed Beides
Estimated Appraisal Date:                      Estimated Board Date: February 23, 2012
Managing Unit: MNSSD                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                         0.00
        Special Financing                                                8.00
                                                                         8.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objective is to improve the reliability of the electricity networks in
Gaza and GEDCO’s capacity in system operation and management.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project would rehabilitate and expand the capacity of the electricity infrastructure in Gaza
including capacity building to The Gaza Electricity Distribution Company (GEDCO). The
network investments financed by the Project will rehabilitate and expand the electricity
networks, restore operations of the networks to acceptable safety standards and improve the
reliability and operational management of the networks while operating under stressed electricity
supply conditions.

 The total cost of the Project is estimated at $US16 million and will include the following
components the scope of which will be further finalized during project preparation and appraisal
and assessments being undertaken by Palestinian Energy Authority (PEA) on the priority
investment needs of Gaza electricity networks.
 #     Component 1: Network Rehabilitation and Expansion

 o    Subcomponent 1: Rehabilitation of Medium and Low Voltage Networks. This
subcomponent will rehabilitate the medium and low voltage networks to relieve existing
equipment overloading, reduce losses and improve network voltage operation.

 o      Subcomponent 2: Network Supply Improvement. This subcomponent will install new
medium voltage feeder lines to reduce loading of existing feeders and increase the transfer of
electricity from Gaza Power Plant and IEC supply point at Northern Gaza to demand centers in
Gaza City.

 o      Subcomponent 3: Increase Collection. This subcomponent will finance the supply and
installation of pre-paid meters to reduce network losses and improve collection. Installation of
pre-paid meters will be gradual and initiated on pilot basis.


 #      Component 2: Utility Capacity Building

 o     Subcomponent 1: Supply of Vehicles, Tools and IT Systems. This subcomponent will
support the purchase of utility tucks, equipment, tools and IT Systems to improve GEDCO
operation and maintenance activities.

 o      Subcomponent 2: Technical Assistance for GEDCO. This subcomponent may include the
provision of technical assistance to improve the administration, financial management, tariff
regulation and operational capacity of GEDCO. The subcomponent will also finance a master
plan for the electricity supply and transmission system in Gaza.

  The proposed Project will be implemented by the existing Project Management Unit (PMU)
within the PEA, which is currently responsible for the implementation of other Bank and donor
financed projects including the multi-donor funded Electricity Utility Management Project
(EUMP).

D. Project location (if known)
The investment projects financed by this operation are expected to rehabilitate and expand the
electricity networks located in various locations in Gaza including urban and surrounding areas
connected to the distribution networks. The exact locations of the interventions are not yet
identified at this stage. However, experience shows that network rehabilitation projects such as
the ones proposed to be financed by this operation are not expected to result in significant
adverse environmental or social impacts. The project will include works such as rehabilitation
and expansion of existing low and medium overhead lines and construction of such new lines
and consequently, potential adverse impacts that are likely to be associated with construction-
related activities are expected to be minor, site-specific and temporary in nature. By careful
planning, adherence to standard procedures of good engineering and construction practice and
implementation of mitigation measures as described in the Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP), potential adverse impacts can be eliminated or minimized to
acceptable levels. In addition, potential impacts on people’s lives or property will be addressed
through a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Resettlement Action Plans when the sites
are identified.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Project Management Unit (PMU) within the PEA is currently responsible for the
implementation of the ongoing Electric Utility Management Project (P084461) that is similar in
scope to the proposed project. The PMU will also be responsible for the overall management of
the proposed project including procurement, financial management, contract management as well
as reporting to the Bank. However GEDCO, through contract execution, will be responsible for
implementation of all civil and installation works under the project. GEDCO will therefore be
responsible for ensuring compliance with the safeguard policies during project implementation.

 Currently the PEA and PMU have developed a good understanding of the requirements needed
to comply with the Bank’s safeguards policies with experience gained through implementation of
the EUMP. They will work with GEDCO initially on monitoring of safeguards implementation
while the capacity of GEDCO is strengthened. Component 2 of the project will also include
capacity building of GEDCO related to the Bank safeguard policies. During project
implementation, GEDCO will provide periodic updates on implementation of the ESMP to the
PMU, which will include this information in the quarterly progress reports that are submitted to
the Bank. OP 4.12 may be triggered because the precise location of all works and their impact
has not yet been fully established. In addition, Gaza is a densely populated and highly urbanized
area, where people’s lives may be disturbed or assets damaged during the construction process.
Therefore the safeguard policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) is triggered and the
borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure compensation in such
cases.

 Both ESIA/ESMP and RPF will be prepared for the project and disclosed before appraisal.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Banu Setlur (MNSEN)
   Ms Lene Natasha Lind (MNSSO)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes           No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
    The project is classified as environmental category B and not anticipated to cause any
irreversible damage to the environment. However, civil works associated with rehabilitation of
medium and low voltage electricity distribution networks and installation of new medium
voltage feeder lines could result in temporary and site-specific minor environmental impacts.
Since the exact locations of project interventions are not know at this stage, the borrower will
prepare a generic Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Management Plan related to
the interventions, specific to Gaza. Consequently when locations become known, site-specific
ESMPs will be prepared before start of civil works. The borrower will also undertake
consultations with relevant stakeholders and include a summary of the consultations in the ESIA
report. The draft ESIA/ESMP will be available by October 27, 2011.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No        TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                    X
    The draft ESIA/ESMP will determine if the policy is triggered or not, and the appraisal stage
ISDS will confirm this. If triggered, necessary mitigation measures will be included within the
scope of the ESMP.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                       X
    A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared by the recipient and the draft RPF
will be available by October 27, 2011.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   10/31/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The safeguards instruments (ESIA and RPF) will be disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s
   Info shop prior to project appraisal planned by December 14, 2011.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Husam Mohamed Beides                                        07/29/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed                                         08/01/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Patricia Veevers-Carter                                     08/01/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
