                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/23/2013                                     Report No.: AC6884
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P119307                 Original Project Name: Cash Transfer
                                             Project
Country: West Bank and Gaza                  Project ID: P144967
Project Name: West Bank and Gaza Cash Transfer Project Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Samira Ahmed Hillis
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 18, 2013      Estimated Board Date: September 26, 2013
Managing Unit: MNSSP                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Other social services (90%);Public administration- Other social services (10%)
Theme: Social safety nets (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.00
         Special Financing                                              10.00
                                                                        10.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]       No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objectives (PDO) for the proposed Additional Financing (AF)
will remain the same as in the original project: "(i) to mitigate the impact of the continued
socio-economic crisis on a subset of the extremely poor and most vulnerable households;
and (ii) to support the Palestinian Authority's (PA) efforts to continue reforms of the
CTP."

3. Project Description
The AF (US$10.0 million) would primarily be used to scale up the Cash Benefits
Component (Component 1) of the West Bank and Gaza Cash Transfer Project
(WBGCTP). Approximately US$9.0 million would be used to continue the payment of
quarterly cash benefits to extremely poor households. The remaining US$1.0 million
would be earmarked for technical assistance to continue reforms of the CTP and to
support project management and monitoring.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
West Bank and Gaza. Since the additional financing will finance only cash payments to
beneficiary households, technical assistance and project management and monitoring, it
will not trigger any safeguards.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the                  N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                    N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                              Date
Task Team Leader:                     Ms Samira Ahmed Hillis                            07/23/2013
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                      Mr Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-Gammal              07/02/2013
  Comments: In consultation with MNAOS, only the Sector Manager will clear/approve this AF,
  P144967 (Category C Project) since the parent project (P119307) has been transferred to the Sector
  Unit on 07/12/2010.
