                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/16/2013                                    Report No.: AC6895
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P117444                  Original Project Name: GZ-Palestinian P.
                                              NGO IV
Country: West Bank and Gaza                   Project ID: P144754
Project Name: GZ-PNGO IV AF
Task Team Leader: Sabine W. Beddies
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2013
Managing Unit: MNSSO                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Other social services (85%);Health (15%)
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (35%);Social Inclusion (35%);Other social
protection and risk management (30%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Special Financing                                             5.00
                                                                       5.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To provide social services through NGOs and CBOs to those who are poor, vulnerable or
marginalized and to strengthen the institutional capacity of these NGOs and CBOs.

3. Project Description
In accordance with Bank guidelines, the proposed Additional Financing (AF) would be
used to finance implementation of expanded activities to scale up the project's strategic
approach and development outcomes. The proposed AF will provide support for
additional demand-driven grants for social services delivered by non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and community-based organizations (CBOs), and to continue the
financing of NGO sector capacity strengthening. The AF retains the components of the
original investment, the Fourth NGO Project (PNGOIV), i.e. (i) NGO Grants for Social
and Productive Services; (ii) Component 2: NGO Sector Development; and (iii)
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.
 21) The overall project structure, implementation and fiduciary arrangements will
remain unchanged from the original project. However, the proposed Additional Financing
will (i) improve targeting of poor and disadvantaged communities in un-served and
underserved areas, using up-to-date data of locality level poverty estimates and geo-
referenced information, as well as coordinated NGO/CBO proposals for social service
delivery; (ii) use a multi-stakeholder collaboration approach between NGOs/CBOs with
the PA, LGUs, citizens, academic institutions (and possibly also the private sector)
during the identification and implementation of NGO/CBO sub-projects; (iii) enhance the
support for good governance strengthening of NGOs/CBOs; and (iv) enhance its focus on
outcome measurements; this includes an expansion of (a ) its gender and youth
disaggregated measurements, focused only on sub-project design, to also focus on
subproject implementation and monitoring; and (b) its use of ICT in all project
components.

 The expected AF outcomes include enhanced good governance and more effective and
efficient social service delivery to marginalized Palestinians in priority geographical
areas through a more targeted, inclusive, holistic, and results-oriented approach that is
grounded in enhanced partnerships between the PA, LGUs, NGOs/CBOs, as well as local
communities and beneficiary populations.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
This project is targeting NGOs and CBOs located in West Bank, Gaza, and East
Jerusalem.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Hana Salah (MNSSO)
   Mr Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (MNSWA)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                            Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                       X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No significant or irreversible impacts are expected. The majority of sub-projects are of
category "C" while some demand driven NGO/CBO sub-projects will be of category B
such as rehabilitation of houses and agricultural roads and lands and small-scale
infrastructure. Those may result in some impacts during the construction phase, e.g.
noise, dust, or safety hazards. Those impacts will be mitigated by virtue of site-specific
ESMPs that will be prepared during implementation as outlined in the ESMF. The
ESMPs will be included in the bidding documents with clear assignment of
responsibilities. All projects that may have large scale impacts (i.e., Category A projects)
are excluded. In addition, any projects that trigger any safeguards policies other than OP
4.01(including on involuntary resettlement, pest management, or cultural resources) will
also be excluded.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term negative impacts are anticipated due to the projects.Overall positive
impacts are expected due to the improvement of NGOs service delivery as a result of
project activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The successful mechanism of safeguards compliance implemented under PNGOIV will
be maintained for the proposed AF. Specifically, NDC confirmed that it will maintain an
environmental safeguards consultant to monitor compliance and train NGOs. The cost of
the consultant will be budgeted in project costs. As common practice during the
NGO/CBO subproject appraisal, NDC conducts environmental screening of all
subprojects and assigns an environmental category to each subproject. For the subprojects
that are likely to be category B, specific ESMPs will be prepared and included in the
bidding documents, NDC will train train NGOs/CBOs on ESMP implementation. The
ESMF and the operation manual includes a negative list of project classes that would be
categorized as "A" according to the Bank OP 4.01 policy. Furthermore, the ESMF and
Operation Manual (OM) contains provisions and check list that will help identify any
safeguards risks re OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement and OP 4.11 on cultural
resources. No pest management or pesticides will be financed by the project. A protocol
for voluntary land donation (if any) and a chance finds protocol have been included in the
ESMF and Operational Manual.

 In terms of social safeguards, any subproject grants that could trigger the OP 4.12 will
be excluded as part of the list of ineligible grants provided in the Operational Manual as
was the case for PNGOIV, which served as an effective means to avoid triggering the
policy. The project will thus not provide grants that may involve direct economic and
social impacts through: (a) the temporary or permanent involuntary taking of land
resulting in relocation or loss of shelter, loss of assets or access to assets, or loss of
income sources or means of livelihood, whether or not the affected persons must move to
another location; or (b) involuntary restriction of access to legally designated parks and
protected areas resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced persons. A
contact person within NDC will be responsible for social safeguards monitoring
throughout project implementation as detailed in the Operations Manual. Training on
safeguards issues will be provided by the World Bank as needed.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are NGOs and CBOs. Three consultations on the AF design and
safeguards issues have been conducted including the NGOs / CBOs (focusing on
marginalized groups, including the poor, females and youth), private sector, donors and
government officials (one in the North of West Bank, one in the South of West Bank and
one in Gaza) in order to get feedback on the AF design and components, as well as on the
ESIA/ESMF.The minutes of the consultations, stakeholders concerns are summarized in
the ESMF and how those concerns are addressed in the project design.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/04/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/11/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/13/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
NA


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                             Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Sabine W. Beddies                             04/02/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Zeyad Abu-Hassanein                           04/02/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Hana Salah                                    04/02/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed                             04/16/2013
  Comments: Cleared, but make sure that reference to Pest Management Plan is left blank.
Sector Manager:                    Mr Franck Bousquet                                 03/26/2013
  Comments:
