                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/05/2011                                   Report No.: AC6592
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P111741                 Original Project Name: Municipal
                                             Development Program
Country: West Bank and Gaza                  Project ID: P127162
Project Name: GZ-Municipal Development Program AF
Task Team Leader: Soraya Goga
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5,        Estimated Board Date: January 19, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: MNSSD                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (93%);Public administration- Energy
and mining (7%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (42%);Municipal finance
(42%);Municipal governance and institution building (16%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Special Financing                                             2.00
                                                                       2.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The PDO is to improve municipal management practices for better transparency.

3. Project Description
The MDP (Phase 1) is implemented in two Cycles (Cycle 1, 2009-2011) and Cycle 2
(2011-2013). It has 4 Windows or Parts, as described below, through which funds will be
disbursed. This AF applies to Cycle 2 of the program. Consequently, the financing
amounts given under each Part correspond to Cycle 2 of the program,which is estimated
to cost approximately Euro 32.3 million equivalent.

 In accordance with OP/BP 13.20, the Additional Financing (US$2 million) would be
used to finance implementation of expanded activities to scale up the project's impact and
development effectiveness primarily through support for additional grants for municipal
infrastructure (an estimated 98.3% of the financing). A portion of the funds (1.7% of the
total additional financing) would also be used to finance cost overruns to complete some
original project activities.

 The program is co-financed by Denmark and Sweden (though a World Bank
administered Multi-Donor Trust Fund), financed in parallel by Germany (through GiZ
and KfW), France (through AfD) and Belgium (through BTC) and benefits from
matching financing (10% of donor contributions) from the Palestinian Authority (PA).
The Donors are collectively referred to as the 'Funding Partners'.

 Window 1: Municipal Grants for Capital Investment (Total US$ 36 million of which
US$1.7 million will be under the TFGWB additional financing)

 Window 1 allocates grants to municipalities for capital investments or operating
expenditures for service provision, per their mandate defined in the Local Administration
Law of 1997. The Phase 1 of the MDP will provide eligible municipalities with
performance based grants for investments in service delivery, using an allocation formula
designed to incentivize better management practices. The formula allocates resources to
municipalities in an equitable, efficient, and accountable way, based on three weighted
criteria that determine the distribution of the funds available through MDP Phase 1:
population (40%), needs (20%), and performance (40%). Municipalities are ranked from
levels A to E, using 12 key indicators of good municipal management, and will receive
higher or lower allocations based on their rank. Eligible sectors, per the Local
Administration Law of 1997, are as follows: (i) water and waste water services if
provided by the municipality for the purpose of ensuring continuous supply; (ii) solid
waste management; (iii) roads; (iv)public facilities (v) street lighting and (vi) electricity
services not provided by a utility. The interventions could include rehabilitation,
reconstruction, construction, or the supply of equipment and spare parts to sustain
municipal service provision.

 Taking note of the special circumstances of municipalities in Gaza, and the continued
closure regime, Gaza municipalities may use their allocations for recurrent expenditures
(excluding salaries of municipal employees) as direct inputs for sustaining essential
municipal services. Examples of eligible expenses include maintaining public health
services such as cost of cleaning and maintaining public land, facilities and assets, water
purification and pest control; cost of solid waste collection and disposal; cost of
maintaining and operating municipal service vehicles, road maintenance, water supply
and wastewater services etc). This can also include fees for temporary workers.

 Window 2: Support to Municipal Innovations and Efficiency (Total US$1.0 m of which
US$ 0.0 million be under TFGWB Additional financing)
 This window promotes learning and innovation to promote municipal development,
including implementation of MoLG policy decisions. The two main areas of intervention
envisaged are: (a) strengthening amalgamation of local governments and (b) piloting
innovations that promote municipal revenue generation or cost savings.
  (a) Strengthening newly amalgamated local governments: This activity will promote
the amalgamation of local governments and fund the expansion of their services,
including some small scale infrastructure and capacity building. All activities of this sub-
window should be outside the scope of Windows 1 and 3.
  (b) Piloting Innovations to improve municipal revenue: This activity will support
studies, consultations, and implementation / testing of innovative approaches to enhance
municipal revenue generation or cost savings. The three main areas of support envisaged
are:
  (i)    Promoting energy efficiency to reduce municipal expenditures through an energy
audit and some investments to increase efficient use of energy in municipal service
delivery in 3 to 4 large municipalities, likely to most benefit from energy savings.
  (ii) One-stop-shops: One-stop shops (OSS) or customer-service-centers will be
financed to promote municipal transparency, accountability, citizen-responsiveness and
public participation efforts in management and service delivery in 3 municipalities in
Gaza. The One-stop-shops will be centers where citizens may obtain information about
all the services provided by the municipality and how to obtain this service. They will
also enable citizens to provide feedback on municipal services so that municipal leaders
may improve the ways in which services are provided and make decisions that are citizen
responsive.

 Window 3: Capacity-Building for municipalities and the MDLF (US$3.6 million in total
of which US$0.03 million to be financed by TFGWB Additional Financing)

 CAPACITY BUILDING FOR MUNICIPALITIES
 This window will support municipalities to move up the performance ranking system in
which they are currently classified. It will provide technical assistance to municipalities
to improve their: (i) financial management, including revenue enhancement, (ii) planning
capacities, with a specific focus on community participation, and (iii) technical
capabilities, in particular for asset maintenance and improving service delivery. The
technical assistance packages described below are demand driven and training targets are
determined by the number of municipalities within each rank.

  (a) Improved Financial Management (US$ 0.8 million). Support will be provided for:
(i) the roll out of the financial management manual which includes the basic use of the
new chart of accounts, to an estimated 13 municipalities; (ii) asset registration and
valuation support to an estimated of 20 municipalities; (iii) promotion of municipal
external audits; (v) office and IT equipment based on MDLF's assessment of the
municipal financial departments,; and (vi) the roll out of an Integrated Financial
Management Information System to an estimated 9 municipalities.
  (b) Strategic Development and Investment Plans (SDIP) (US$1.4 million): This
activity will support an estimated 56 municipalities to develop simple strategic
development and investment plans with the participation of communities and relevant
stakeholders.
  c)     Technical Assistance to Municipalities for overall improved management,
especially for operations and maintenance (O&M) plans and procurement (US$0.3
million). This will include (i) the development of O&M guidelines and a procedural
manual and (ii) piloting use of the manual in 5 municipalities.

  FOR MDLF
  This activity will strengthen the MDLFs capacity to implement the MDP, ensuring that
it continues to use innovative approaches that build on international best practices. It will
provide support for human resource development and institutional building based on the
MDLF's Medium Term Strategic Plan and its Human Resources Development Plan. The
specific activities will be based on an annually approved detailed plan of activities by the
Financing Partners and drawing on the Strategic and Human Resources Development
plan.

  Window 4 MDP Management (Total of US$ 3.8 million of which US$ 0.19 million
financing from TFGWB Additional Financing)
  MDLF Management Fee. All Funding Partners will pay a 7 percent administration fee
on their grants to MDLF. This was estimated on the basis of a fully costed budget for the
implementation of MDP Phase 1, taking into account its fixed and variable costs,
including staff, equipment and operating costs. This administrative fee was reviewed by
the Financing Partners and assessed to be adequate.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The program will be located in all 134 municipalities in both the West Bank and Gaza.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Mario Antonio Zelaya (MNSUR)
   Ms Sabine W. Beddies (MNSUR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The development and rehabilitation of municipal infrastructure includes roads, water
wells, water networks, wastewater and sanitation, parks, and others. The negative
environmental impacts associated with municipal subprojects are expected to be minor
during the construction phase. These impacts will be mitigated by the MDLF through
implementation of the EMP; therefore, the AF project is classified as category "B" as was
the original MDP (Phase 1). Furthermore, the size of funds available to municipalities
under this program limit the scope of the subprojects, and hence larger scale subprojects
which require a full-fledged EIA (category A) will be excluded (negative list) in the sub-
project screening process. Such sub-projects would not be feasible due to the ceilings of
funds available under the project.

 Operational Policy 4.01 is triggered and requires an environmental assessment for
activities that involve infrastructure construction.

 Operational Policy 4.09 was triggered in the event that municipalities, particularly in
Gaza where the project does support operations and maintenance, required financing to
assist in controlling pests, such as mosquitoes, within their municipal areas. These are
expected to be very small in quantity, and are not expected to support agricultural
activities. Thus far under the Original project, no municipalities have requested sub-
projects that support the purchase of pesticides. A Pest Management Plan has been
included as part of the Environment Management Plan.

  OP 4.12 would not apply as the project does not finance any investments or sub-projects
that would involve the involuntary taking of lands resulting in relocation or loss of
shelter, loss of assets or access to assets, or loss of income sources or other means of
livelihood by an affected person (whether or not that affected person must move to
another location or any type of impact that would lead to an investment or sub-project
that being classified as triggering OP 4.12 according to World Bank screening
mechanisms

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Sub-project alternatives would be considered at the planning and designing stages by
concerned municipalities. Minor environmental impacts may occur. However, the EMP
provides adequate guidance on measures for avoiding and mitigating negative impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The MDLF, with the support of Consultants, prepared the EMP for earlier municipal
programs and projects financed by the World Bank, including the MDP (Phase 1). The
MDLF has developed, through these previous projects, experience in addressing
safeguards issues including requirements for the safeguards consultation process. It has a
full time environmental specialist who has been involved in the review and approval of
sub-projects under the Original project, the MDP Phase 1. It is also supported by
consultants who provide guidance to municipalities on environmental issues from the
planning and designing stages through construction and operation. The English and
Arabic versions of the EMP has been disclosed in-country on MDLF's website. The EMP
is part of MDLF Operational Manual and it will be upgraded and updated annually and
according to project/program needs.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are municipal leaders/staff, contractors (who carry out public
works) and communities. The sub-projects are selected through the Strategic
Development and Investment Plans (SDIP) where these are available. The SDIP is a
consultative process of all key stakeholders including the communities and concerned
local NGOs. Where SDIPs are not available, sub-projects are selected in consultation
with communities. Municipalities have staff members responsible for environmental and
social issues who serve as MDLF's primary counterparts. The draft EMP was discussed
with these stakeholders. It was also reviewed by the Environmental Quality Authority
whose comments have been incorporated.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/13/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/17/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/13/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              11/15/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Soraya Goga            11/21/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Li Song                11/14/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Hana Salah             11/14/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Hocine Chalal          11/21/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Franck Bousquet        11/21/2011
  Comments:
