                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                         RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/03/2012                                  Report No.: AC6580
1. Basic Project Data
Country: World                                 Project ID: P100198
Project Name: Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund 2
Task Team Leader: Valerie Hickey
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 12, 2007        Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2007
Managing Unit: ENV                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Biodiversity (67%);Participation and civic engagement (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):               0
IDA Amount (US$m.):                0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              20
PCF Amount (US$m.):                0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            25.00
         FRANCE: French Agency for Development                         25.00
         Foundation/s (identified)                                     12.00
                                                                       62.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to strengthen the involvement and effectiveness of
civil society in contributing to the conservation and management of globally important
biodiversity.

 The global environment objective is to achieve sustainable conservation and integrated
ecosystem management in areas of globally important biodiversity, through consolidating
conservation outcomes in existing CEPF regions and funding to new critical ecosystems.

3. Project Description
The Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund (CEPF) is a global program, with different
donors supporting different time slices. This project would build upon the experiences
and lessons learned during the first phase of CEPF to consolidate and expand the program
in 14 hotspots, including nine new hotspots. The number of hotspots approved for new
investment under the second phase of CEPF (CEPF-2) continues to be staggered to
ensure adequate funding and implementation capacity. In each hotspot, disbursement of
grants is guided by ecosystem profiles based on a stakeholder-driven prioritization
process to create a shared strategy from the outset.

 The project provides strategic assistance through grants to locally-based NGOs,
community groups, indigenous peoples, the private sector and other civil society partners
to support: (a) strengthened protection and management of biodiversity within selected
hotspots and critical ecosystems; (b) increased local and national capacity to integrate
biodiversity conservation into development and landscape planning; and (c) expanded
and improved monitoring and learning to demonstrate biodiversity impact and enable
adaptive management and replication.

 The project includes four interlinked components:

  Component 1. Strengthening protection and management of globally significant
biodiversity. CEPF-2 focuses on key biodiversity areas and addresses threats to
biodiversity across broad landscapes that include a matrix of land uses, including
protected areas, biological corridors and high value conservation sites in production
landscapes, including indigenous reserves, community and private lands managed for a
conservation objective. Support to civil society groups would contribute to the
strengthened protection and management of more than 24 million hectares of key
biodiversity areas within hotspots, including at least 1.5 million hectares of new protected
areas. CEPF-2 also supports activities that contribute to improved conservation of
biodiversity within biological corridors and production landscapes as well as trans-
boundary collaboration to protect key areas that straddle national borders. Specific
activities are selected on a competitive basis at the ecosystem profile level and include
activities under the following themes: (a) protected areas and other key biodiversity
areas; (b) consolidation of biodiversity conservation corridors; including collaboration
with the private sector; (c) community and Indigenous Peoples initiatives; (d) innovative
financial mechanisms for sustainability; and (e) multi-regional priorities.

  Component 2: Increasing local and national capacity to integrate biodiversity
conservation into development and landscape planning and management. This component
supports activities that seek to integrate biodiversity conservation in production systems
and sectors, including training of civil society groups to plan, implement, and monitor
biodiversity outcomes as effective partners in sustainable development. Such
participation builds on local knowledge and technical expertise, and leverage social
capital to bring innovative ideas to solving local problems. The program focuses
especially on mainstreaming biodiversity conservation and sustainable use in production
landscapes through strategic and effective alliances to increase impact and sustainability.
Grant making fosters alliances by identifying and linking potential partners; helping to
design integrated and complementary management approaches; supporting partnerships
within civil society as well as with development institutions, government agencies,
corporate partners, and others. Activities under this component strengthen civil society
capability for advocacy and influence over development decisions and national strategies
at local, regional and trans-boundary scales.
  Component 3: Monitoring and knowledge sharing. This component supports monitoring
and evaluation of both individual projects and hotspot programs to assess conservation
outcomes and to derive good practice and sharing lessons learned within the hotspot.
Activities include (a) systematic analysis and documentation of grantees’ performance
against individual project and ecosystem targets; (b) assisting civil society groups,
including local communities and Indigenous Peoples, to engage in participatory
monitoring; and (c) expanding and formalizing information sharing and learning
opportunities across the hotspot. Additionally this component supports specific activities
to strengthen outcomes monitoring and to document, disseminate and replicate lessons
learned and good practice.

 Component 4: Ecosystem profile development and project execution. This component
supports project management including (a) the development and updating of ecosystem
profiles to guide hotspot investment strategies; (b) overall execution and administration
of the global program by CI, through the CEPF Secretariat; and, (c) support to locally-
based Regional Implementation Teams (RITs) to lead grant-making and monitoring and
capacity building activities in the hotspots.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will provide investments in up to14 hotspots globally to be chosen from the
30 hotspots which are eligible for Bank and GEF funding. CEPF investments target high
biodiversity areas, and by the end of CEPF-2 will have initiated investments in nine new
hotspots as well as provided support for consolidation of conservation activities in some
hotspots which have already received support under the first phase of the CEPF.

  Investments are guided by ecosystem investment strategies (Ecosystem Profiles) which
require approval by the CEPF Donor Council. Investment strategies have been prepared
for seven new hotspots to date under CEPF-2: Polynesia-Micronesia, Indo-Burma
(Indochina region); the Western Ghats and Sri Lanka (focusing on the Western Ghats
region); the Caribbean; Maputoland-Pondoland-Albany; the Mediterranean; and the
Eastern Afromontane hotspot. Other ecosystems for investment will be chosen based on
biodiversity status and threats, conservation needs, social and political environment, and
current or planned investment by other donors. Investments target protected areas,
biological corridors and other key biodiversity areas, including community-managed
areas and indigenous reserves. Explicit efforts will continue to be made to assist local and
indigenous communities to access grants for biodiversity conservation and management
within the hotspots.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Valerie Hickey (ENV)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Given that the project will have no significant or irreversible adverse impacts, but will
have country-based investments that have the potential to have minor environmental
impacts, it is considered a Category B operation under the Bank’s Environmental
Assessment policy (OP 4.01).

  Environmental issues. The project addresses priority conservation objectives and is thus
expected to have a highly positive environmental impact. Project activities are selected
on a competitive basis according to criteria that ensure that resources are directed to the
most important biodiversity issues while ensuring minimum adverse environmental
effects. This project is fully consistent with the Bank’s Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and
Forests (OP 4.36) policies. It does not now, nor will it in the future cause, nor facilitate,
any significant loss or degradation of forests or other natural habitats. By design, CEPF
finances activities that promote conservation of natural habitats and threatened species
and prevent, or reduce, habitat loss or degradation by providing strategic assistance to
engage NGOs, community groups, and other civil society partners in conservation in
biodiversity hotspots. The project has a detailed Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) in which to identify, minimize, mitigate and manage any small
impacts that do arise. In addition to this ESMF, the project has prepared a Pest
Management Plan (PMP) to provide guidance on how to manage projects that apply for
support to apply pesticides in pursuit of invasives species management.

 Social issues. Many of the projects under CEPF-2 have been and are expected to be
small-scale and provide positive impacts for local communities, including greater
empowerment of local civil society groups to participate in active conservation and
natural resource management. Direct positive impacts include creating employment
opportunities, promoting community management of natural resources, development of
ecotourism and capacity building. However, some projects may have the potential for
adverse impacts on the livelihoods of local populations, particularly in the short term
prior to implementation of more sustainable management practices. These include
projects that result in some form of restrictions of access to natural resources in
designated protected areas, projects that induce changes in livelihood and natural
resource practices, and projects that affect Indigenous Peoples. Accordingly, an
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and Process Framework for Involuntary
Restrictions have been prepared with guidelines included in the Operational Manual.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
CEPF-2 will have only positive impacts in the long term. Long term and future impacts
of the Project will contribute to the overall improvement natural resource management
and greater engagement of local civil society actors in biodiversity conservation and
natural resource management. The CEPF program has explicit initiatives designed to
engage, empower and benefit local communities and Indigenous Peoples so that they are
in a better position to protect their natural capital in the event of future activities in the
project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project’s ESMF, PMP, IPPF and Process Frameworks outline best practice to
identify potentially alternative approaches to project activities to maximize positive
impacts and minimize the potential for adverse impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Based on a review of lessons from the CEPF program to date, explicit guidance and
clarity on the application of safeguard policies have been prepared for CEPF-2, including
an ESMF, PMP, Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and Process
Framework for Involuntary Restrictions. Following the guidance outlined in these various
safeguard instruments prepared by this project and incorporated in their Operational
Manual, all individual subprojects at the ecosystem level are screened for compliance
with Bank safeguards policies both at the time of grant application and during
implementation. These instruments include the requirement for Regional Implementation
Teams (RITs) to consider alternatives to minimize adverse safeguard-related impacts in
their decision on grant applications. All instruments are disclosed on the CEPF website
(www.cepf.net) and through the Bank’s InfoShop website. As needed, specific
instruments are developed for sub-projects funded by CEPF-2. Training by Bank staff on
Bank safeguards has been provided, and supervision missions include a focus on
compliance with safeguard instruments.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the program are the CEPF Secretariat, Regional Implementation
Teams (locally-based organizations who are selected on a competitive basis to manage
the small grants program and provide support to all grants in a hotspot) and civil society
groups within the hotspot. The program is designed to increase the participation of local
civil society stakeholders in biodiversity conservation and natural resources management.
Ecosystem profiles provide the basis for strategic business planning and implementation
within selected hotspots. Profile development is led by civil society partners within the
hotspot and based on stakeholder-driven prioritizing processes to identify conservation
targets, major threats, socioeconomic factors, and current conservation investment.
Government and donors are also included in this profile development. Specific efforts are
made to inform and involve potentially affected people in the planning, design,
implementation and monitoring of individual projects and the overall ecosystem
programs. As necessary, capacity building activities are undertaken to strengthen
consultation and participation skills of the stakeholders.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/17/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/30/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/29/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/17/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/30/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/07/2007
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/17/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/30/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/07/2007
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/30/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/15/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/22/2012
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name               Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Valerie Hickey                    02/01/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Valerie Hickey                    02/01/2012
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan   02/08/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Sari K. Soderstrom                02/03/2012
  Comments:
