                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/11/2011                                   Report No.: AC6457
1. Basic Project Data
Country: World                                Project ID: P118145
Project Name: 1W: MED. Sustainable Governance & Knowledge Generation
Task Team Leader: Gabriella Izzi
GEF Focal Area: International waters          Global Supplemental ID:
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 11,         Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: MNSSD                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);General information
and communications sector (50%)
Theme: Water resource management (30%);Climate change (20%);Environmental
policies and institutions (20%);Pollution management and environmental health
(20%);Other environment and natural resources management (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              3.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.71
                                                                         0.71
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project development objective is to foster the integration of environmental issues
into sectoral and development policies of participating countries.

3. Project Description
The Project consists of three components:
  #     Component 1 - Governance. Component 1 aims to promote dialogue,
coordination, integration, and synergy among local, national, and international
stakeholders on environmental issues. It will have five sets of activities: (i)
Environmental Management Systems review; (ii) Interministerial dialogue; (iii) Private
sector engagement; (iv) Local constituencies engagement; and (v) Regional integration. It
will finance: (i) consultant services; (ii) goods and non-consulting services; and (iii)
training.
  #     Component 2 - Knowledge generation. Component 2 aims to support production
of knowledge and the sharing of information on environmental issues. It will have two
sets of activities: (i) Knowledge production; and (ii) Knowledge sharing. It will finance:
(i) consultant services; (ii) goods and non-consulting services; and (iii) training.
  #     Component 3 - Project Coordination and Management. Component 3 will support
the Project Management Team (PMT). It will finance: (i) Plan Bleu staff costs associated
with Project coordination and management; and (ii) incremental operating costs
associated with Project coordination and management; and (iii) consultant services
(including audits).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project is intended to engage all GEF eligible Mediterranean Countries in MENA.
The Project will start with those countries which have submitted their letters of
endorsement (Lebanon and Morocco).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
As confirmed during the concept stage by the Sector Manager and Regional Safeguard
Coordinator, this Project has been classified as environmental category C, no
environmental implications will arise.

 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 N/A
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations were held during the preparation of the Project with representatives of
eligible countries, donors, partners, and regional initiatives. In April 2011, a one-day
consultation was held in Rome (Italy), with the participation of the GEF focal points (or
their representative) of Algeria, Egypt, Tunisia, and Morocco, plus the participation of
representatives of UNEP/MAP. The draft Project document was shared, and inputs were
taken into consideration in its revision. No safeguard issues were raised during the
consultations.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShop
  * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
  the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
  Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
  explain why:
  N/A


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Gabriella Izzi                            10/06/2011
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Hoonae Kim                                10/06/2011
  Comments:
