                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/14/2013                                    Report No.: AC6874
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P117949                 Original Project Name: RY:Social Fund for
                                             Development IV
Country: Yemen, Republic of                  Project ID: P133699
Project Name: Additional Financing for Social Fund for Development IV
Task Team Leader: Mira Hong
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15,       Estimated Board Date: April 2, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: MNSSP                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (50%);Global food crisis response (10%);Nutrition and food
security (30%);Social Inclusion (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             25
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
         Financing Gap                                                 0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objectives are to: (i) improve access to basic services; (ii)
enhance economic opportunities; and (iii) reduce the vulnerability of the poor.

3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) fully supports the ongoing Social Fund for
Development (SFD) IV Project's original development objectives which are to: (i)
improve access to basic services; (ii) enhance economic opportunities; and (iii) reduce the
vulnerability of the poor. These objectives will therefore remain the same for the AF. The
AF will scale up Component 4 of the SFD IV Project on Labor Intensive Works (LIW)
and introduce the following two new subcomponents: (i) support LIW targeted to
unemployed youth and (ii) introduce cash for work opportunities for youth and women in
the delivery of services, while targeting the works and services to poor and vulnerable
communities. The existing LIW component is being implemented successfully and will
continue with its original allocation of US$25 million to finance labor-intensive
community infrastructure subprojects, providing cash for work to participating members
of poor households. The additional subcomponents are detailed below:

 1) LIW for Youth (US$4 million): The objective of this subcomponent is to reduce the
vulnerability of unemployed youth through youth-targeted labor-intensive works.
 The sub-component will finance labor-intensive sub-projects that provide income
opportunities and work experience to participating youth in subprojects to improve
community infrastructure and environment.

  The program will target unemployed youth in the 18-30 age bracket in urban and semi-
urban areas, with wages set low to ensure that the program attracts unemployed youths
from poor households. About 5,000 youth are expected to benefit from employment
lasting approximately 50 to 60 days with average remuneration of about $400 to $500.

 Subprojects will be selected on the basis of high labor-intensity and potential impact. In
addition to the LIW Program's regular subprojects menu, projects more suitable for youth
and for urban and semi-urban areas will be added, such as planting trees, cobble-stone
street paving, cleaning shorelines, and especially rebuilding the damaged public spaces.

  2) Cash for Work for Social Services (US$21 million): The objectives of this
subcomponent are (i) to reduce the vulnerability of unemployed youth and women
through providing employment opportunities in social service delivery and (ii) to
improve access to basic social services in poor communities. In close coordination with
relevant national programs, this sub-component will focus on the demand side in
financing social services at the community level and improving access of the poor and
vulnerable to these services. Three categories of services are proposed:

 (i) Education, literacy and numeracy

  Job opportunities, through nine-month contracts, will be provided for approximately
3,590 male/female youth who have recently graduated from university, high school, or
teacher training institutes, with priority given to those with training or experience in
education and to residents in the project location. Successful applicants will receive
initial training and regular supervision in providing the following services: teachers to fill
teacher gaps in regular schools (pupils 6-14 years old); non-formal accelerated programs
for children who have not enrolled or have dropped out of school to help them re-
integrate into the formal system; adult literacy classes including life skills.

 Beneficiary communities will be 30 percent in urban and 70 percent in rural areas.
Selection criteria will be based on evidence of need: poverty index; population density;
enrollment gaps; illiteracy rate; and low university or secondary education outcomes in
the region. The program expects to provide education and literacy benefits for
approximately 36,000 males and females in targeted communities and to stimulate the
demand for education among households that have not traditionally considered education
important.
 (ii) Nutrition

  An estimated 1,600 Community Health Volunteers (CHVs) will be trained and
contracted and will receive monthly incentives. Training to be qualified to carry out
defined activities will follow MOPHP's training modules. CHVs will provide a package
of community-based nutrition services to children under 5 (U5) and pregnant and
lactating women, including: (a) enrolment and initial screening for acute malnutrition;
(b) quarterly or bi-annual malnutrition screening in case MOPHP quarterly outreach
services are not available; (c) provision of transport to facilities for treatment; (d)
monthly nutrition education to mothers of U5 children; (e) nutrition education for
pregnant women; (f) breastfeeding promotion; and (g) community level nutrition and
health education. The supply side of services is being supported through the Bank's
Health and Population Project which is under implementation (nutrition kits), along with
MOPHP and development partners (equipping of the health facilities and training of
CHVs).

 Geographic and demographic targeting is focused on Hodeida Governorate, which has
been selected based on its particularly high malnutrition rate and its readiness to provide
nutrition interventions from the public health facilities. The program expects to benefit
approximately 15 percent of the estimated 493,644 children in the governorate. The
selection of districts and beneficiary communities will also be based on malnutrition rates
and readiness to participate.

 (iii) Social research

 Cash-for-work opportunities will be provided to approximately 400 young men and
women university graduates who will be given an introductory training and guided to
participate in data collection and other assessment and monitoring and evaluation
activities of the SFD programs. Through working directly with communities and
experienced SFD staff and consultants, participants will learn skills needed to work in the
development field as surveyor, researcher, enumerator or field assistant.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
This is a national program. Beneficiary communities will be approximately 30 percent in
urban and 70 percent in rural areas. Selection criteria will be based on evidence of need:
poverty index; malnutrition rates; population density; and enrollment gaps and illiteracy
rates.

 Subprojects with high labor-intensity and potential impact will be selected. In addition
to the LIW Program's regular menu of subprojects (including irrigation, water harvesting
schemes, agricultural terraces rehabilitation, agricultural land improvement, maintenance
and improvement of village access earth roads, the improvement of drinking water
sources, and watershed management), subprojects more suitable for youth and urban and
semi-urban areas will be added, such as planting trees, cobblestone street paving,
cleaning shorelines, and especially rebuilding the damaged public spaces.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Banu Setlur (MNSEN)
   Ms MargeT F. Gunness Davis (MNSHD)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will remain classified as environment category B according to the World
Bank's Operation Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). The Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) dated February 2010 that was updated by SFD during the
preparation of SFD IV is still applicable to the AF. Any potential negative environmental
impacts will be site-specific and reversible, that can be mitigated with the implementation
of the EMP. Furthermore, SFD periodically updates the EMP as needed to reflect
additions and/or changes in its overall program design with IDA and other donors. Since
no new type of works will be introduced as part of this AF, the current EMP is still
applicable to the AF. No other safeguard policies are envisaged to be triggered by the
project. Activities under the AF will not result in any large scale, significant or
irreversible negative impacts. This is also consistent with the ongoing SFD IV Project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long-term or indirect negative impacts are expected as a result of project activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
No additional safeguard policies are triggered in the AF that was not triggered in SFD IV.
SFD had updated the EMP for SFD IV dated February 2010 that will still be applicable to
the AF. SFD has successfully implemented previous projects and has proven capacity to
implement and comply with the EMP and Bank's safeguard policies. Furthermore, SFD
will continue to prepare annual environmental audits of its program, including for
subprojects funded by IDA.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Beneficiary communities are in both urban and rural areas across the country. By nature
of the project design, consultations with stakeholders and community members will
continue to be undertaken before implementation of subprojects as part of subproject
cycle. Subprojects will be selected on a demand basis. The activities added under the AF
are scaling up of the LIW of the ongoing SFD IV project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/26/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/27/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/02/2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Mira Hong                            02/12/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Banu Setlur                          02/11/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms MargeT F. Gunness Davis              02/11/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed                  02/13/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-Gammal   02/13/2013
  Comments:
