                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC3021

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Yemen, Republic of               Project ID:      P144764
                            Project Name:       Climate Resilience of Rural Communities Project (CRRC) (P144764)
                            Task Team           Garry Charlier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-Jan-2014                      Estimated        02-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      MNSWA                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Public administration-
                                                Water, sanitation and flood protection (50%)
                            Theme(s):           Climate change (60%), Other rural development (20%), Other environment and
                                                natural resources management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     18.60                      Total Bank Financing:           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                  18.60
                              Total                                                                         18.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective is to increase the resilience of the rural population to the impact
                           of climate change through improved natural resource management.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will scale up and mainstream climate resilience into the agricultural sector,
                         local rural development planning and implementation. The project will improve climate resilience by
                         building on the participatory processes and institutional mechanisms established by the RALP to
                         improve soil and water conservation. The proposed project will adopt the RALP integrated pilot
Public Disclosure Copy




                         approach of combining soil and water management for climate change adaptation and enhanced
                         provision of ecosystem goods and services. In addition to building on the RALP approach, the
                         project will improve climate resilience by supporting community risk management, including the
                         development of early warning systems.

                         The proposed project, which will be implemented with a Strategic Climate Fund grant of US$19
                         million over five years (2015-2020), will consist of three inter-related components.

                         (i)     Component 1: Climate resilient soil and water conservation

                         This component will improve the climate resilience of the watershed-based ecosystems in selected
                         rainfed areas of Yemen through (i) integrated soil and water conservation measures at the watershed/
                         basin level, (ii) a landscape approach through community mobilization and training to build local
                         capacities to manage water and other natural resources in an integrated and sustainable manner, and
                         (iii) piloting Payment for Environmental Services (PES) to maintain terraces and other water and soil
                         saving devices.

                         This component will build on RALP and SFD experience and adopt an Integrated Watershed
                         Management (IWM) approach for ecosystem management, which provides a framework to integrate
                         natural resource management with community livelihoods in a sustainable way by focusing on the
                         sustainability of ecosystem services as well as sustainable benefits for human well-being (as well as
                         animal production). The IWM approach focuses on the watershed level, cutting across administrative
                         districts, through formulation of a Comprehensive Watershed Management Plan and implementation
                         of inter-community and district level sub-projects.

                         In this component the project will seek to develop the IWM approach into a broader landscape
Public Disclosure Copy




                         approach in selected project sites. In this context, the landscape approach will involve supporting
                         integrated approaches to managing land and water in a geographic area, supporting the intensification
                         of production on fertile lands as well as landscape restoration in degraded areas. As part of its
                         decentralized, community-based approach, the project will work with farmers groups (including
                         herders) and WUAs, in developing capacities of local councils and communities to manage water
                         resources (including groundwater), soil, plants and animals and to include climate resilience in local
                         and community planning. Special focus will be given to building capacities and raising awareness for
                         inter-community planning and action. Under this component the project will encourage investments
                         in terrace rehabilitation, other water saving devices (water tanks) and other eco-system maintenance
                         activities which would allow farmers better options for increasing agricultural diversification and
                         productivity of both water and cropping and animal production systems. Agricultural diversification
                         and water conservation will also be achieved by promoting high-value cash crops as alternatives to
                         qat, in line with the strategic objectives of the National Agriculture Sector Strategy (NASS). Less
                         water intensive alternatives to qat will be promoted, such as barbary cactus for fruit, aloe, almonds,
                         and coffee - all of which have had some success in Yemen as alternative crops.

                         This component would aim to work through existing decentralized structures in developing
                         capacities of local councils and communities to manage water resources (including groundwater) and
                         to include climate resilience in local and community planning. It will focus on improving local water
                         governance through community mobilization and working with National Water Resources Authority
                         (NWRA) and local councils on water management aspects. Special focus will be given to building
                         capacities and raising awareness for inter-community planning and action, as part of the investments
                         for integrated watershed management, e.g. promoting coordination between communities covering
Public Disclosure Copy




                         upper and lower watershed management.

                         This component would build on established RALP field activities to provide additional funds to
                         selected communities to assist them prepare special programs designed to better manage and utilize
                         watershed structure especially as related to flood water through community action, local participation
                         and self-help groups. The grant would support the testing of pilot models for managing floods with
                         the objective of protecting vulnerable communities and their assets, protect natural resources, and
                         increase groundwater recharge. Technology improvement of water harvesting is an essential part of
                         improved watershed management because it could increase water storage needed to increase the
                         recharge of local aquifers.

                         (ii)    Component 2: Integrated community risk management.

                         This component will improve climate resilience of the rural population by addressing the risks
                         associated with droughts and flood hazards and other shocks. This component will adopt a
                         comprehensive approach, combining initiatives in climate change adaptation through an early
                         warning system, social protection, and asset protection, such as animal health protection to protect
                         livestock assets. For each community, specific activities will be determined based on the key risks
                         identified by the community and corresponding risk-management plan.

                         In climate change adaptation, the activities will include institutional capacity building for
                         establishing an early warning system in support of climate resilience related initiatives. The objective
                         is to revitalize traditional risk mitigation measures and incorporate them into the early warning
                         system as part of community development plans. The project will not support upgrading of national
                         hydro-meteorological and agro-meteorological networks. Support for such activities, and support for
                         improving the coordination of such networks between CAMA, MAI, and NWRA, is to be provided
Public Disclosure Copy




                         by the Climate Information System & PPCR Coordination Project (P132116). Activities under this
                         proposed project supporting early warning systems in the targeted communities will be closely linked
                         to other PPCR activities to ensure synergies and to avoid duplication. This component will be
                         prepared in coordination with MAI, CAMA, NWRA, and other relevant units/programs of the SFD,
                         such as the Labor Intensive Work Program.

                         The social protection activities will build on the scope of available instruments currently in use in the
                         RALP, such as cash-for-work. This will help to target the most vulnerable groups and communities’
                         living in chronic crisis situation and climate hazard prone locations. These types of programs can
                         then operate as productive safety net programs that can be scaled up to respond to shocks of various
                         kinds, such as crop failures or other natural disasters. This component will also explore opportunities
                         for ‘risk pooling of agricultural and livestock production’, such as traditional solidarity mechanisms.

                         (iii)   Component 3: Strategic knowledge management and project coordination.

                         This component will collect and document local best experiences and indigenous knowledge on
                         activities improving climate resilience at the local level, undertake knowledge sharing and exchange
                         in coordination with relevant local and national stakeholders, and promote the incorporation of this
                         knowledge into national and sub-national policies and strategies. This knowledge management
                         component will be implemented by SFD in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and
                           Irrigation (MAI) and the PPCR Coordination Unit at the Environment Protection Authority (EPA).

                           This component will also finance the operating costs of the project. The project will rely upon the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           support units established in SFD. Costs will be financed through the provision of overhead costs to
                           account for the increased volume of work and additional operating costs for SFD, including salaries,
                           equipment, and consultancy services as needed.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will target rainfed rural areas in Yemen, focusing on the most vulnerable populations
                           living in areas with high climatic risk, with a special focus on the situation of women, youth and
                           chronically poor. The criteria for identifying vulnerable populations will be based upon the RALP
                           experience in selection of communities and targeting. The project will explore options for scaling up
                           geographically to include new governorates. RALP has focused on 23 rural districts in the five
                           governorates of Lahej, Hajjah, Hodeidah, Al-Mahweit, and Sana’a.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Social Fund for Development (SFD) will implement the project. SFD would be responsible for
                           overall project management including compliance with Safeguard Policies. The Agriculture and
                           Rural Development Unit (ARDU) of the Social Fund for Development will be in charge of project
                           implementation, in coordination with other SFD units and the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
                           (MAI). SFD has experience in safeguards implementation from previous and ongoing Bank-
                           supported operations, including the preparation of environmental impact assessments and
                           management plans. Thus SFD has demonstrated capacity to manage the application of the Bank's
                           safeguard policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Banu Setlur (MNSEE)
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Policy will be triggered as the project will
                           BP 4.01                                              include activities such as construction of water
                                                                                cisterns, rehabilitation of terraces, and other
                                                                                small scale works relating to soil and water
                                                                                conservation. Since the location of the sub-
                                                                                projects (activities) is not known at this stage,
                                                                                an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                Framework (ESMF) including a checklist for
                                                                                sub-project selection criteria and impacts will be
                                                                                prepared and disclosed before project appraisal.
                                                                                Site/sub-project specific Environmental and
                                                                                Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be
                                                                                prepared during implementation and before
                                                                                construction.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                result in loss, conversion or degradation of
                                                                                                                                 natural habitats or critical natural habitats as
                                                                                                                                 defined by the policy.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            Policy does not apply as the project will not be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 implemented in any forested areas.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                                                                 procure any pesticides nor will it induce an
                                                                                                                                 increase in the current non-existent to low levels
                                                                                                                                 of pesticide use.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            Policy is not triggered as the project will not be
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         implemented in areas of cultural heritage sites.
                                                                                                                                 However, chance finds procedures will be
                                                                                                                                 included in EMP as is standard practice.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            Policy is not triggered as indigenous people as
                                                                                                                                 defined in the policy are not present in project
                                                                                                                                 areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            Policy is not triggered. No involuntary
                                 4.12                                                                                            resettlement is anticipated by the project. The
                                                                                                                                 project will not finance any activities which
                                                                                                                                 involve involuntary taking of land and
                                                                                                                                 involuntary restriction of legally designated
                                                                                                                                 parks and protected areas. Land for the
                                                                                                                                 construction of water storage tanks will be
                                                                                                                                 obtained through voluntary donation by local
                                                                                                                                 communities. The guidelines for safeguards
                                                                                                                                 screening, voluntary land donation and negative
                                                                                                                                 project list will be developed and included in
                                                                                                                                 the PAD. The client will conduct due diligence
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 to ensure that no involuntary settlements will
                                                                                                                                 take place.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                                                                 include construction of dams as defined by the
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            undertake any activities in the catchment areas
                                                                                                                                 of international waterways and shared aquifers.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Policy is not triggered as project activities will
                                 7.60                                                                                            not be implemented in any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will prepared and disclosed prior
                                      to project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Garry Charlier

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)    Date: 13-Aug-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Steven N. Schonberger (SM)   Date: 02-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
