                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC2497

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Yemen, Republic of              Project ID:     P144522
                            Project Name:      Maternal and Newborn Voucher Project (P144522)
                            Task Team          Alaa Mahmoud Hamed Abdel-
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Oct-2013                     Estimated       30-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSHH                           Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Population and reproductive health (70%), Child health (15%), Health system
                                               performance (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     10.00                    Total Bank Financing:        10.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                10.00
                              Total                                                                      10.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project would contribute to supporting the Government of Yemen’s efforts to achieve the 4th
                           and 5th MDGs in reducing maternal and newborn mortality.

                           Project Development Objective (PDO). The PDO is to increase access to and utilization of maternal
                           and neonatal health services in selected poor rural and urban areas in Yemen.
                           C. Project Description
                           This is a five year project with a proposed cost of US$10.0 million equivalent to be implemented
                           using a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) instrument. The overall approach is to have a community-
                           based maternal and newborn health program using demand-side financing, including a voucher for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           safe delivery services and neonatal care, together with a cash benefit for women living in rural areas
                           to cover transport, food and possibly other opportunity costs. The supply side will be supported by
                           the ongoing World Bank financed Health and Population Project (HPP, Cr.H640) in the same project
                           target governorates, i.e., Ibb and Sana’a Governorates. The HPP, with a Closing Date of September
                           30, 2017, will be operating in parallel with the proposed project.

                           The proposed project would have two components.

                           Component 1: Improving Access to Maternal and Newborn Health Services (US$9.0 million
                           equivalent total) which would support results-based payments for the reimbursement of vouchers and
                           cash benefits for maternal and newborn health services for eligible women in reproductive health age
                           through profit and non-profit private and public health sector providers.

                           Component 2: Results-Based Monitoring, Impact Evaluation, Quality Assurance, Verification, and
                           Project Management (US$1.0 million equivalent total) which would include support for: (i) capacity
                           building activities for the Social Fund for Development (SFD), the implementing agency for the
                           project, in the area of results based financing; (ii) quality assurance of service provision; (iii)
                           monitoring of compliance with medical waste management; (iv) independent monitoring of project
                           targets and verification of project outputs; (v) project impact evaluation; and (vi) project
                           management.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Ibb and Sana’a Governorates

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The project’s impact on the environment is
                           BP 4.01                                              expected to be minor and indirect, given that it
                                                                                will not finance inputs for service providers in
                                                                                the form of goods or works, but rather will pay
                                                                                for services already provided using vouchers.

                                                                                The project will stimulate demand in public
                                                                                facilities which are expected to comply with
                                                                                medical waste management guidelines under the
                                                                                HPP Environmental Management Plan (EMP,
                                                                                dated July 2010) once on-the-ground activities
                                                                for HPP commence. For-profit and non-profit
                                                                NGOs which are expected to provide services
                                                                under the proposed project are not covered by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                the HPP EMP.

                                                                Therefore, it is proposed to: (i) classify the
                                                                project as an Environmental Category C
                                                                according to the World Bank’s Operation Policy
                                                                on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01),
                                                                (ii) ensure that public facilities which provide
                                                                services under MNVP are in compliance with
                                                                the HPP EMP guidelines on medical waste
                                                                handling, (iii) set aside funding under MNVP
                                                                for similar training of for-profit and non-profit
                                                                NGOs which are expected to provide services
                                                                under MNVP. Training will be provided as part
                                                                of the accreditation process and the ongoing
                                                                quality assurance supported by GIZ. Funding
                                                                will also be used to audit safeguards compliance
                                                                between the closing date of HPP (September
                                                                2017) and the closing date of MNVP
                                                                (2018/2019), and (iv) carry out environmental
                                                                safeguards auditing of the project as part of
                                                                overall Bank implementation support missions,
                                                                and report on performance in mission and
                                                                progress reports.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   The project will not damage natural habitats
                                                                (land and water areas where most of the native
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                plant and animal species are still present), and
                                                                will not result in loss or degradation of any
                                                                Critical Natural Habitats as defined by the
                                                                Policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   The project will not have an impact on the
                                                                health and quality of forests; will not affect the
                                                                rights and welfare of people and their level of
                                                                dependence upon or interaction with forests;
                                                                and will not bring about changes in the
                                                                management, protection, or utilization of natural
                                                                forests or plantations, whether they are publicly,
                                                                privately, or communally owned.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   The project will not require the purchase,
                                                                application or storage of pesticides and will not
                                                                lead to an increased use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   The project will not affect physical cultural
                         BP 4.11                                resources
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will not invoke involuntary
                                 4.12                                                                                            resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve the construction of
                                                                                                                                 new dams and and/or existing dams in the
                                                                                                                                 borrower's territory.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project does not involve any hydroelectric,
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            irrigation, flood control, navigation, drainage,
                                                                                                                                 water and sewerage, industrial, and similar
                                                                                                                                 activities which involve the use or potential
                                                                                                                                 pollution of international waterways as
                                                                                                                                 described in paragraph 1 of the Policy; and does
                                                                                                                                 not include detailed design and engineering
                                                                                                                                 studies of activities under paragraph 2(a) of the
                                                                                                                                 Policy, including those to be carried out by the
                                                                                                                                 Bank as executing agency or in any other
                                                                                                                                 capacity.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project does not take place in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Alaa Mahmoud Hamed Abdel-

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Enis Baris (SM)                                                                                                      Date: 15-Jul-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
