                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/07/2013                                      Report No.: 74859
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P117363                  Original Project Name: Yemen Public
                                              Finance Modernization Project
Country: Yemen, Republic of                   Project ID: P133637
Project Name: Yemen Public Finance Modernization Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Arun Arya
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 12,        Estimated Board Date: February 14, 2013
2012
Managing Unit: MNSPS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Public administration- Financial Sector (80%);General public administration
sector (18%);Sub-national government administration (2%)
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (80%);Other
accountability/anti-corruption (18%);Decentralization (2%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              5
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                         Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of proposed Additional Financing is to improve accountability in the
management of public finances, by providing decision support systems and building
capacity of two accountability institutions – Supreme National Authority of Combating
Corruption (SNACC) and Civil Society Coalition Against Corruption (CCAC). The
original project was aimed at improving the 'efficiency' and 'transparency' in the
management of public finances.

3. Project Description
The additional financing of US$ 5 million would:

 (i) finance two new Components (6 and 7) to the project as follows:
 •      Component 6 (US$2,100,000) - This component would contribute to establishing
core systems and enhancing the institutional capacity of Supreme National Authority for
Combating Corruption (SNACC) in implementing the national anti-corruption strategy in
6 pilot sectors of education, health, water, social protection, civil service and judiciary.
The support to SNACC would include conducting a diagnostic study of causes and forms
of corruption in six pilot ministries; establishing Data-base Management System for the
Asset Declaration Unit; establishing Management Information System for the
Investigations department; and capacity building of SNACC and other law enforcement
agencies.

 •      Component 7 (US$1,000,000 ) - Supporting the 'Yemen Civil Societies Coalition
Against Corruption Coalition (CCAC)' in enhancing the demand for good governance by
identification, and recording, documentation and dissemination of case studies of victims
of corruption; coordination and mediation with Authorities; and capacity building of 16
civil societies under the CCAC.

 (ii) finance two new sub-components to be included under Component 1 on
strengthening the decision making mechanisms of the Budget Management as follows:

 •     Sub-component 1 on Strengthening National Accounts System (US$300,000):
The new sub-component would support in (1) upgradation o outdated National Accounts
System to the System of National Accounts (SNA) 2008 classification, which is the latest
version of the international statistical standard for the national accounts, adopted by the
United Nations Statistical Commission (UNSC); (2) Providing Personal Digital
Assistants (PDAs) for improved data collection by saving time, reduced errors,
economies of scale, ease of use and saving paper.

 •     Sub-component 2 on Internal Audit System (US$50,000): This sub component
would provide Technical Assistance to the Ministry of Finance in (1) establishing an
appropriate institutional mechanism for the internal audit system; and (2) developing
adequate internal audit procedures.

 (iii) finance the scaling up of ongoing activities:

 •      Component 1 on improving budget preparation and budget execution systems
(US$150,000).

  •    Component 2 on strengthening information systems (US$570,000). The additional
financing would support in installing AFMIS in all the 22 treasuries under Central Bank
of Yemen to provide a comprehensive control to the Ministry of Finance over budget
execution.

 •       Component 3 on strengthening public procurement institutions and capacity (US$
680,000). The additional finance would support th implementation of the institutional
strategy of High Authority on Tender Control and expanding the coverage of government
staff in the ongoing training on the executive bylaws of the nation procurement law.
 •      Component 4 on building capacity of Central Organization for Control and Audit
(COCA) (US$150,000). The Reengineering Plan of COCA prepared with support from
the Bank-funded Civil Service Modernization Project (CSMP) has recently been
approved by the President. The additional financing would help in the implementation of
that reengineering plan for improving COCA's audit manual and methodology.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project is located in Sana'a, Yemen, and the proposed restructuring and additional
financing of the project aims at providing enabling decision-support systems and capacity
for improving the efficiency, transparency and accountability in the management of
public finances. As such, it does not involve any physical structure or construction, land
acquisition and environmental impacts. AFMIS and LGMIS will be installed in the
existing government buildings. No new buildings are to be constructed. Only upgrading
of existing computer rooms might be required before installing AFMIS and LGMIS,
which is not expected to have an environmental impact. Activities of SNACC and CCAC
are aimed at conducting diagnostic studies of business processes of pilot sectors, physical
surveys of beneficiaries and establishing core systems for their institutional development.
The project does not focus on any particular population group.

 The current security situation in Yemen does not permit Bank staff to undertake visits to
project sites which has impacts on Bank team ability to monitor and supervise the project
on the ground.

 Therefore, the project will not trigger any environmental and social safeguard policies.
The project restructuring and additional financing is classified as "Category C".

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no Safeguard issues. The project does not involve any physical structure or
construction, there is restriction or acquisition of land and all the investments will be
installed in the existing government buildings. No new buildings are to be constructed.
Therefore, the project will not trigger OP 4.12.

 The proposed project as designed is likely to have minimal-to-no adverse environmental
impacts. Therefore, the project will not trigger OP/BP 4.01.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not Applicable

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not Applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Not Applicable

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not Applicable



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The document will be disclosed in the country.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Arun Arya            10/12/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Tracy Hart           10/17/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni   10/14/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Guenter Heidenhof    10/17/2012
  Comments:
