                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/06/2013                                     Report No.: AC6787
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Yemen, Republic of                  Project ID: P070092
Project Name: RY TAIZ MUNICIPAL DEV & FLOOD PROTEC
Task Team Leader: Ali Khamis
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2001     Estimated Board Date: November 1, 2001
Managing Unit: MNSUR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Flood protection (74%); Sub-national government administration (24%); Other
social services (2%)
Theme: Natural disaster management (20%); Decentralization (20%); Municipal
governance and institution building (20%);Water resource management (20%);Other
social development (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            100.2
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           4.80
                                                                      4.80
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The original objectives of the Project were to: (a) protect Taiz city residents, businesses
and infrastructure from seasonal destructive flash flooding through the construction of
flood structures, restoration and maintenance of Amria dam and existing flood structures;
(b) resettle persons displaced by the flood structures; and (c) develop the capacity of Taiz
local government to carry out a major part of its responsibilities according to the Local
Authorities Law, and initiate support for Yemen's decentralization program. These
objectives were revised for the Additional Financing as follows: (i) protect residents,
economic activities and infrastructure from the destructive effects of seasonal flooding in
Taiz, Hadramout and Al-Mahara; (ii) restore access to critical road infrastructure
damaged by the floods; and (iii) strengthen the capacity of local governments and support
decentralization.
3. Project Description
The project consists of the following components:
 Component 1: Flood protection and infrastructure rehabilitation US$38.5 million
equivalent (of which IDA's share is US$32.8 million equivalent). This component will
rebuild select critically damaged infrastructure in the affected areas to higher standards
that could withstand future flooding. It comprises two sub-components focusing on
rehabilitation and reconstruction of priority damaged segments of the regional road
network and the flood protection system, as follows:

 (a) Regional road rehabilitation sub-component (US$24.3 million equivalent, of
which IDA's share is US$20.6 million equivalent). Interventions under this sub-
component include rehabilitating and reconstructing selected priority regional roads
where critical segments have been destroyed by flooding, and retrofitting these with
adequate storm water drainage systems. This sub-component finances the repairs of
damages over the entire regional road network in the Wadi Hadramout area (the worst
affected by the disaster) as well as the Riyan-Ben Aifan regional road in Sahel
Hadramout (one of two road connections between Wadi Hadramout and the rest of
Yemen, the other being Ben Aifan-Al-Abr). The flood-related damages tackled under
AF-2 include: (i) washout/erosion of one or both sides of the road caused by inadequate
slope protection structures including some instances where the whole road has been
damaged and traffic rerouted; (ii) damages to and blockages of single or multi-cell box
culverts and pipe culverts causing consequential local damages to the road; (iii) partly or
fully damaged Irish crossings (cement concrete drifts across river beds); (iv) damages to
bridges and bridge abutments; (v) minor damages to road pavement and shoulders due to
soaking of the pavement and subsequent loss of load bearing capacity requiring asphalt
patching and shoulder rehabilitation; and (vi) damages and blockages of roads due to
rock fall and slides caused by extensive rain and which led to subsequent damages to
road pavements and side drains.

 Specifically, 12 regional roads are covered, totaling 40 km in damage length. These are:
Rayan-Ben Aifan, Almashad-Dawan, Alhawra-Azzaher, Ben Aifan-Alabr, Seiyoun-Ben
Aifan, Alkhashaa-Rakhi, Seiyoun-Tarim, Tarim-Alsom, Prophet Hood road, Aladlos–
Rasib Algharf-Sah, and Alaleeb-Rahaba. The repairs would allow building back the
damaged sections along the same footprint and alignment, but with adequate flood-proof
standards.

 (b) Flood protection system rehabilitation sub-component (US$14.2 million
equivalent, of which IDA's share is US$12.6 million equivalent). Interventions under this
sub-component include: rehabilitating and reconstructing selected priority components of
the flood protection system in the affected areas, which were damaged or affected by the
storm and floods, and which served to protect human settlements and agricultural lands.

 Component 2: Resettlement of Affected Persons (US$0.0 million equivalent). No
investments would be allocated for the second component of Taiz Municipal
Development and Flood Protection Project (TMDFPP) covering resettlement activities.
 Component 3: Capacity Building (US$2.5 million equivalent, of which IDA's share is
US$2.2 million equivalent). The objective of this component is to prepare a flood
protection plan for the vulnerable areas of Wadi Hadramout; a storm water drainage
master plan for Mukalla city; help set up local government capacity in disaster
preparedness, mitigation and response; finance the cost of design/tender document
preparation and construction supervision; and cover Project Management expenses over
the three-year implementation period.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The Project takes place in various affected areas in Hadramout and Al-Mahara
Governorates. The road network rehabilitation encompasses 12 regional roads that cover
Wadi Hadramout as well as the Riyan-Bin Aifan regional road in Sahel Hadramout
region. The flood protection rehabilitation encompasses different Wadis in Wadi
Hadramout, Hadramout Sahel and Al-Mahara as detailed in the project description.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Tracy Hart (MNSEN)
   Mr Chaogang Wang (SDV)
   Ms Ana Nunez Sanchez (MNSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

With the exception of the Abdullah Gharib section of the Rayyan Bin Aifan Road, most
of the sub-projects to be financed are for replacement of existing structures located at the
same place and within the same alignments and right-of-ways, the incremental adverse
impact of the project is expected to be minimal. Many adverse impacts have already been
caused by the storm and flood disaster such as substantial erosion and change in
alignment of natural drainage courses including damaged infrastructure. However, these
impacts will be mitigated through the rehabilitation and reconstruction of damaged
infrastructure and protection of drainage courses from further erosion, particularly at
places where populated and important agricultural areas are at great risk to flood damage.
Expected environmental impacts from the project are those typically associated with road
reconstruction and infrastructure rehabilitation. Among other potential impacts, these
include: (i) temporary site disturbance associated with demolition of damaged
infrastructure; (ii) temporary erosion and sedimentation in streams from reconstruction of
road foundations and associated increases in sediment loads and turbidity during
construction; (iii) in-stream temporary disturbances from blasting or excavation works for
removal of damaged foundation; (iv) dust and noise from operation of heavy equipment
during construction; (v) handling, storage and disposal of waste materials; (vi) traffic
congestion or temporary re-routing and interruption of traffic around the construction
zones; and (vii) worker occupational health and safety related potential impacts.

  All of these impacts can be managed during construction with typical mitigation
measures included in the contracts and capacity building of supervising organizations. It
should be noted that each construction site, whether for road reconstruction or flood
protection works, will be located at existing streams and crossings and at confined sites
so as to limit and avoid incremental damage. The potential impacts will therefore be very
localized. None of the sub-projects will have large scale or regional environmental
impacts. The only modification on existing roads financed by the Project pertains to the
realignment of the Abdullah Gharib section of the Rayyan-Bin Aifan Road to a higher
elevation east. The Project carried out a specific Integrated Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (IESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), as
well as consultations with communities for the proposed road realignment. The new road
will extend for a distance of 7 km (the existing route is 5.4 km long) along public land.
The Project area is sparsely vegetated and dry, and presents few food resources and an
absence of habitat. There are also no cultural or historic sites in the area. It is not
envisaged that the realignment of the Abdullah Gharib section will cause large-scale,
irreversible impacts. Hence the environmental category remains B as per OP 4.01.

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
 There are no anticipated impacts under the Bank's Physical Cultural Resources Policy
(OP 4.11). The project has confirmation that the proposed alignment for the
implementation of the Abdullah Gharib Road of the Rayyan Bin Aifan Road will not
have any adverse impacts on a mosque located in the general vicinity of the proposed
alignment. However, to cover potential impacts under OP 4.11, chance find clauses will
be included in the contractor bidding documents.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
The Bank's Policy on Involuntary Land Acquisition and Resettlement does not apply to
this project. Information made available from the Project Coordination Unit (October
2012) and also final ESIA which is based on site visits and consultations with community
members confirms that the construction of Abdullah Gharib Section of the Rayyan Bin-
Aifan Road will not have adverse impacts on communities. There will be no loss of
lands (permanent or temporary); no relocation of households, nor will there be any
adverse impacts on livelihoods. The only impact is on a community water cistern (16
meters wide and 3.5 meters deep) located within the road corridor (public lands) which
will either be demolished or shifted. A new cistern (approximate cost USD 5,000) will
be reconstructed by the contractor adjacent to the existing one. This will be included as
an addendum in the bidding document.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

Close attention will be paid during implementation to any potential adverse impact that
may result from flood protection rehabilitation works-construction debris or dust, etc., on
sensitive coastal natural habitats, especially for rehabilitation works in Wadis that are
close to coastal areas.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
As mentioned above, the incremental adverse impact resulting from the project is
expected to be small, since all activities to be financed are replacement of existing
structures located at the same place and within the same alignments and right-of-ways,
and the proposed road alignment will likely cause site-specific, reversible impacts.

  Given that many adverse impacts have already been caused by the storm and flood
disaster such as substantial erosion and change in alignment of Wadis (natural drainage
courses) and damaged protection infrastructure, the alternative of doing nothing would
leave Wadi courses vulnerable to further erosion and put populated areas and agricultural
areas at a greater risk of flooding and further damage and loss of livelihoods.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower's existing implementing agency, the TMDFPP Project Management Unit
(PMU), will be reconfigured to reflect the expanded geographic scope of this project. It
will include a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) based in Sana'a and staffed with the
existing Project Director and fiduciary staff, which will be supported by Project
Implementation Units (PIU) based in Taiz (with the existing remaining staff to implement
the ongoing Additional Financing) and in Hadramout.

 The TMDFPP PMU, whose same management and staff, complemented with additional
staff, will constitute the implementing unit of this project - has over 15 years' experience
and a strong track record in implementing IDA projects. Specifically, the PMU has
demonstrated effective implementation of the Bank's safeguards policies. For instances, it
successfully resettled 244 households following the guidelines of the Bank's policies for
these households that lived in flood paths and which was rated Highly Satisfactory and its
environmental safeguards implementation is also rated satisfactory.

  Supervision of the IESIA/ESMP will be carried out by the implementing agency. The
latter includes a full-time Environmental and Safety Officer (ESO) in the Taiz office, and
would recruit a new Environmental Officer (EO) for the to-be-established PIU in
Hadramout. The environmental officer is appointed on a contract basis and the PIU is
responsible to check the performance of the ESO/EO. The ESO/EO would oversee the
preparation of and implement the ESMP and the environmental aspects included in the
Project's Operations Manual and as detailed in individual contract Tender Documents.
The ESO has been in charge of supervising similar work under the original TMDFPP and
the ongoing AF.

 Date made available by the ESIA consultants and PMU (October 2012) confirms that
there are no adverse social safeguards related impacts for local communities affected by
the project The PIU staff in Hadramout/Seiyun are responsible for the daily monitoring
of safeguards issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders include inter-alia, the affected communities and households, elected
local councils at the Governorate and district level, and the Environmental Protection
Authority (EPA), the agency responsible for environmental matters in Yemen.
Consultations through formal workshops and meetings taking place within the project-
affected areas would take place upon the completion of the IESIA/ESMP in conjunction
with the completion of the detailed designs of the different investments (which are still
under preparation). Elected local councils at Governorate and district levels will be called
upon to facilitate local consultations and in regards to dissemination and disclosure
requirements. Finally, local the Traffic Department and MWPH are key stakeholders, as
they will assume responsibility for traffic diversion in construction phase and operation
and maintenance, including both preventative and routine maintenance in post
construction phase, respectively.

  As part of the social assessment, consultations have been carried out with government
officials, villagers, and project affected people through group meetings, individual and
focus group discussions.

  The RPF and IESIA/ESMP are publicly available through the Ministry of Public Works
in Sana'a, and in the General Department of Public Works and Highways in Mukalla and
Seiyun (Hadramout) and Al-Ghaida (Al-Mahara) and the World Bank InfoShop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/27/2012
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/04/2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/05/2013
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Ali Khamis                               02/28/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Tracy Hart                               02/28/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Chaogang Wang                            02/28/2013
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Ana Nunez Sanchez                        02/28/2013
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed                      03/01/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Franck Bousquet                          03/01/2013
  Comments:
