                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6332


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/18/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Zimbabwe                            Project ID: P125229
Project Name: Zimbabwe Health Results Based Financing
Task Team Leader: Monique Vledder
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 23, 2011       Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (70%);Public administration- Health (30%)
Theme: Health system performance (40%);Population and reproductive health
(40%);Participation and civic engagement (20%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       0.00
        Health Results-based Financing                                15.40
                                                                      15.40


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The RBF program has been designed to accelerate the availability, accessibility and utilization of
quality health services to contribute to the reduction of maternal and neonatal mortality. The
Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to (i) to increase coverage of key maternal and
neonatal health interventions in targeted rural districts, and (ii) strengthen the institutional
capacity of the Recipient’s health system to deliver services effectively.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project#s technical design has three components:
 Component 1: Performance-based contracts with District Health Executives (DHEs), Provincial
Health Executives (PHEs), District Hospitals (DHs), and Health Center Committees
(HCCs)/RHCs for the delivery of pre-agreed services focused on maternal and neonatal health.

 The project will be implemented by an NGO that will serve as a Project Implementing Entity
(PIE). The PIE will sign performance contracts with HCCs/RHCs, DHEs, PHEs, and DH
administrators. The contracts will stipulate what services the four different entities (DHEs,
PHEs, DHs and HFs) need to deliver in order to receive performance-based grants.
 Component 2: Management and Capacity Building in Results-Based Financing

  This component supports management and capacity building for HCCs/RHCs, DHEs and DH
and District Steering Committees to strengthen the health system for effective implementation of
the RBF initiative. This includes training, strengthening of data quality and reporting and
financial management. An RBF training module will be developed by the MOCHW and the PIE
and it will include strengthening of data quality, results management, financial management,
procurement, reporting etc. The MOHCW will provide oversight to the roll-out of the training
while the implementation will be executed by a core group of internal and external experts on
financial management, M & E, reproductive health and health financing under the supervision of
the MOHCW and the PIE. In addition to workshop based trainings, on-the-job capacity
development support will be provided by staff and consultants from the PIE and where possible
from MOH provincial and national teams.
  Component 3: Monitoring and Documentation

 The RBF program has been designed to enable learning through a rigorous impact evaluation
combined with process and qualitative reviews to capture the effect of the program on health
outcomes and various aspects of the health system. The third component will primarily support
the impact evaluation.

D. Project location (if known)
The intervention will specifically target rural districts. There will be two front runner districts,
after which national implementation will commence to eventually in all rural districts in the
country.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
At the central level, MOHCW has overall guardianship over all the health facilities. As such, it
will take the lead in coordinating implementation of the HCWMP. The Environmental Health
Services Department (EHSD) of the MOHCW is responsible for the day-to-day management of
issues surrounding health care waste.

 The district and local authorities are responsible for ensuring that facilities are capable of
handling all medical waste generated in their jurisdictions according to the guidelines of the
HCWMP. Mechanisms will be in place for the district and local authorities to provide feedback
to the higher level in case they suspect that the proposed medical waste measures could have
adverse affects on the local population#s health. The manager of each health facility will be
responsible for ensuring a health care waste management plan for his/her health facility is
prepared and implemented according to the national level guidelines.

 The Health Education/Environmental Health Department of MOHCW will lead outreach
activities to increase awareness among the general public about the risks associated with health
care waste. These activities will include public service announcements on radio and television,
posters, and through public animation sessions led by NGOs. The key stakeholders are health
workers, patients, government, communities, and international partners. A stakeholder
workshop was convened in mid-April 2011, in which the various stakeholders carefully reviewed
the draft plan, provided input, and eventually endorsed the final product.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    The proposed project will mainly support such activities as strengthening human and
institutional capacity; support to priority health programs and support to districts in local health
service management. No major civil works will be undertaken and thus there are no negative
environmental impacts envisaged in the proposed program. But the improvement of the health
services improves the population access in the health service. It is expected that the project will
increase the quantity of health services provided, which may in turn lead to additional medical
waste. Most medical waste has not been in contact with patients and is similar to household
waste. A smaller portion of the medical waste (10-25%) is infectious/hazardous waste that poses
a threat to both human health and the environment. The project has been designed to mitigate
this risk by setting standards for medical waste management at the health facility level as a pre-
condition to receive project benefits. It is proposed the Environmental Category: B - Partial
Assessment.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                      X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                              X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   05/25/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
   The project has been designed to mitigate the risk by setting standards for medical waste
   management Plan. The Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP) will be disclosed in the
   country as well as in the Bank Infoshop before appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Ms Monique Vledder                          05/18/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                    05/19/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Eva Jarawan                              05/18/2011
   Comments:
