                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/14/2011                                     Report No.: AC6373
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Zimbabwe                            Project ID: P125229
Project Name: Zimbabwe Health Results Based Financing
Task Team Leader: Monique Vledder
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 31, 2011       Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTHE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (70%);Public administration- Health (30%)
Theme: Health system performance (40%);Population and reproductive health
(40%);Participation and civic engagement (20%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Health Results-based Financing                               15.40
                                                                      15.40
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the coverage of key maternal
and child health interventions in targeted rural districts.

3. Project Description
The project’s technical design has three components. Each component is described below.

 Component 1: Results-based contracts with Provincial Health Executives, District
Health Executives, District Hospitals, and Rural Health Centers for the delivery of a
package of key maternal and child health services. (US$ 9.9 million)

 The project will be implemented by an international NGO that will serve as Project
Implementing Entity (PIE). The PIE will sign performance contracts with various entities
stipulating what services they will deliver in return for performance payments. The
contracts to be signed are between the PIE and (i) Rural Health Centers (RHCs)
represented by Health Center Committees (HCCs) and District Hospitals (DHs) for the
delivery of a full basic package of services with a focus on maternal and child health; (ii)
District Health Executives (DHEs) for supervision outputs and services linked to the
package of services performed within a health district; and (iii) Provincial Health
Executives (PHEs) for supervision outputs including quality of care at DH and in-service
support and mentoring within participating RBF districts. In addition to performance
payments, the project will provide an initial grant to facilities to meet the minimum
requirements to enroll in the program, since many facilities lack basic medical equipment
as a result of the crisis.

 Performance based payments to RHCs and DHs will take place on a fee-for-service
basis and will take into consideration the quantity as well as the quality of services
delivered (see table 2 for an example of how payments to a facility would be calculated).
The demand side financial barrier to access services will be reduced by abolishing the
need to pay user fees for the agreed package of services. The fee levels will be
determined by public health goals, but will also be set at levels that will allow health
facilities to cover the forgone income currently generated by user fees as well provide
sufficient additional resources for the RHCs and DHs to improve performance.
Community surveys will ensure user fees are not being collected for incentivized services
during implementation of the program.

 The project has been designed to build upon the existing health system with regard to
the division of labor between the HCCs and RHCs. A HCC oversees each RHC and
collects and administers user fees and has the authority to decide on how to invest various
forms of funds collected/generated by a health facility. Health workers from the RHC are
represented on the committee that decides on the use of the funds. Within the context of
the RBF, HCCs will decide how facility performance payments will be invested to
improve health outputs of a given health facility.

 Challenges faced by facilities in remote areas result in higher costs to deliver services.
The fee for service scheme will take this into account by adjusting the fees upwards for
the delivery of services in more remote areas. The quality of care will be reflected in the
quarterly performance payments. A quality assessment tool will be used to assess the
quality of services provided by the RHCs and the DHs. The tool has a broad variety of
indicators such as cleanliness, quality of recordkeeping, availability of staff and supplies
etc. Performance payments given to the facilities will be adjusted based on the quality
score. Facilities will have sufficient decision space for social entrepreneurship to use the
performance payments to improve the demand and quality of services provided.

 The project will strengthen the DHEs and PHEs ability to supervise the RHCs and DHs,
check the quality of the services delivered and support improvements in the
implementation of the agreed package of maternal and child services. The DHEs and
PHEs will receive a performance-based grant that is conditional on delivering certain pre-
agreed supervisory services that fall under their mandate.

 The project will support improvements of quality of care of (maternal) health services in
DHs. A performance based grant can be earned based on quality measures of key life-
saving maternal health services. The PHEs will play a key role in supervising the DHs
and the DHEs. The PHEs will receive a performance-based payment that is conditional
upon delivering certain pre-agreed supervisory services.

  The project’s Implementation Manual (PIM) will describe the details of the RBF model
including the (i) criteria for facility enrollment, (ii) the service package and fee schedule,
(iii) the quality verification tool, (iv) roles and responsibilities for the verification of
results and (v) penalties for misreporting, and other irregularities. The PIM will be
developed in such a way as to allow it to be a practical guide on RBF implementation for
different levels of actors in the health system. It will be a living document that will be
updated regularly based on lessons learnt during implementation.

 Component 2: Management and Capacity Building in Results-Based Financing (US$3.9
million)

 This component supports management and capacity building for HCCs, RHCs, DHEs,
PHEs, DHs, and District Steering Committees to strengthen the health system for
effective implementation of the RBF initiative. This includes training, strengthening of
data quality and reporting and financial management. A RBF training module has been
developed by the MOCHW and the PIE during the preparation phase of the project. The
MOHCW will provide oversight to the roll-out of the training while the implementation
will be executed by a core group of internal and external experts on RBF, financial
management, M&E, reproductive health and health financing.

 During the start-up phase in each district, training workshops will be provided to key
staff from health facilities, members of the HCCs and the DHEs. In addition to
workshop-based trainings, on-the-job capacity development support will be provided by
staff and consultants from the PIE and from MOHCW provincial and national teams.
This component will also finance verification and counter verification of whether the
facilities have in fact provided the services they reported, as well as the management
costs associated with the PIE and its decentralized structures, the Local Purchasing Units
(LPUs). The project also uses benchmark tools to compare results in different districts
and facilities to encourage learning and facilitate better management.

 Component 3: Monitoring and Documentation (US$1.2 million)

 This component will support monitoring, evaluation and documentation of the project.
Resources from this component will finance the project’s counter verification to ensure
facilities adequately report on achieved results. Additionally, attention will be given to
ensure there are no unintended effects of the project. This component will also finance
the aggregation of results and the analysis of the data to monitor trends in coverage of
services in project districts. The RBF program has been designed to enable learning
through a rigorous impact evaluation combined with process and qualitative reviews to
capture the effect of the program on health outcomes and various aspects of the health
system. Equity will be assessed through household surveys and exit interviews during
health facility assessments using an asset index to assess income.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project implementation will take place in 8 provinces in Zimbabwe with a focus on
rural health facilities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project will mainly support such activities as strengthening human and
institutional capacity; support to priority health programs and support to districts in local
health service management. No major civil works will be undertaken. But the
improvement of the health services improves the population access in the health service.
It is expected that the project will increase the quantity of health services provided, which
may in turn lead to additional medical waste. Most medical waste has not been in contact
with patients and is similar to household waste. A smaller portion of the medical waste
(10-25%) is infectious/hazardous waste that poses a threat to both human health and the
environment. The project has been designed to mitigate this risk by setting standards for
medical waste management at the health facility level as a pre-condition to receive
project benefits.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No such long term impacts are foreseen.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The only project alternative to avoid the environmental impact is a no project alternative,
which is not acceptable in view of the high morbidity and mortality rates of women and
children in the country.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During the project preparation, the Borrower has prepared an Health Care Waste
Management Plan. The main recommendations and action plans within the HCWMP are
defined around 6 pillars which are sufficient and judged satisfactory to manage Medical
Waste in the Country where its implementation is scheduled for five years period with a
total estimated cost of implementing for around of US$ 100 million. The project design
incorporates the safe and responsible handling and disposal of medical waste through
several measures. Additionally, the quality verification tool, a supervision checklist that
will be administered on a quarterly basis, includes verification of medical waste measures
by the facility. Indicators of medical waste handling will therefore be monitored in every
facility on a regular basis. Poor performance on the facility quality tool score impacts the
amount of the performance grant a facility will receive so facilities that perform better on
waste management practices receive higher payments. This will act as an incentive to
health workers to adopt good waste management practices and ensure staff adheres to the
guidelines. The PIE plays an important role in monitoring this aspect of the program. The
Republic of Zimbabwe has a strong institutional arrangement to implement the HCWMP.
The HCWMP falls directly under the responsibility of the Environmental Health
Department (EHD) of MOHCW. The department will coordinate the implementation and
apply a multi-stakeholder approach to embrace all the relevant payers to include Ministry
of Environment and Natural Resources Management (MENRM), Environmental
Management agency (EMA), local Authorities, NGOs and other private players. The
Environmental Management Agency (EMA) will be responsible for monitoring of the
implementation of HCWMP. This agency has the overall responsibility of protecting the
environment in compliance with the requirements of the Environmental Management
Act. It will verify the whole chain of HCW from generation to final disposal.The
proposed RBF program will support the implementation of the HCWMP with its major
component focus on building capacity in the health sector which will contribute to
delivering adequate health care services to the Zimbabwean population.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Health Care Waste Management Plan (HCWMP) was prepared using a broad-based
public consultation approach, involving stakeholder groups in the health sector and
NGOs, private sector institutions and local communities within the country at the
different levels.The HCWMP report was publicly disclosed in-country in April 2011
through series of workshops.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          04/18/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                      05/26/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/26/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Monique Vledder                          06/09/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Paul-Jean Feno                           06/08/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Eva Jarawan                              06/10/2011
  Comments:
