                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/27/2011                                    Report No.: AC6456
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Zimbabwe                            Project ID: P125857
Project Name: Zimbabwe Productive Safety Net - Pilot Public Works Program
Task Team Leader: Anush Bezhanyan
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: August 15, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTSP                         Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     0.00
         Rapid Social Response Program                                0.60
                                                                      0.60
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to pilot a labor intensive public works program,
designed to provide temporary employment opportunities to unemployed people in
Zimbabwe, while at the same time building community assets supportive of productive
activities.

3. Project Description
This RSR grant, in the amount of US$600,000, supports the implementation of a pilot
public works program and will be executed by the Ministry of Labor and Social Services
(MOLSS) through two components; the first component consists of capacity development
for the Department of Social Services (DSS) in the MOLSS to implement the pilot; and
the second component covers the cost of labor-intensive public works sub-projects that
contribute to productive activities.

 It is expected that the payments from the involvement in the public works activities will
support the beneficiaries to address food insecurity of households and cover partial costs
for items such as food and other basic needs during the lean season; while building
community assets that address human development needs in areas such as water,
sanitation etc.
 Component 1 # Capacity Building of the Department of Social Services (US$ 120, 000)

 This component consists of capacity building of the DSS to design and implement the
public works scheme. The grant will finance technical assistance through short-term
consultants with expertise in relevant areas. A Project Implementation Support Unit
(PISU) will be set up within the DSS to coordinate the implementation of the project. The
PISU will consist of a project coordinator, an accounting assistant, and two district
coordinators at the district level. Establishment of the PISU and hiring the above staff
will be a condition of effectiveness of the Grant Agreement. Some funds will also be set
aside for short-term consultancies (such as support to the development of a simple
monitoring system) and awareness creation of the pilot among the targeted communities
to ensure efficient community involvement in the identification and implementation of
the sub-projects. This component will also cover operating costs and an audit to be
undertaken at the end of the project.

 Component 2 # Implementation of the pilot public works scheme (US$ 480,000)

 This component will consist of eligible labor-intensive public works sub-projects, as
defined in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). It will also support the training of
Sub-project Management Committees (SMC) who will be responsible for the
management of the sub-projects, as well as training of the members of the community
who will participate in the public works activities. Details on the parameters of the public
works scheme will be agreed upon and documented in the PIM.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The pilot will be implemented in 2 districts (sub-projects to be determined during
implementation). The criteria for selecting these districts will be defined in the PIM.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Svetlana Khvostova (AFTOS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no major environmental issues anticipated under sub-projects due to the small
size and rehabilitation nature of minor public works to be financed under sub-projects. To
mitigate against any potential negative environmental impact an Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) has been developed and will be incorporated into the
Project Implementation Manual (PIM) of the project. This Framework will be used
during the evaluation of the sub-project proposals to ensure that the proposals will have
no major negative environmental impact. Further, a sub-project must propose
rehabilitations/construction within the footprint of existing community assets or on public
unencumbered land to ensure that no involuntary resettlement occurs as a result of the
sub-project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry has developed an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and held
consultaitons on this framework at different occasions. The Ministry has limited previous
experience related to safeguards. Compliance with the environmental safeguards
mitigation measures and checklists(as it is outlined in the EMF and will be outlined in the
PIM) will be supervised by the District Environment Officers. Funds will be set aside in
the project to support these officers to undertake the environmental safeguards
supervision.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders for this project are the relevant government ministries, development
partners, NGOs and potential beneficiaries of the sub-projects.

 Consultations have been held at two different occasions; (i)with potential beneficiaries
as well as district level government staff; and (ii) with different government ministries,
development partners and NGOs.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07/15/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             07/29/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              07/25/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Anush Bezhanyan                           07/20/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Svetlana Khvostova                        07/20/2011
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Marito H. Garcia                          07/22/2011
  Comments:
