                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6333


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/26/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Zimbabwe                         Project ID: P125857
Project Name: Zimbabwe Productive Safety Net
Task Team Leader: Anush Bezhanyan
Estimated Appraisal Date:                 Estimated Board Date: June 10, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTSP                      Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                          Loan
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Social safety nets (100%)
SPF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                    0.10
        Rapid Social Response Program                               1.00
                                                                    1.10


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The objective of this Rapid Social Response (RSR) grant is to help the Government of
Zimbabwe (GoZ) to design a labor intensive public works program that would enable the poor
population of Zimbabwe to access temporary employment opportunities to improve their income
while at the same time contributing to building community assets that support productive
activities.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The program to be financed under the RSR has two parts. The first part is executed by the World
Bank and supports the design of a new public works program (including operational guidelines
for the program) and compilation of lessons learned from the implementation of the pilot project
and the development of a public works policy framework. It also includes implementation
support and supervision of the pilot project, supporting the design of a public works program.
The second part is executed by the Ministry of Labor and Social Services and supports the
implementation of a pilot public works program.

 Piloting Public Works Program (US$600 000, Recipient-executed)
 The objective of this grant is to pilot the public works scheme designed under Bank-executed
portion of the grant. The first component provides support to capacity development for the DSS
to implement the pilot and the second component covers the cost of labor-intensive public works
projects that contribute to productive activities.

 Component 1 # Capacity Building of the Department of Social Services (US$ 115,000)

 This component supports the capacity building of the DSS to implement the public works
scheme. It will finance technical assistance through short-term consultants with expertise in
relevant areas (to be defined during the design phase), software for a management information
system and printing of ID cards for beneficiaries registered to participate in the public works.
Some funds will also be set aside for awareness creation of the pilot among the targeted
communities to ensure efficient community involvement in the identification and implementation
of the sub-projects. This component will also cover operating costs and an audit to be undertaken
at the end of the project.

 Component 2 # Implementation of the pilot public works scheme (US$ 485,000)

 This component will finance eligible labor-intensive public works projects, as defined in the
operational guidelines. It will also support the training of Project Management Committees
(PMC) who will be responsible for the management of the sub-projects. Details on the
parameters of the public works scheme will be agreed upon and documented in the operational
guidelines under the Bank-executed part of the RSR grant.

D. Project location (if known)
Given the need to test the design and the use of the operational guidelines and to gradually build
capacity to implement the activities at district level it has been agreed that the pilot should be
implemented in a few districts (to be determined during the design phase). The criteria for
selecting these districts will be defined in the design phase and spelled out in the operational
guidelines.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Ministry has limited previous experience related to safeguards. Compliance with the
environmental safeguards mitigation measures and checklists(as will be outlined in the EMF and
the Operations Manual) will be supervised by the District Environment Officers. Funds will be
set aside in the project to support these officers to undertake the environmental safeguards
supervision.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
   Ms Svetlana Khvostova (AFTOS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                     Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
    There are no major environmental issues anticipated under sub-projects due to the small size
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes         No          TBD
and rehabilitation nature of minor public works to be financed under sub-projects. To mitigate
against any potential negative environmental impact an Environmental Management Framework
(EMF) will be developed and incorporated into the operational guidelines of the project. This
Framework will be used during the evaluation of the sub-project proposals to ensure that the
proposals will have no major negative environmental impact.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                        X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   05/31/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The EMF for the project will undergo public consultations and will be disclosed in-country
   and Bank InfoShop by June 18, 2011.

         The Sector Management Unit has agreed to accept transfer of safeguard responsibilities.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                   Ms Anush Bezhanyan         05/24/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   05/24/2011
   Comments: hard copies with signature filed in WBdoc
 Sector Manager:                     Ms Setareh Razmara         05/24/2011
   Comments: It has been approved by the SM.
