Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/11/2011 
Report No.:  AC6223
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P118053 
Project Name:  Afghanistan New Market Development 
Task Team Leader:  John F. Speakman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
22.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To help in the revitalization of private sector activities in the four major urban cities of 
Kabul, Mazar-e-Sharif, Jalalabad and Herat through provision of business development 
technical assistance to support private firms initiatives to gain market knowledge, 
improve product quality and processing technologies, and increase their presence in both 
domestic and export markets.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will achieve its objective through the development of new markets and 
innovation in business practices.  The project has two components implemented over four 
years:  
 
Component 1: Facility for New Market Development (US$ 18 million). This component 
is mainly a cost-sharing program to support Small and Medium Enterprises and business 
associations with access to business development services (BDS) in order to enhance 
their productive capacity and encourage innovation through product and/or market 
diversification. The FNMD would operate in four key urban cities, Kabul, Mazar-e-
Sharif, Jalalabad and Herat, which serve as the national hubs of economic activity. Other 
FNMD supporting activities include a marketing and communications program, skills 
Page  2
building workshops, supplementary support to businesses for developing plans, and 
sharing results to encourage participation of new firms in the FNMD.  
 
Component 2: Project Implementation Support and Technical Assistance to Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry (MoCI) (US$ 4 million). This component will support the 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry (MoCI) with (a) the establishment and operation of a 
project management unit for the New Market Development Project; and (b) technical 
assistance to develop a strategic plan to access support from the proposed new 
Afghanistan Capacity Building for Results Facility which is currently under preparation 
by the World Bank and the Government of Afghanistan (GoA).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will focus on Kabul, Herat, Jalalabad, Mazar-e-Sharif. The main project 
activity is a cost sharing program which aims at supporting SMEs through Business 
Development Services (BDS). Through this program, successful SME applications will 
receive a 50% subsidy (cost sharing) to purchase Business Development Services, which 
includes services such as business planning, marketing, quality assurance, etc. This cost 
sharing program will mainly finance technical assistance with a much smaller portion 
intended for equipments and small scale works. Business associations can also benefit 
from the cost sharing program and successful applications will be reimbursed 70% of 
eligible expenditures.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI) 
Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No negative social and environmental impacts are expected under this project which 
focuses on providing technical assistance to MOCI and SMEs.  
Page  3
However, to ensure that the Facility for New Market Development does not have any 
unforeseen negative environment impact, the Client prepared an Environment and Social 
Management Framework (please see section 3 below).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative social and environmental impacts are expected under this project which 
focuses on providing technical assistance to MOCI and SMEs.  
 
However, to ensure that the Facility for New Market Development does not have any 
unforeseen negative environment impact, the Client prepared an Environment and Social 
Management Framework (please see section 3 below).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Project initially involved an infrastructure component. However to minimize 
potential adverse social and environmental impacts, this component was dropped.  
 
In addition, the Facility for New Market Development Plan has a negative list of 
activities that cannot be financed. The list is included below.  
 
SMEs with any of the following characteristics shall not receive any form of support 
from the Facility:  
 
1) 
Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country 
laws or regulations or international conventions and agreements, or subject to 
international bans, such as pharmaceuticals, pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting 
substances, Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs), wildlife or products regulated under 
CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora);  
 
2)
Investments detrimental to the environment;  
 
3)
Investments destined to be used for the production poppy or poppy processing;  
 
4)
Production of trades in guns, mines, armaments or other military paraphernalia;  
 
5)
Production or trade in alcoholic beverages;  
 
6)
Production or trade in tobacco  
 
7)
Any activity on land that is considered dangerous due to security hazards or the 
presence of unexploded ordnance (mines, bombs);   
 
8)
Use of any land that has disputed ownership or tenure rights;  
 
9)
Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor / 
harmful child labor.  
 
10)
Equipment or infrastructure (pumps, deep bore wells) designed to exploit any 
underground water sources with diesel engines for irrigation or mass processing (e.g. 
washing, produce transport in processing plant), including the construction of tube-wells;  
 
11)
Crop and soil biocides (pesticides, herbicides, fungicides) that are shown to have 
toxic or noxious effects on humans;  
Page  4
12) 
Activity that would significantly damage non-replicable cultural property;  
 
13)
Production or trade in radioactive materials:  
 
14)
Production or trade in or use of non-bonded asbestos fibers  
 
15)
Production or trade in pharmaceuticals and pesticides/herbicides subject to 
international phase outs or bans;  
 
16)
Fishing in the marine environment using electric shocks and explosive materials;  
 
17)
Production or trade in ozone depleting substances subject to international phase 
out;  
 
18)
Production or trade in wood or other forestry products other than from sustainably 
managed forests.  
 
19)
Production, trade, storage, or transport of significant volumes of hazardous 
chemicals, or commercial scale usage of hazardous chemicals. Hazardous chemicals 
include gasoline, kerosene, and other petroleum products;  
 
20)
Production or trade in alcoholic beverages;  
 
21)
Gambling, casinos and equivalent enterprises;  
 
22)
Activities involved with production, trade, transport and storage of ammonium 
nitrate fertilizer.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared to define the 
management procedures that allow the proposed ANMDP to avoid, mitigate, or minimize 
adverse environmental and social impacts of supported enterprises. The ESMF provides 
an Environmental Screening process and other tools such as Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) to assess and mitigate potential environmental and social 
impacts of proposed activities where needed.  
 
With the use of the ESMF, national environmental and social requirements regarding 
any affected community and entity will be met. This will also be consistent with the 
OP4.01 and OP4.12 and other applicable safeguard provisions of the World Bank. The 
ESMF also represents a statement of policy, guiding principles and procedures of 
reference with focus on ANMDP, agreeable to all key stakeholders such as MOCI, 
NEPA, the World Bank as well as Afghan SMEs.  
 
The environmental issues, level of impacts, mitigation measures and the institution 
arrangement will be addressed in the Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP).  
 
The objectives of the ESMF are:  
 
To provide tools and guidelines for assessing potential environmental and social impacts 
of SMEs to be supported by the Project;  
 
To make provision for mitigation measures which will effectively address identified 
negative impacts;  
 
Page  5
To specify appropriate roles and responsibilities, and outline the necessary reporting 
procedures for managing and monitoring environmental and social concerns related the 
Project;  
 
To determine the training and technical assistance needed to successfully implement the 
provisions of the ESMF; and  
 
To establish the program funding required to implement the ESMF requirements.  
 
The overall purpose of the ESMF is to ensure that all activities with the SMEs supported 
by the FNMD are not harmful to the environment as well as are environmentally and 
socially sound and are in compliance with the requirements of pertinent Afghan laws and 
Legislations as well as World Bank environmental and social policies.  
 
The ESMF was prepared in accordance with definitions provided in to the triggered 
operational policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). The other World Bank 
safeguards policies are not triggered by ANMDP. The Environment Category of the 
Project is Category B. No large scale impacts are expected.  
 
The ESMF includes capacity building activities to ensure that the Borrower has the 
capacity to implement the ESMF. These in-country training activities will fall under three 
distinct categories: (i) Environmental screening and ESMF will be intended for about 15 
PMU and FNMD staff over a duration of two days and will cost US $5,700; (ii) Gender 
Training, also intended for the same PMU and FNMD staff over two days will also cost 
US $5,700; (iii) Work place health and safety training will be given to approximately 750 
SMEs receiving FNMD funding over one day (broken down in 30 sessions, 25 trainees 
per session) for a cost of US $46,500. The total cost of trainings will be $57,900.  
 
In addition, it is also proposed to include a focus on social and environment issues 
within the overall FNMD capacity building program, as follows: (i) New Market 
Communication and Marketing Program - sessions will be organized for female 
entrepreneurs only (to be undertaken by female trainers / facilitators); (ii) New Market 
Core Skills Development Workshops for SMEs - these workshops will include sessions 
on social and environment safeguards issues including sessions on health and safety 
issues at the work place and gender awareness where workshops will be organized for 
female entrepreneurs only (to be undertaken by female trainers / facilitators); and (iii) 
Business Plan Supplementary Support Services - if a SME has high potential, but is 
facing critical environment or social safeguards issues, targeted assistance could be 
provided, with guidance from the Safeguards Officer.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are MOCI and private firms. The ESMF will be issued to them.   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/15/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/26/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
N/A 
Page  7
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John F. Speakman 
03/15/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
03/15/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani 
03/15/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
04/05/2011 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John F. Speakman 
04/05/2011 
Comments:  Cleared 
