Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/23/2011 
Report No.:  AC6099
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P121755 
Project Name:  Afghanistan ICT sector development 
Task Team Leader:  Tenzin Dolma Norbhu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 26, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  TWICT 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (40%);Information technology (25%);General information 
and communications sector (25%);Public administration- Other social services (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (35%);Regulation and 
competition policy (25%);Other rural development (25%);Small and medium enterprise 
support (15%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to expand connectivity, mainstream the use of 
mobile applications across the Government, and support the development of the local IT 
industry.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project takes an integrated approach to the development of the ICT sector in 
Afghanistan. It is composed of four components.  
 
Component 1: Expanding connectivity  
 
This component will finance: (a) technical assistance to MCIT and ATRA to support 
policy and regulatory reforms that create an enabling environment for rapid broadband 
network deployment and for even wider access to high quality mobile telephone services; 
(b) the extension of the national backbone network to central, northeast, and southern 
provinces of Afghanistan, totalling about 1,000 km, to support the expansion of 
Page  2
telephony and Internet services in the central provinces, the northeast, and in the south 
and allow redundancy for the national backbone network; and (c) capacity building 
activities for MCIT and ATRA.  
 
Component 2: Mainstreaming mobile applications in Government  
 
This component will finance activities to build on the wide reach and use of mobile 
telephones in Afghanistan to mainstream the use of mobile telephone-based applications 
(mobile applications or m-apps) across Government ministries, agencies, and programs. 
Specifically, the component will finance: (a) technical assistance for the creation of an 
mGovernment strategy and roadmap, the development of required policy or regulatory 
instruments to enable the m-apps ecosystem, and capacity building activities; (b) the 
creation of shared services and infrastructure for use by various ministries, agencies, and 
programs that will enable less expensive and faster design, testing, deploying, and 
operation of mGovernment services, including the creation of a service delivery platform 
(SDP) for mGovernment; and (c) an innovation support program to fund the most 
innovative ideas selected through competition that address specific development 
challenges in priority areas identified by various ministries and agencies of the 
Government.  
 
Component 3: IT industry development  
 
This component will finance: (a) technical assistance for development of an IT sector 
development strategy and required legal, regulatory, and investment instruments to 
capture growth opportunities; (b) a skills development program aimed at developing a 
pool of skilled and qualified IT professionals as a key building block for IT sector 
development in Afghanistan; (c) consultancy services to develop a business plan for the 
ICT Village being developed by MCIT; (d) shared services and facilities such as high-
capacity telecommunications connectivity and backup power supply that will help make 
the ICT Village an attractive location for Afghan ICT firms; and (e) the setting up of an 
incubator for ICT firms in the ICT Village and operational support, including rental 
charges for the incubator space, the acquisition of furniture and some communications 
facilities for the incubator, and the hiring of an incubator manager.  
 
Component 4: Project management support  
 
This component will finance the creation and functioning of the Project Management 
Office (PMO) that will become part of the MCIT#s PICU and support MCIT in Project 
implementation. Responding to the need to build capacity within MCIT#s finance, 
procurement, and administration departments, this component will also finance training 
and capacity building activities as well as incentives for high-performing MCIT staff.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposal for the fiber optic network construction includes some possible routes for 
the project (under component 1). MCIT plans to use existing rights of way of the 
Government including roads and power transmission networks to link-up the following 
towns with the main OFC Ring:  Shinwari, Siyagard, Shikh Ali, Shibar, Bamyan, 
Page  3
Yakolang, Panjab, Lal Sarjangal, Dowlat Yar, Chagcharan, Daikundi, Kunduz, Takhar, 
Kishm and  Faizabad.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI) 
Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
NA   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There is no land acquisition or resettlement involved in the project. The project will 
support the development of the fiber optic backbone.  The backbone will be buried along 
the existing roads using the existing right of way and those being built out in the next 2 
years, along the Kabul - Bamyan - Chagcharan route; and along the Kunduz - Fayzabad 
route.  No towers will be built and no land acquired.  The MCIT has implemented 2400 
km of a fiber optic network and has always coordinated with the Ministry of Public 
Works, and with the Urban authorities (Municipality Corporations).  All fiber is buried . 
The backbone will be developed under a turnkey project. The contractor will be required 
to adhere to all requisite environmental and social safeguards.  The ESMP prepared for 
the project has an Environment and Social screening and Mitigation Plan to be strictly 
followed, and implementation monitored. The screening check list and mitigation plan 
will also be a part of bidding documents and the Bank#s safeguards team will approve the 
bidding documents for the turnkey contract.  
 
The project will not support any civil works or physical development of the ICT village.  
The project will not finance any civil works and/or construction.  World Bank will 
provide: (i) technical assistance support to develop the business plan for establishing the 
ICT village on a public private partnership basis; (ii) investment support for shared 
Page  4
infrastructure in the ICT village (high speed connectivity; back up power facilities 
(generators); office equipment and facilities for the IT business incubator to be set up in 
the ICT village.   The ICT village will be accommodated within the limits of the land 
owned by MCIT at  Yakatoot.    The land for the ICT village is on the Kabul- Jalalabad 
road.  It already has access to roads and commercial power.  A few families have leased 
the land for agriculture purposes.  The lease agreement clearly indicates that the families 
will voluntarily move when MCIT#s private partner commences construction of the ICT 
village.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None foreseen at this time.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
simple Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared which can 
be used as a checklist to mitigate Environment, Health and Safety aspects of small 
construction. This ESMP will also be used in the bidding document of the backbone 
contractor. The Contractor who will be awarded the contract will be responsible for 
preparation of the site specific ESMP either through a consultant or Environmental 
Specialist with sufficient knowledge of the environmental and social issues related to the 
telecommunications sector. Ideally, the consultant should have a strong understanding of 
the legislative structure of Afghanistan.  
 
An appropriate environmental supervision plan will be developed with clear objectives 
to ensure the successful implementation of ESMP. The responsibility for monitoring the 
implementation of the ESMP will be by the environmental specialist engaged by MCIT. 
Contractors and MCIT staff should be provided with awareness-raising, environmental, 
and training on site. These should focus on the construction phase of the subcomponents.  
 
A
Project Management Office (PMO) dedicated to this Project will employ a few 
international and national consultants and will also include support for safeguards.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Contractor will be required to consult the Project-affected public (if any) during the 
preparation of site specific ESMPs. For this, the ESMP prepared for the fiber optic 
backbone component will be disclosed to the public.  Copies of the ESMP should be 
made available to relevant communities and interested parties in accessible locations 
through local government authorities, (e.g., local councils, district offices).  Copies of the 
ESMP should also be provided to the MCIT and submitted to the World Bank.  This will 
ensure record keeping and ensure that third-party audits have adequate information when 
undertaking annual social and environmental audits.  
 
The Project has been identified and is being prepared due to the confluence of demand 
from a range of stakeholders and programs. The Project has been developed through 
discussions with the MCIT, ATRA, other ministries and agencies, donors, as well as 
private sector stakeholders. Officials of MCIT and ATRA have played a central role in 
defining the scope of and activities included in this Project.  
Page  5
Private sector stakeholders and especially the mobile telephone network companies and 
Internet service providers have also indicated their support for the overall Project 
concept. Consultation with non-government stakeholders on Project objectives and 
components has been conducted though the National ICT Alliance of Afghanistan 
(NICTAA) and with Government stakeholders through the Government CIO training 
program that was funded by USAID.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/22/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/25/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  6
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Tenzin Dolma Norbhu 
02/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
02/22/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani 
02/22/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/22/2011 
Comments:  Cleared. Please refer email of Feb. 17, 2011 for details. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
02/23/2011 
Comments:  Cleared. 
