Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/15/2011 
Report No.:  AC5963
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P122235 
Project Name:  Irrigation Restoration and Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Usman Qamar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
115.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed PDO is to increase agriculture productivity and production in the project 
areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of the following four components.  
 
Component A: Rehabilitation of Irrigation Infrastructure (base cost US$70 M):  This 
component would support the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes covering a total 
irrigated area of about 300,000 ha that would benefit approximately 230,000 households 
and increase irrigated area by about 15 percent.  This component will be designed and 
implemented using the successful model that is being followed under the EIRP. Typical 
rehabilitation works would include improving canal intake structures, conveyance 
channels, wash structures (water bridges/super passages to allow safe passage of hill 
torrents over canals), siphons, aqua ducts and other river crossing structures, culverts, and 
control structures. Mini/micro-hydro-electric generation, drinking water supply and small 
roads needed for construction and operation and maintenance would be considered where 
feasible. Irrigation scheme designs would be closely coordinated with on-farm 
Page  2
development works that would be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture Irrigation 
and Livestock (MAIL) under the proposed OFWM Project currently under preparation.  
 
Component B:  Small Dam Development (base cost US$30 M): This component would 
support the design and construction of a limited number of multi-purpose small dams and 
appurtenances, and associated irrigation conveyance and distribution systems.  The 
selected dams would be located in closed river basins that are free of trans-boundary 
riparian issues.  Twenty two potential sites have been identified in the northern closed 
river basins and preparation of feasibility studies is expected to be completed by June 
2012. Subsequently detailed design would be prepared under a design and construction 
supervision consultancy contract. Actual construction of small dams would commence in 
2013/14 utilizing three full construction seasons before the project closing date. The 
project would also support under Component D the development of the capacity in MEW 
and local institutions [Mirabs, CDC and clusters of CDCs] to carry out operation and 
maintenance.  
 
Component C: Establishment of Hydro-Meteorological Facilities and Services (base 
cost US$5 M): This component would build upon the work done under the EIRP and 
support the establish¬ment of an efficient and effective hydro-meteorological service, 
including the provision of: (i)  hardware and software, field equipment and transport 
facilities; (ii) operation and maintenance of the hydro-met network on a declining basis; 
and (iii) capacity building of MEW#s hydro-meteorological department in data 
collection, analysis and dissemination. Twinning arrangements would be sought with 
countries with well developed hydro-meteorological services to help develop capacity of 
MEW#s hydro-meteorological department.  
 
Component D: Technical Assistance, Institutional Strengthening and Project 
Management (base cost US$38.30 M):  This component would include the following four 
sub-components:  
 
Sub-component D1: Project management and construction supervision (US$17.90 
million): This would include support for: (i) overall project management, including 
procurement, financial management and capacity building; (ii) preparation of irrigation 
rehabilitation sub-projects, including survey and design work;  (iii) supervision of 
contracts for irrigation rehabilitation and hydro-met facilities, including contract 
management and quality control; (vi) consultancy services for preparation of sub-project 
specific ESMPs in accordance with the provisions of the ESMF; and (v) independent 
monitoring of compliance with the project#s ESMF. A team supplied by the FAO has 
been successfully providing technical assistance under the EIRP.  Based on this good 
experience and to maintain continuity, MEW has proposed selection of FAO on a single 
source basis to provide technical assistance services for activities (i), (ii) and (iii) under 
this sub-component.  For activity (iv), the project will hire short term consultancy 
services to prepare sub-project specific ESMPs.  Finally, for activity (v), an independent 
organization or local NGOs would be engaged to monitor compliance with the ESMF.  
 
Sub-component D2: Support for capacity building (US$7.90 million): This would 
include: (i) training of MEW and PCU staff in various fields as wells as training of 
Mirabs, CDCs and farmers in operation and maintenance (O&M) of completed sub-
projects; (ii) provision of an international financial management specialist for building 
capacity of MEW#s Finance and Administration Directorate; (iii) performance based 
incentives/training allowances for PCU and Hydrology Department staff; (iv) 
Page  3
rehabilitation of office buildings of provincial water management department (PWMDs); 
(v) establishing a web-based MIS for the Project; and (vi) acquisition of office and field 
equipment and vehicles required for project implementation.  
 
Sub-component D3: Incremental contract staff (US$4.00 million): This sub-component 
would finance the cost of existing and additional contract staff of the PCU and its 
regional offices, the hydrology/CMWD and the M&E unit.  Additional staff would 
include: surveyors, works supervisors, quality controllers, community water assistants 
(social mobilization), hydro-meteorologist, social and environmental officers, contract 
management officers, procurement officers, financial management officers, IT staff, 
M&E, enumerators, etc.  
 
Sub-component D4: Recurring/incremental operating costs (US$8.50 million): This sub-
component would finance the recurring costs the of PCU and its six regional offices, the 
M&E unit, and the hydrology/CWMD, including office rentals, utilities, communication 
and IT costs, office maintenance cost, salaries of support staff (e.g. vehicle drivers), staff 
travel and per diem, vehicle O&M costs as well as the cost of monitoring and evaluation 
activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The activities supported by the new financing would be implemented country wide 
through six regional offices located at Mazar, Kundoz, Kabul, Jalalabad, Kandahar, and 
Herat. Most IRDP activities will be similar to the current EIRP subprojects and is not 
expected to have any significant irreversible environmental and social impacts.  Other 
components such as some of the large schemes and the small dam components could 
have significant, irreversible environmental and social impacts and therefore has a 
Category #A# environmental classification. Since the irrigation systems consist of a large 
number of medium and large schemes, both formal (modern) and informal (traditional), 
the final selection of schemes for rehabilitation under the IRDP must meet the scheme 
selection criteria agreed with the Government.  
 
The nature of the irrigation rehabilitation activities is such that they will not lead to 
significant deforestation; however, in case there is a need for felling trees along water 
channels, twice as many new trees would be planted in a nearby location. The project will 
ensure uninterrupted traffic of humans and animals by building bridge structures where 
appropriate. The project will also provide for #community structures# to allow safe use of 
off channel laundry basins, ablution places by the local population through the 
construction of small diversions. The risk of potential small scale and temporary impacts 
on the local environment and the communities is reduced and mitigated through the 
ESMF, developed by the client, which includes tools and mitigating measures, e.g., LEA, 
and check lists.  
 
The targeted small storage dam development projects, selected after screening and 
evaluation of a long list of 57 potential sites, will be located in closed basins in different 
parts of the country and will not have an impact on international waterways. Also, in 
order to make sure the dam site selection is done appropriately and does not require large 
amount of resettlement, a satellite imagery and investigation of the sites has been 
Page  4
undertaken by a competent consultant in the subject matter to help select the right dam 
sites among the predetermined sites by MEW. Potential significant and irreversible 
impacts may occur on the local environment and communities, including downstream 
water flow regime, environmental flow, aquatic life, and submergence of grazing areas, 
land acquisition and resettlement. Also, there may be implications for upstream and 
downstream users, agriculture, impact on soil drainage, water quality, water use and 
availability for community and customary rights; labor, local customs, etc. Adverse 
impacts on the current land use, negative impact on fisheries, environmental health 
issues, e.g., creation of breeding places for vector of diseases could also occur.  
 
Pre-feasibility studies of 22 potential dam sites would be carried out, and based on the 
findings the sites would be ranked according to economic, social, and environmental 
criteria.  Sites involving any of the features in the ESMF Negative List or other major 
adverse social and environmental impacts will be dropped.The ten top ranked sites would 
be selected for preparing detailed feasibility studies, including preparation of full 
ESIAs/EMP, and RAP through international consulting firms. Finally, two or three sites 
would be selected for preparation of detailed design and construction.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI) 
Mr Abdul Mohammad Durani (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori (SASDI) 
Mr Obaidullah Hidayat (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Most of the subprojects of the proposed IRD project are not expected to have significant 
irreversible environmental and social impacts, however, there is a chance some potential 
long term and significant impacts could be possible especially in the small dam 
component and thus the project category has been identified as Category A in 
Page  5
environmental classification. No schemes are approved, and funds will not be allocated 
until the environmental viability is ascertained in accordance with the Environmental and 
Social Safeguard Management Framework (ESMF). In case of schemes where land 
acquisition is unavoidable, no physical works will be initiated until a SIA and a RAP has 
been undertaken and implemented (i.e. compensation to affected people being paid). In 
case of rehabilitation of schemes, site specific environmental impacts are dealt with at the 
design stage and during the actual rehabilitation.  Feasibility studies for the rehabilitation 
of large irrigation schemes will include a full environmental and social assessment.  
 
The Project Coordination Unit, its regional offices and the technical assistance will have 
trained social and environmental staff to deal with safeguards issues in accordance with 
ESMF.  Training and capacity building of these staff is an important element of the 
project design.  Apart from the environmental and social safeguard officers of the PCU 
will have one social/gender organizer at the regional level. Capacity will also be built at 
the CDC/community level. The village organizers, identified by the community itself, 
will be trained in social and environmental safeguards compliance and in general 
environmental awareness-building activities in particular. In the case of difficulties on the 
part of women organizers to go alone to villages, they would be accompanied by a male 
member of her family (Mahram).  
 
During implementation, attention to environmental and social issues would be further 
enhanced by (i) appointing International Consultant with a phased approach having 
responsibility of transferring skills to the local staff in environmental management, and 
environmental and social monitoring and reporting  would be included in the terms of 
reference of the M&E unit of EIRP.  
 
Since rehabilitation of large schemes could create some potential impacts, limited 
environmental assessment (LEA) or a full EA should be carried out and a project-specific 
ESMP will be prepared and implemented.  
 
Most of the IRD project activities will be similar to the previous EIRP subprojects and 
would not have any large scale, significant and /or irreversible impacts. However, there 
will be some potential small scale and temporary impacts on the local environment and 
the communities. In order to avoid, reduce and mitigate these potential impacts the 
prepared ESMF and its tools and mitigating measures, e.g., LEA, check lists, etc. provide 
guidelines for how to  take care of the issues.  
 
In case of small dam component potential large scale, significant and irreversible 
impacts could be possible on the local environment and the communities. One could 
expect potential adverse changes in /impacts on the downstream water flow regime, 
environmental flow, the downstream aquatic life, etc. Also, there could be potential 
impacts on the assets, land and livelihoods.  
 
Once the sites for the small dams are finalized with the relevant prepared criteria a full 
blown ESIA and the RAP with the help of a competent consulting company would be 
prepared. The ESIA and the RAP prepared for the specific dam sites would address 
Page  6
relevant issues, including: collection of baseline data, social impact assessment, incl. 
stakeholder consultations, community participation, communication and information 
sharing , formulation of  ESMP and implementation plan. An independent third party 
would monitor compliance with the ESMF including land acquisition and resettlement 
plans.  A panel of experts will advise on dam safety issues during detailed design and 
construction supervision.  
 
The institutional arrangements under the on-going EIRP project would be further 
strengthened by hiring more staff and training and capacity building.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Because investments, apart from the small dams component, will be limited to the 
rehabilitation of existing schemes, no significant impacts are expected. However, for the 
rehabilitation of large schemes, the limited environmental assessment (LEA) will assess 
any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts in the project area, and define mitigation 
measures, as required. Full social and environmental assessments will be carried out as 
part of the feasibility studies for large new schemes.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the vital importance of irrigation supplies for agriculture and food security, there 
are no alternatives to rehabilitation of the existing dilapidated irrigation infrastructure. 
Replacement with new systems is not an option.  The environmental and social screening 
process as outlined in the ESMF will adequately address any potential negative impacts 
of rehabilitation activities. However, for the small dams 22 sites are being considered to 
select the most suitable sites through a ranking process.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Recognizing the current social and environmental management capacity constraints, 
while at the same time ensuring due diligence in managing environmental and social 
risks, the framework approach adopted under EIRP will be continued. The updated and 
strengthened Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) for IRD provides for early 
identification of potential adverse impacts, prior to subsequent more rigorous analysis 
through quantification, and also provides broad guidance for their effective mitigation. 
Also, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared by the Afghan 
Government to take care of the relevant land acquisition and land donation issues.  
 
The selection, design, contracting, monitoring and evaluation of sub-projects, including 
small, medium and large irrigation schemes, will be consistent with the following 
guidelines:  
 
#
A
negative list of characteristics that would make a proposed sub-project 
ineligible for support  
Page  7
#
Resettlement Policy Framework and  protection of cultural property, including the 
chance discovery of archaeological artifacts, and unrecorded graveyards and burial sites  
 
#
Generic codes of practices for environmental management at the design, 
construction and operation stages  
 
#
Formats for limited environmental assessment (LEA) and generic Terms of 
Reference for a full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)  
 
#
Generic Terms of Reference for a full Social Assessment  
 
#
Training Action Plan for Environment and Social Safeguards along with training 
and Capacity-Building Activities at different levels  
 
#
The requirement that confirmation is received through the Regional Mine Action 
Center that areas to be accessed during reconstruction and rehabilitation activities have 
been demined  
 
Implementation of the ESMF will be the responsibility of Ministry of Energy and Water 
(MEW), which through its Project Coordination Unit (PCU) supported by the FAO 
Technical Assistance and the Provincial Water Management Departments will ensure that 
relevant program staff is given adequate training on safeguards issues (see under II. 
above).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Ministry of Energy and Water is the executing agency and other main stakeholders 
include; Ministry of Agriculture Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL), River Basin 
Organizations where they exist, members of Water User organizations, CDCs, NGOs, 
and other project beneficiaries, project staff at different levels and functionaries of other 
Departments and agencies concerned with project implementation. During preparation of 
the ESMF relevant stakeholders have been consulted. The main consultation with 
communities will take place during identification and implementation of the subprojects.  
For schemes where an EIA/SIA will be conducted, community consultations are an 
integral part of the process # and will continue during implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/09/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/11/2011  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/27/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/27/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/05/2011 
 
Page  8
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  9
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Usman Qamar 
01/24/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
01/25/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
01/24/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Obaidullah Hidayat 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
01/26/2011 
Comments:  cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
02/06/2011 
Comments:  Cleared 
