                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: February 24, 2011
                                                                                    75414
I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan                             Project ID: P 118925
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Sustainable Development of Natural Resources Project 2
Task Team Leader: Michael Stanley
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2011         Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2011
Managing Unit: SEGOM                             Lending Instrument:
Sector: Oil, Gas and Mining
Theme
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.): 52
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [ ]                   No [x]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [x]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises         Yes [x]       No [ ]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The Development Objective of the proposed project is to build the requisite legal and regulatory
frameworks and capacities to further enable the equitable distribution of benefits from mining
activities in a transparent manner.

3. Project Description:

Component 1. Award of Contracts and Licenses
This component will support the preparation and management of competitive and transparent
tender processes for extraction and development of the country’s mineral resources, by
strengthening the Government’s policy and planning capabilities and developing the geological
information needed for informed decision-making and the preparation of additional resource
auctions. It will further assist in supporting infrastructure planning options to render large-scale
operations feasible.
Component 2. Regulation and Monitoring of Operations
This component will increase the capacity of the Ministry of Mines and other relevant
institutions to monitor contractors’ compliance with national laws and sector regulations,
including through field verification visits to ensure the transparent and efficient reporting and
collection of EI revenues. This component will also build capacity to monitor compliance with
the World Bank Group’s environmental and social safeguards, including the preservation of
physical cultural resources.

Component 3. Revenue Collection and Management
This component will strengthen the fiscal and regulatory instruments, and will provide policy
options to the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Mines regarding stabilization of the EI
revenue stream to enable long-term fiscal planning.

Component 4. Supporting alternative livelihoods through sustainable ASM and mining
communities
This component will help to promote alternative livelihoods through improving the sustainability
of small and medium scale mining enterprises, with an emphasis on women employment,
gemstone, decorative stones and jewelry craft, including improving market access. It will also
work with communities and women in the Logar valley to promote local production of artifacts.

Component 5. Project Implementation/Embedded Technical Expertise
This component will continue funding for the existing Project Management Unit (PMU), which
has been overseeing day-to-day implementation of SDNRP1. It will also strengthen capacity at
the Ministry of Mines and the National Extractive Industry Excellence Program (NEIEP) to (a)
assess the progress of mining operations; (b) maintain comprehensive and current site data
pertaining to mining licenses; (c) ensure compliance with Grant Agreement provisions governing
procurement and project financial management; and (d) ensure compliance with environmental
and social regulations. The embedded technical expertise in this component will be the project’s
main mechanism for knowledge transfer.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

Given the TA nature of the project, it will be largely focusing on the ministerial bodies of the
sector administration in Kabul. However, certain components will also indirectly affect other
areas, notably the Aynak valley in Logar province and the Hajigak area in Bamyan province.
Similarly, support for institutions that operate nationwide (such as the inspectors, the
decentralized satellite office of the Ministry, the Geological Survey etc.) will result only in
indirect effects.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (Lead Environmental Specialist)
Asta Olesen (Senior Social Development Specialist)
Mohammed Arif Rasuli (Sr. Environmental Specialist)
Abdul Durani (Social Development Specialist)



6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                         Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
       The project is of a TA nature, and thus does not carry with it environmental and / or
       social impacts. While mining activity is supposed to increase, specifically due to
       improved availability of geodata, promotion of tenders and support of gemstone miners
       and value-added activities, the project does not directly engage in mining operations or
       related engineering works.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

        SDNRP I and II both address indirect long term negative impacts of unregulated mining
        sector development. It is exactly the consequences of unregulated activities that the
        project addresses by supporting the relevant capacities of the regulating and enforcing
        institutions, such as the MoM (specifically the Inspectorate units) and the Environmental
        Protection Agency (NEPA). While, as mentioned above, mining activity is expected to
        increase over the next years, the goal will be to sustain capacity building around tangible
        mineral developments to ensure that social and environmental performance is improved
        and more satisfactory outcomes are achieved.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

 N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

        With assistance of the original SDNRP project, the borrower’s capacity to mitigate risks
        was substantially increased, notably through:

    o ongoing implementation of a Strategic Environmental / Social Assessment
    o presence of four experts to support the National ESIA Panel within NEPA
    o activities of the Aynak Monitoring Firm, observing environmental / social compliance
    o provision of additional support to MoM through international social and environmental
      safeguard specialists
    o education exchange with the Indian School of Mines
    o emergency support of the French archeological assessment of cultural activities at Mes
      Aynak.

        The proposed SDNRP 2 will further promote the abilities of the regulating, monitoring
        and enforcing agencies and ensure adequate implementation of the respective
        environmental and social standards through

   o strengthening state support on the local level through establishing extension services, thus
     reducing the probability of unsafe small-scale mining
   o promoting contract compliance (including safeguards compliance) through direct
     compliance monitoring and assistance
   o supporting the training and capacity building of the Mines Inspection unit
   o continuing support for the safe excavation and preservation of the antiques relics of the
     Aynak valley

        In these efforts, the project will build on guiding principles by (a) the Mining Law, (b)
        the National Environmental Action Plan, and (c) emerging regulations from the National
        Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) and Ministry of Mines (and to a lesser extent
        the Ministry of Culture and other agencies).

        An additional, cross-sectoral issue that the project will try to address is to strengthen the
        policy framework for administration and implementation of Strategic Impact Assessment
        and Resettlement Action Plans, which for the latter is weakly developed, and dispersed in
        responsibility across several agencies.
        The project recognizes the importance of a sound land acquisition policy framework
        regarding eminent domain (the acquisition of land in the national interest). In this
        regard, the project is currently addressing sector eminent domain issues; and is in
        ongoing discussion with the Bank PRM economists and social protection specialists to
       institute a broader set of reforms for application across all sectors regarding eminent
       domain; perhaps through DPG lending.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

       Key stakeholders are, besides the Government, the private sector which will be
       responsible for mineral sector operations, as well as the communities that live nearby the
       mining sites and that are impacted by its activities. Civil society organizations are
       emerging around the EITI, and as such are being formalized under the project using the
       EITI multi-stakeholder group (discussed below).

       The Aynak developer works closely with the Government (on a national as well as local
       level) and the community councils in order to inform people on the effects in due time.
       The Government has established the Aynak Authority, an inter-ministerial agency to
       promote mining development in the Logar valley and address community issues. The
       Authority includes an ombudsman for community affairs.

       The implementation of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), which
       features a standing committee of Government representatives, private sector and diverse
       civil society organizations, is providing additional capacity building support (a) directly
       through the SDNRP and SDNRP 2 projects, and (b) also through EITI World Bank-
       managed Multi-donor Trust Fund.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                No
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ X ]    No [ ]      N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]     No [ X ]     N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ X ]    No [ ]      N/A [ ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate    Separate assessment has been conducted
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural         in Mes Aynak site and support to the
resources?                                                 assessment, recovery and preservation
                                                           of the cultural heritage of the Aynak
                                                           valley (Mes Aynak antiquities) with
                                                           emphasis on integration of the artifact
                                                           recovery plan with the Aynak mining
                                                           plan; and thereafter ensuring recovery in
                                                           high-priority areas. Note – this sub-
                                                           component provides ongoing immediate
                                                           assistance and will require parallel
                                                           financing from other sources for full
                                                           recovery and preservation of cultural
                                                           artifacts
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning            Yes [ ]        No [ ]        N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [ X ]        No [ ]        N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         MoM is developing under the
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the        existing SDNRP a Resettlement
plan/policy framework/process framework?                   Action Plan to which MoM, will
                                                           develop a Resettlement Policy
                                                           Framework. Such a RPF would be
                                                           the guidance for land acquisition and
                                                           resettlement until such time when the
                                                           borrower revises the legal framework
                                                           for land acquisition, including
                                                           associated regulations
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]        No []       N/A [X ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]        No []       N/A [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]     No []      N/A [X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]     No []      N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ X ]     No [ ]     N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Under preparation
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                             Name                        Date
 Task Team Leader:                                Michael Stanley               2/13/2013
 Environmental Specialist:           Ernesto Sanchez-Triana and Mohammad Arif
                                                       Rasuli
 Social Development Specialist         Asta Olesen, Abdul Mohammad Durani
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Sanjay Srivasta               2/13/2013
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                               Christopher Sheldon              2/13/2013
   Comments:
