Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5966 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/03/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P118925 
Project Name: Afghanistan: Sustainable Development of Natural Resources Project II 
Task Team Leader: Michael C. Stanley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit: SEGOM 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (50%);Central government administration 
(30%);General energy sector (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (35%);Regulation and 
competition policy (17%);Legal institutions for a market economy (17%);Administrative 
and civil service reform (17%);Other environment and natural resources management 
(14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project objective will be to create a more sustainable mineral resource sector by 
strengthening capacities of institutions responsible for regulating access to mineral resources, as 
well as monitoring and enforcement of environmental, social and cultural regulations.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A  - Award of Contracts and Licenses & Access to Resources  
 
o
Sector Policy and Planning # preparation of a Sector Development Policy to guide EI 
sector development (with a strong emphasis on creating an enabling environment for major 
projects with international investors) plus a specific plan for the development of quarry and 
construction minerals by domestic companies  
Page  2
o
Hajigak # completing the preparation of the Hajigak tender leading to international 
competitive auction to select the preferred bidder  
 
o
Resource Corridor Exploration Packages - collection and analysis of geo data for high 
priority resource corridor areas taking into account geological potential to encourage new 
exploration in new areas along the corridor(s) and the subsequent allocation of mineral rights 
under autions  
 
o
Geological Data - collection of new geodata to attract exploration by international 
investors and starting the process of digitization and publication of presently available geo data 
including new geological maps  
 
Component B - Regulation and Monitoring of Operations  
 
o
Regulatory Oversight of Aynak and Hajigak  # continued monitoring and enforcing 
regulatory and contractual for Aynak and Hajigak  
 
o
Institutional Strengthening of National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) to 
strengthen NEPA#s capabilities to monitor and enforce compliance of EI projects with 
environmental requirements  
 
o
Institutional Strengthening of Ministry of Mines including mines inspectorate, 
environmental and social protection, and mining cadastre functions.  
 
o
Regulatory capacities and archaeological recovery to allow for a sound assessment of the 
cultural heritage of the Aynak valley and subsequent draft and implementation of a recovery plan 
as well as a storing / presentation facility for the Buddhist artifacts  
 
o
Reform of State Minerals Enterprises including first phase reform of gas, fertilizer and 
minerals extraction enterprises  
 
Component C - Collection of Taxes and Royalties  
 
o
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative -  support for EITI next steps as needed 
according to support being provided by other sources  
 
o
Civil Society Capacity Building Support for demand side of governance including EITI 
through civil society capacity building in alignment with the National Solidarity Program (NSP) 
and with a specific focus on strengthening gender-related aspects  
 
Component D - Sustainable Development Policies and Projects  
 
o
Resource Corridor Assessment - a survey and analysis of potential non-mining 
commercial activities in high priority resource corridors taking into account agricultural, 
industrial and other livelihood practices within the corridor(s)  
 
o
Education for Sector Professionals # both short professional training courses and degree 
track courses being offered by local educational institution (s) supported by twinned 
organizations  
 
o
Gemstone Training - direct technical assistance to the artisanal gemstone sector to 
support added value (e.g. cutting and polishing) and possible assistance for marble and stone and 
capacity building for local community leaders.  
 
Page  3
Component E - Project Implementation Support  
 
o
To finance all the activities of the Project Implementation Unit needed in order to deliver 
the project efficiently and effectively. This will include funds to cover incremental operating 
costs, PMU staff costs, monitoring and evaluation of project activities, and compliance with 
Bank fiduciary and safeguards requirements. This component will also finance an extensive 
communications and awareness-building campaign.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined at a later stage   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The World Bank has supported relevant monitoring units within the Ministry of Mines as well as 
the National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) through capacity building and training. 
Further capacity building will be continued under this project. In addition, the Environmental 
Impact Assessment Board within NEPA will be advised by consultancy firms on a steady basis, 
which are also funded by the Bank.  
 
Furthermore, the safeguards team (including both social and environmental) will work more 
closely not only with the Ministry of Mines, but also with the National Solidarity Program (NSP) 
and civil society. At Aynak, the current IDA project will also install and ombudsman so that any 
potential grievances can be identified and mitigated early on.  
 
As such, the capacity of the relevant institutions is deemed appropriate to handle the new 
project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Jane T. Nishida (SASDI) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While the project is providing TA, it is recognized that project activities will provide 
recommendations for site-specific investments.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
to be defined during ROC   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
to be defined during ROC   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The existing SDNRP project is providing funding assistance to the assessment and recovery 
of Buddhist artifacts around the proposed Aynak mine development.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
to be defined during ROC   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
to be defined during ROC   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/07/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Minutes of the PCN review recommend a Regional Operations Committee meeting to 
authorize project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael C. Stanley 
12/13/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
12/14/2010 
Comments:  a) a category B, trigger OP 4.1  (b) commit to produce tangible output with time frame (c) 
ISDS refer to SESA ongoing 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anwar B. Ravat 
12/22/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
