Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  59449 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/31/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P075941 
Project Name: NELSAP:  Regional Rusumo Falls Hydroelectric and Multipurpose 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Satoru Ueda 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2012 
Managing Unit: AFTWR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (50%);Power (30%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (33%);Other environment and natural resources 
management (17%);Other rural development (17%);Regional integration (17%);Conflict 
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (16%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
135.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
African Development Fund 
40.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
15.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
55.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project objective is to enhance power generation and transmission capacity for 
Burundi, Rwanda and Tanzania and improve sustainable livelihoods in the project affected area.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will develop renewable hydroelectric power and regional transmission connecting 
Burundi, Rwanda and Northwest Tanzania, and support local area development and benefit 
sharing activities in the area of the dam, reservoir and transmission lines. With the construction 
of  a 15 meter high dam on the Rwanda-Tanzania border of the Kagera River, the installed 
Page  2
capacity would be around 60-80 MW under a head of 35 meters. The feasibility study indicated 
that firm energy production per year is estimated at around 388 GWh with average annual energy 
production of 444 GWh whose reservoir would extend into Burundi, Rwanda and the northwest 
Tanzania. With the construction of new transmission lines, power would be delivered to off-take 
points in each country and sold to the three state power utilities, i.e. REGIDESO, RECO, and 
TANESCO.  
 
The project is expected to contribute to regional stability and integration by developing a joint 
hydropower generation and transmission system. The project provides for important transmission 
interconnections, which will help form the transmission backbone between Burundi, Rwanda, 
and Tanzania, advancing the medium and long term goals of regional transmission inter-
connection in the EAPP and the SAPP.  Therefore, the project would support the Bank#s greater 
focus on regional integration in Africa.  
 
The project will also consider providing measures for local area development in the affected 
areas including rural electrification; rural water supply for people, livestock and irrigation; rural 
sanitation, catchment /environmental conservation, fishing, etc. under the same project or other 
ongoing /planned projects. The local area development program (LADP) as well as ESIA and 
RAP are under preparation.  
 
The project would include four components:  
 
(1) 
Construction of a 60-80 MW Hydropower project. Generation of renewable cost efficient 
hydro electric power (60 -80 MW to be shared equally between the three countries/utilities);  
 
(2) 
Power transmission, regional integration of networks, and power distribution that targets 
growth centers along the regional transmission lines;  
 
(3) 
Local area development and livelihood improvement in the project affected areas; and  
 
(4) 
Institutional capacity enhancement of a newly established Rusumo Power Company and 
relevant institutions of three countries.   
 
The four proposed project components are defined as:  
 
Component 1: Hydroelectric Power Generation (US$ 224 million)  
 
This component would include a hydropower facility with envisaged installed capacity of 60 # 
80 MW to be shared between the three countries. The power station and hydraulic infrastructure 
would be situated at the Rusumo Falls, where the Kagera River forms the boundary between 
Tanzania and Rwanda, about 2 km downstream of the river#s confluence with the Ruvubu River.  
 
The feasibility study and ESIA for the power generation component is currently underway, 
funded by a project preparation grant made to NELSAP through the Nile Basin Trust Fund, 
which is administered by the World Bank. The studies are expected to be completed by August 
2011.  The feasibility study has compared three alternative development scenarios (full 
development, intermediate, and run of river) including their technical, economic, social and 
environmental aspects.  Depending on the final results of the feasibility and ESIA studies, the 
final design option and operating rules for the dam will be determined by optimizing power 
generation capacity/pattern while minimizing social and environmental impacts.  
Page  3
Component 2: Power Transmission, Regional Integration of Networks and Distribution (US$77 
million)  
 
Three transmission lines from Rusumo to (i) Gitega, Burundi (161 km); (ii) Kigali, Rwanda 
(109 km); and (iii) Nyakanazi, Tanzania (98 km) will connect the power station to the national 
grids of Rwanda and Burundi, and supply electricity to the western mining provinces of 
Tanzania, which are currently not connected to the country#s national grid. As mentioned, these 
transmission lines are expected to play a role in the creation of a regional grid #backbone# for 
power trade within the region. The transmission lines will be designed to support provision of 
low-cost electrification to selected rural growth poles (see subcomponent 3b), as well as ITC 
systems, in rural growth centers in the transmission corridor.  
 
The technical feasibility study for the transmission component is almost complete, but 
additional work is underway on the ESIA to ensure that the preparation of this component meets 
the standards of the Bank. Specifically, the consultant is undertaking a census-based preparation 
of the Resettlement Action Plan to replace the sample-survey method used for the earlier draft 
report. The preparation of this component is being undertaken by NELSAP on behalf of the 
countries with funding from AfDB.  
 
Component 3: Multi-purpose Local Area Development (US$49 million)  
 
Part of this Component # Multi-purpose Local Area Development - is also under consideration 
under the same project or other ongoing/planned projects.  
 
Sub-component 3a:  - local area development and benefit sharing along the dam site and 
reservoir (US$ 32 Million).  
 
This sub-component will provide funds for the implementation of the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP), Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and Local Area Development Plan 
(LADP) for the dam site and reservoir area. The subcomponent is expected to support rural water 
supply and sanitation, small-scale irrigation/livestock/fishing, watershed management, 
prevention of waterborne diseases, etc.  
 
The ESMP, RAP, and LADP for the power generation component are currently being 
developed as part of the ESIA.  The details of the proposed local area development program is 
still not determined, and will be based on the recommendations of the ESIA and consultations in 
the three countries.  
 
Sub-component 3b:  local area development and benefit sharing along transmission corridors 
(US$ 17 Million).  
 
This sub-component is expected to provide rural electrification and promote the use of 
electricity in selected rural growth poles along the transmission corridor. This will also include 
the implementation of the activities defined in the ESMP, RAP, and LADP for the transmission 
lines. The subcomponent is expected to support rural water supply and sanitation, small-scale 
irrigation/livestock/fishing, watershed management, prevention of waterborne diseases, etc.  The 
ESMP, RAP, and LADP for the transmission component are still currently under development, 
and further details are expected to be developed when preparation is complete.  
 
Page  4
Component 4: Institutional Capacity Enhancement (US$ 10 Million)  
 
Preliminary studies by NELSAP into possible institutional arrangements between the three 
countries are ongoing. Preliminary analysis suggests that a Rusumo Power Company could be 
jointly established by the three governments and possibly with private financiers. For broader 
technical oversight, the possibility of establishing a joint entity with a monitoring, advisory, and 
approval role as well as a water resources management and development function is under 
discussion.  Such an entity could set operating rules, address water use issues, and resolve any 
regional issues that arose. The detailed design of a power company and joint oversight entity, 
such as organizational structure, legal charters, and operational responsibilities is expected to be 
analyzed and finalized before appraisal / negotiations.  
 
The implementation of the ESMP, RAP, and LADP would be the responsibility of the 
respective national agencies, with oversight under a possible regional entity to be established by 
three countries.   The coordination mechanism between these agencies and the EPC contractor 
would also need to be discussed and agreed to ensure that the mitigation measures align with the 
construction schedule and impoundment.  
 
The three governments demonstrated strong commitments to the Project for addressing the 
energy crisis, expanding electricity access, and supporting economic development to break out of 
a
downward spiral of land degradation, unsustainable use of natural resources, low access to 
public infrastructure and services, and constraints to private sector development in the region.  
The three Energy Ministers first signed a Communiqué on joint project development in Kigali in 
2005, which was followed by requests from each government to the World Bank for IDA 
assistance for project development.  Upon the Bank#s response and to allow project preparation 
to proceed, the Energy Ministers later signed a Joint Project Development Agreement (JPDA) on 
March 31, 2006, to carry out the feasibility study for the project. The Bank received a follow up 
request from the Ministers of Energy in March 2010. In addition to providing IDA funds from 
three countries allocation and regional integration budget, the Bank is expected to play a 
syndication role to ensure that funds from multiple parties are secured. The project is being 
prepared in consultation and collaboration with other key donors, notably AfDB, who is 
financing the preparation of the transmission lines through a bilateral grant to the NBI.  
 
The Rusumo Falls hydropower project is one of the key power generation schemes identified 
and promoted under the framework of the Nile Basin Initiative. In collaboration with three 
governments, Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program (NELSAP) has been preparing 
the project for generating hydropower at the Rusumo Falls site and delivering power through 
new transmission lines to off-take points of three countries as well as generating multi-purpose 
and public benefits for the project affected areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The dam and power station would be situated at the Rusumo Falls where the Kagera River forms 
the boundary between Tanzania and Rwanda, and about 2 km downstream of the river's 
confluence with the Ruvubu River (see Map). Depending on the dam height (estimated at 15 m), 
the reservoir may extend some 60 km up the Kagera River to increase the inundation area around 
the existing natural Lake Rweru. The delineation of the inundation area, which will define the 
project affected environs, communities and households, will be finalized prior to appraisal.  
Page  5
Three transmission lines are planned under an associated AfDB project from Rusumo to:  (i) 
Gitega, Burundi (161 km); (ii) Kigali, Rwanda (109 km); and (iii) Nyakanazi, Tanzania (98 km). 
Local development activities will take place both in the project reservoir area and along the 
transmission line corridors.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower capacity varies among the participating countries.  In all countries, however, capacity 
will be a challenge for implementing a project at this scale and complexity.  
 
Through the project preparation grant made to the NBI and implemented by NELSAP-CU, 
based in Kigali, the Bank is currently supporting quality preparation of safeguards instruments 
through strengthened technical oversight, project management, and regional facilitation. This 
includes a Dam Safety Independent Panel of Experts (IPoE); an Environmental and Social IPoE; 
an independent review and synthesis studies of the  ESIAs and economic / financial analyses 
from the two feasibility studies; and technical staff at NELSAP to increase capacity for oversight 
of key studies, including two social development specialists, one environmental specialist, and a 
hydropower specialist. These experts, as well as the consultants preparing the ESMP, RAP, 
LADP and PCDP, will work closely with the respective officials of the three beneficiary 
countries to explain the detailed procedure of safeguard policies and action plans and support 
building their implementation capacity. Additionally, the energy Ministers for all three countries 
met in Khartoum in March 2010 specifically to discuss the Rusumo Falls project, and requested 
that the Project Implementation Committee establish an Environmental and Social Task Force to 
increase oversight of and country input to project preparation.  The task force will serve as 
country focal points for the ESIA.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS) 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS) 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTWR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The dam/reservoir (Component 1a) may have potentially significant biophysical and 
socioeconomic impacts both downstream and upstream, while the transmission lines 
(Component 2a) are expected have lesser impacts that can be more easily mitigated. Project area 
development activities (Components 1b and 2b) may have local, adverse effects that can likely 
be avoided or minimized through common design and management measures. Issues of concern 
will be thoroughly analyzed to contribute to project planning and design during feasibility 
studies and related ESIAs.  An independent review and synthesis of the ESIAs of the power 
generation and transmission components and POE review will be conducted.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project may affect the downstream Akagera National Park in Rwanda by altering the 
flow regime, although the significance and likelihood of the impacts appears low given that the 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
reservoir will capture only approximately 7.5% of the basin#s runoff.  The reservoir will flood 
upstream marsh habitat around Lake Rweru, though the extent of the affected area is still being 
determined through ongoing advanced hydrological and topographical surveys. NELSAP has 
recently informed the Bank that wetlands far upstream of Lake Rweru could possibly be 
designated wetlands of international significance under the Ramsar Convention. Impacts on 
natural habitats are also possible from the transmission line construction under the associated 
AfDB project.  The extent of any impacts on natural habitats will be assessed in the course of 
ongoing studies, and mitigated through implementation of EMPs, possibly including an 
environmental offset.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The project will affect a large area of rural landscape and wetland vegetation. The completed 
and ongoing environmental studies will be consulted to determine whether the project will affect 
forests and trigger the forests policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Agricultural development in the project area consequent upon increased access to electricity 
may increase the use of agricultural chemicals. Pest Management Plan will be developed as a 
part of due diligence work.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Given the extensive civil works for the hydropower facility and T-lines, potential exists for 
affecting physical cultural resources. Potential impacts will be managed through implementation 
of standard chance find procedures.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
This policy is not triggered because initial socio-economic surveys, completed in 2006 and 
2008, indicated that there were no indigenous peoples in the project site. However, this finding 
will be confirmed once the project boundaries (affected communities) are delineated as part of 
the RAP process.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Flooding the reservoir would affect a significant number of people. Preliminary estimates 
indicate that approximately 5,280 ha of agricultural lands and 20 ha of built-up lands will be 
flooded along the Kagera and Ruvubu Rivers and around Lake Rweru. Based on two socio-
economic surveys completed in 2006 and 2008, the total number of PAPs is expected to reach   
between 5,200 to 6,700 households, or roughly 30,000 to 40,000 people. The final demarcation 
of the shoreline, which will be the basis for the RAP valuation and compensation process, will be 
determined after completion of advanced topographical map and hydraulic simulation.  
 
Settlement and land use issues along the transmission lines are being addressed in a 
separate, associated project funded by the AfDB that is preparing the feasibility study and ESIA 
for the transmission lines. Due diligence and technical assistance, as needed, will be provided by 
the project team to ensure that the T-Line RAP is completed in a manner satisfactory to IDA.  
 
The project will include a stand-alone Local Area Development Plan (LADP) and a Public 
Consultation and Disclosure Plan (PCDP) due to the large affected area, multi-country (regional) 
coverage; and prevalence of poverty in affected communities. The objectives of providing some 
form of sustainable livelihoods and addressing the immediate needs of displaced households 
were adopted by the participating countries.   
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The current project design envisages a 15 meter high dam and thus triggers the policy.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project directly involves three countries, and downstream riparians of Lake Victoria and 
the Nile River. Notification will be through standard procedure per OP 7.50 as well as 
consultative mechanism of the Nile Basin Initiative.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/01/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As outlined above, safeguards issues will be thoroughly analyzed to contribute to project 
planning and design during feasibility studies, and to provide a sound foundation for the 
subsequent independent EA. Preparation of RAPs for the reservoir and T-Lines will be 
included in the feasibility studies.  As the feasibility studies and safeguards documents 
concerning the power generation and transmission lines were prepared by the same 
consultant, the Bank#s Management has agreed that  an #Independent Review and Synthesis 
of the Environmental and Social Studies for the Hydroelectric Power Plant and Transmission 
Lines# would be undertaken to ensure a thorough independent review of the environmental 
and social studies for the power plant, dam, transmission lines, and other related multi-
purpose local area development facilities has been completed. Once the review is completed, 
the Bank#s Management will ensure that the safeguards due diligence complies with the 
requirements of OP 4.01. Details of this independent review TOR were finalized with inputs 
from OPCQC and LEGEN, in particular, synchronizing and ensuring consistency with the 
relevant national environmental and social legislations in the three cooperating countries 
(Burundi, Rwanda, and Tanzania) and with the safeguards policies and procedures of the 
World Bank (WB) and African Development Bank (AfDB). This review will cover quality 
assessment of the EIA updates, ESMP, RAP, LADP, and the PCDP, including mechanisms 
for disclosure of these reports.  An Expression of Interest (EOI) will be advertised as part of a 
competitive recruitment process for a qualified consulting firm.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
The policies that are triggered in the associated T-Line project are: OP 4.01 (Environmental 
Assessment), OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), and OP 
4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). According to AfDB, similar to the safeguards instruments in 
the dam/reservoir area, the following documents will be reviewed during appraisal:  
 
#
Engineering studies and design (to determine the scope of impacts of the T-Line)  
 
#
Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) updates  
 
#
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)  
 
#
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and Livelihood Restoration   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Satoru Ueda 
10/14/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
10/15/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
10/15/2010 
Comments:   
