Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/08/2011 
Report No.:  AC5909
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P122065 
Project Name:  West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program APL (WAAPP-1C) 
Task Team Leader:  Abdoulaye Toure 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (100%) 
Theme:  Technology diffusion (29%);Rural services and infrastructure (29%);Export 
development and competitiveness (14%);International financial architecture 
(14%);Regional integration (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
83.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Similar to WAAPP-1A and 1B, the development objective of WAAPP-1C is to generate 
and accelerate the adoption of improved technologies in the participating countries# top 
agricultural commodity priorities areas that are aligned with the sub-region's top 
agricultural commodity priorities, as outlined in the ECOWAP. The expected key 
outcomes at the end of the Project include: (i) 1500,000 direct/indirect beneficiaries, of 
which 40% are female; (ii) at least 3 technologies released by each NCOS; (iii) 100 
percent of the release technologies show an improvement in yield of at least 15 percent 
compared to the control technology; (iv) 1000,000 hectares of area under improved 
technologies disseminated under the Project; and (v) 900,000 producers have adopted 
improved varieties made available under the Project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed WAAPP-1C PDO, components, results framework, outcome indicators, 
and triggers are consistent with those in WAAPP-1B and WAAPP-1A (which were 
updated during WAAPP-1A MTR in May 2010). The main differences in WAAPP-1C 
Page  2
compared to WAAPP-1A and WAAPP-1B are: (i) the proposed support to the Mano 
River countries which are fragile states with special focus on rebuilding of their adaptive 
research and technology transfer capacities and; (ii) the fact that under Component 2 
smaller countries will not have their own centre of specialization.  
 
Component 1: Enabling Conditions for sub-Regional Cooperation in the Generation, 
Dissemination, and Adoption of Agricultural Technologies to allow ECOWAS member 
countries to benefit from those technologies. It also, in the specific context of the Mano 
River countries, aims at strengthening the institutional mechanisms and procedures for 
integration of regional rice markets and cross-border/national dissemination of 
technologies.  
 
Component 2: National Centres of Specialization (NCOS). This component will support 
the strengthening of NCOs in Niger for Livestock, Benin for Maize, and Sierra Leone for 
Mangrove Rice, while for countries including Togo, Liberia, Guinea and The Gambia it 
will only focus on strengthening capacities for adaptive research and technology transfer.  
 
Component 3: Support to Demand-driven Technology Generation and adoption, 
Dissemination and Adoption by financing priority-focused agricultural research and 
advisory services within participating countries and complementing core program 
activities financed under Component 2.  
 
Component 4: Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation to 
ensure an effective and efficient management and coordination of the project at national 
and regional levels.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program will be extended to cover all the ECOWAS countries. It will provide a 
regional framework on the basis of which ECOWAS countries will collaborate to 
implement national and regional agricultural strategies in the area of technology   
generation and dissemination. WAAPP-1C will focus mainly in Liberia, Sierra Leone, 
Niger, Togo, Benin, Guinea and The Gambia.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
SOCIAL (including safeguards): The WAAPP-1C is not expected to have any significant 
negative social impacts. Project beneficiaries are mainly small-scale farmers who 
dominate African agriculture (with women playing a critical role), both in local food 
production and production for regional and international markets. The Project will work 
to ensure that the circumstances of small-scale farmers and particularly women are 
accounted for in setting priorities for the CARGS and implementing the research 
proposals it finances. The grant scheme will require, for example, that bids for 
competitive grants clearly identify the farm population that will benefit from the research. 
Adaptive research will be conducted on farmers and fields. Competitive grants to 
implement R&D will be open to producer#s organizations and agribusiness associations 
and not only to research organizations. The Project will work with development agencies 
and public and private partnerships to promote the sustainable use of technologies by 
producers.  
 
Under WAAPP-1A and 1B CORAF recently designed a regional gender strategy which 
aims at mainstreaming gender considerations into technology generation and adoption. 
This strategy will be further improved with the proposed Comprehensive Social Impact 
Assessment that will (i) further deepen the gender dimensions, notably highlighting the 
country-specific initiatives and national strategies proposed to better mainstream gender 
dimensions into the agriculture sector, as well as (ii) capture the conflict dimensions, 
especially between herders and farmers which is often sources of human conflicts that 
could, if not mitigated, constitute serious negative impacts to the project. Overall, the 
project will support implementation of this strategy in each of the participating countries.  
 
During the pre-appraisal mission site visits that covered some participating countries 
(Benin, Togo, Liberia and Sierra Leone) issues related to land acquisition and/or loss of 
economic activities on the part of individuals or groups of individuals were identified 
particularly in Togo but also in other countries. Therefore the project has triggered the 
Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP4.12) and launched studies to prepare an 
Page  4
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (A-RAP) for Togo and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) for all the other participating countries (other RAPs will be prepared if 
and when needed). The documents have been issued in early January and reviewed and 
cleared by the team and ASPEN and have consequently been disclosed both in the 
CORAF/WECARD regional website and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.  
 
ENVIRONMENT (including safeguards): The WAAPP-1C is expected to have positive 
environmental impacts through its support for agricultural technologies that promote the 
better use of land and water resources. Potential environmental risks could include point 
and nonpoint pollution of water sources, other issues associated with the use of 
agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental impacts associated with the 
rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works on research stations. Research on 
transgenic crops is neither explicitly planned nor excluded. If it becomes part of the 
research agenda supported under the Project, it will proceed with environmental 
safeguards consistent with international good practice and the regulatory framework, and 
ESMF guidelines of the host country. In particular, such research needs to be carried out 
in accordance with the obligation of each country under international treaties to which it 
is a party, including the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety for Burkina Faso and Nigeria. 
Potential adverse environmental impacts associated with the NCOS activities will be low 
intensity, minor, site specific, and handled under safeguard measures already in place for 
ongoing activities.  
 
Mitigation measures under the Project will include the application of integrated pest 
management (IPM) practices and the application and promotion of pesticide management 
practices outlined in the guidelines of the International Code of Conduct on the 
Distribution and Use of Pesticides; risk management for transgenic crops through the 
national biosafety framework and international best practice; and the use of 
environmental impact assessments as appropriate for minor civil works.  
 
WAAPP-1C is a Category B Project. In other words, the environmental and social 
impacts of the Project, for the most part, are expected to be minimal, site specific, and 
manageable to an accepted level. The Bank safeguard policies applicable to the Project 
are: Environmental and Social Assessment (OP 4.01) Pest Management (OP 4.09), 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).  
 
The ESMF and the PMP for Benin, Togo, Niger, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone were 
prepared by CORAF and reviewed during a participatory stakeholder sub-regional 
workshop in Dakar in August 2010. Both the ESMF and the PMP were submitted to the 
Africa Safeguard Policy Enhancement (ASPEN), the regional Safeguard Unit, and 
cleared for disclosure regionally by CORAF and at Bank InfoShop on December 21, 
2010. Additionally, since The Gambia has been included to the Project at a later stage, 
these regional ESMF and PMP have been updated to include The Gambia, and have been 
reviewed and cleared by regional Safeguard Unit  and consequently disclosed both in the 
CORAF/WECARD regional website and at the World Bank InfoShop on January 20, 
2011.  
 
Page  5
OP 4.04 has been triggered only for Sierra Leone because activities in the research 
center of Rocpur are likely to affect mangrove areas. OP 4.12 has been triggered because 
the preparation mission identified the existence of land tenure issues between 
communities and Research Institute. An Abbreviated RAP was prepared for Togo, and an 
RPF was prepared for Benin, Guinea, Niger, Liberia, Sierra Leone and The Gambia.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The two regional safeguard documents (ESMF and PMP) are available and have been 
cleared by the Bank and disclosed publicly both in-country and at the InfoShop initially 
on November 30, 2010 and December 21, 2010 respectively. Then they have been 
updated to include The Gambia, and were re-disclosed both in the CORAF/WECARD 
regional website and at the World Bank InfoShop on January 20, 2011. The proposed 
Project (WAAPP-1C) is not only building on many years of experience in implementing 
Bank-funded agricultural and rural development in each of the participating countries, but 
also on lessons learned, both positive and negative, from implementation of WAAPP-1A 
and 1B. This provides the Project Teams and relevant actors in the participating countries 
a
good framework for smooth implementation of safeguards measures.  Nonetheless, the 
ESMF, PMP, A-RAP and RPF include further provisions for capacity strengthening at all 
levels for the successful implementation of the project safeguard measures, in compliance 
with national and Bank safeguard policies. These safeguard instruments are considered 
both as planning tools and means for a harmonious integration of the project in its bio-
physical and social environment and as a way to maximize positive effects on the same 
environment in the sub-region.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The stakeholders that were consulted in the preparation of the safeguard documents were 
CORAF and the various agricultural, environmental, social, health and few civil society 
agencies in the seven participating countries. The following direct beneficiaries and 
potentially affected peoples were also consulted: producers# organizations and 
agribusiness associations, both at the regional and national levels.  
 
A
participatory and well attended stakeholder workshop was organized by CORAF in 
Dakar (Senegal) in August 2010, involving relevant project stakeholder groups in public 
agencies in the seven countries involved, namely, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Niger, Togo, 
Benin, Guinea and The Gambia;  and representatives of national research institutes and 
extension services, professional organizations, farming organizations; civil society and 
Page  6
NGOs. This approach was utilized with the intention of presenting the results of the 
studies, fostering ownership and garnering input from these stakeholders in order to 
improve quality and soundness of the safeguards documents. Key issues discussed 
include: (i) identifying a community of practice in implementing the various safeguard 
measures across the countries involved in the Program; (ii) training of Social and 
Environmental Focal Points (SEFP); (iii) land tenure issues with communities adjacent to 
research stations; and (iv) the importance and mechanisms of social and environmental 
screening of each activity prior to implementation.  Recommendations from both ASPEN 
and stakeholders' workshop have been reflected in the final ESMF, PMP, A-RAP and 
RPF prior to public disclosure.  These recommendations and relevant provisions from the 
ESMF, PMP, A-RAP and RPF will be reflected in the Project Implementation Manuals 
(PIM) to be prepared by each participating country. To ensure good grasp of social and 
environmental safeguard policies implementation, the Project team has planned to 
organize comprehensive safeguard training jointly with ASPEN during the week of 
March 7-11, 2011. The workshop is primarily targeted at relevant stakeholder groups 
involved in project safeguard function, namely all Social and Environmental Focal points 
(SEFP) in each participating countries including two representatives of each National 
Environmental Protection Agencies (NEPA) including PIU Coordinators and all co-TTLs 
from WAAPP-1.A, 1B and 1C. This first-time safeguard clinic will take place in Dakar 
(Senegal) and is designed to foster complete understanding, on the part of participants, of 
the various steps involved in attending to project safeguard requirements, the role and 
responsibilities of each entity, as well as the modality of their intervention in the project. 
Such safeguard training will be repeated once a year and dissemination workshop at each 
country level undertaken to further ensure good understanding of social and 
environmental issues and how to implement all required safeguard measures outlined in 
project documents.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/01/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/01/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/08/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  7
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/01/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
Page  8
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdoulaye Toure 
01/28/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
01/28/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
01/28/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/01/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/28/2011 
Comments:   
