Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/03/2011 
Report No.:  AC5663
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P121611 
Project Name:  Financial Sector Development & Regionalization Project I (FSDRP I) 
Task Team Leader:  Michel Noel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 8, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: January 27, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTFE 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (50%);Regional integration 
(50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDO of FSDRP I is to establish the foundation for financial sector integration among 
EAC Partner States.  
 
Specifically, the foundation for financial sector integration among EAC Partner States 
will be built though: (i) financial inclusion and strengthening market participants; (ii) 
harmonization of financial laws and regulations against common standards ; (iii) mutual 
recognition of supervisors; (iv) integration of financial market infrastructure; (v) 
development of regional bond market; and (vi) capacity building.   
 
3. Project Description 
FSDRP I will be structured along six components. These are: (i) financial inclusion and 
strengthening market participants; (ii) harmonization of financial laws and regulations 
against common standards; (iii) mutual recognition of supervisors; (iv) integration of 
financial market infrastructures; (v) development of regional bond market; and (vi) 
capacity building.  
 
Component 1 # Financial Inclusion and Strengthening Market Participants  
Page  2
To leverage the establishment of a single market and the benefits of scale associated 
with regionalization to make a broader range of formal financial services/products 
available to a more diversified client profile, including those that are currently unserved.  
 
Component 2 # Harmonization of Financial Laws and Regulations  
 
To move towards legal and regulatory harmonization in banking and accounting, 
securities markets, insurance, pensions, investment funds critical to achieve an effective 
functioning of a single market in financial services via EAC Acts.  
 
Component 3 # Mutual Recognition of Supervisory Agencies  
 
To support establishment of a system in which a financial institution or market 
intermediary licensed by the supervisory authority in one Partner State will be allowed to 
operate in all Partner States upon simple notification to the supervisory authority of the 
host State.  
 
Component 4 # Integration of Financial Market Infrastructure  
 
To support establishment of an efficient market infrastructure, which is compatible at 
the regional level.  
 
Component 5 # Development of the Regional Bond Market  
 
To support the development of the government bond market in each Partner States, to 
ensure bond issuers in individual EAC Partner States having access to a deeper pool of 
liquidity in a single market.  
 
Component 6 # Capacity Building  
 
To provide capacity building support at the EAC Secretariat, and strengthen regulatory 
capacity at both the regional and the national level to ensure that the market functions 
effectively and that all economic agents in the regional area aware of and able to realize 
the benefits from the process of integration.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Burundi, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTOS) 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No impact anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No impact anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel Noel 
11/11/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
11/11/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
11/11/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michael J. Fuchs 
11/11/2010 
Comments:   
