Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/20/2011 
Report No.:  AC5217
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P108879 
Project Name:  Nyika Transfrontier Conservation Area project 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Michel G. Pavy 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 13, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: April 15, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (50%);Environmental policies and institutions (25%);Other 
financial and private sector development (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.82 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.85 
 
NORWAY: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
4.20 
 Foundation/s 
(identified) 
0.23 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
6.28 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The combined Project#s Development Objective (PDO) and Global Environmental 
Objective (GEO) of the Project is to establish more effective transfrontier management of 
biodiversity in the Nyika Transfrontier Conservation Area.   
 
3. Project Description 
This Project supports transboundary biodiversity conservation through planning, 
institution building, fundraising and capacity building for protected area management.  It 
is implemented with the following 3 components:  
 
Component 1: Institutional and Planning Framework  
 
Component 2: Sustainable Financing  
 
Component 3: Protected Areas Management  
 
Page  2
To implement these components within the Project area, see map 1, the Project will 
receive parallel cofinancing from the GEF, Norway Embassy in Malawi and Peace Park 
Foundation as well as the Government of Zambia (GoZ) and the Government of Malawi 
(GoM). All above financiers have agreed to comply with World Bank safeguard.  
 
Component 1: Institutional and Planning Framework  
 
(Total US$1.90m - GEF Zambia US$0.63m, GEF Malawi US$0.71m, Norway US$ 
0.30m, PPF $0.23m, GoM US$5,000)  
 
The objective of this component is to establish and operationalize the governance and 
planning functions for the Nyika Trans-Frontier Conservation Area (TFCA) by financing 
the design of TFCA-wide planning instruments and assisting with the establishment and 
capacity building of the implementation agencies.  
 
The component has two subcomponents:  (A) Project management & (B) Strategic 
planning.  The activities proposed under Subcomponent A include: (1) The procurement 
and financial management technical assistants as well as short technical assistance (TA) 
on planning, monitoring and evaluation to support teams of the implementation agencies, 
(2) the vehicles, office and field equipment of the implementation teams in both 
countries, (3) the capacity building for the implementation teams in both countries 
through hiring of trainers, training courses, planning and consultation workshops, and (4) 
the annual external audits of all funds.  The activities proposed under Subcomponent B 
include (1) the feasibility study of the Nyika Implementing Agency, (2) the 
transboundary integrated district planning for the Chama District in Zambia and the 
Rumphi District in Malawi, (3) the review and up-date of the Nyika TFCA Management 
and Tourism Plans, and (4) the diagnostic of national legal barriers for full TFCA 
operationalization.  
 
Component 2:  Sustainable Financing  
 
(Total US$0.27m - GEF Zambia US$0.10m, GEF Malawi US$0.17m)  
 
The objective of this component is to develop mechanisms for financial sustainability of 
TFCA management through the institutions responsible for the long term management 
and financing of the Nyika TFCA.  
 
The activities under component 2 include:  (1) a feasibility study for the Nyika 
Implementation Agency (NIA) including a business plan, fund raising strategy, and an 
investment strategy, (2) a broker tasked with advertising concessions to attract private 
investors for tourism, logging or hunting concessions, and (3) promotion material for 
fund raising, investment promotion, partnership seeking as well as events, trips, 
workshops, etc.  
 
Component 3: Protected Areas Management  
 
(Total US$8.93m - GEF Zambia US1.81m, GEF Malawi US$1.40m, Norway US$ 
3.88m, GoM US$ 1.37m, GoZ US$ 0.47m)  
 
The objective is to improve management effectiveness of the agglomerated three Nyika 
TFCA management #blocks#: the Nyika, the Vwaza and the Chama blocks.  As well as 
assure that the Project, by increasing the protection of the block does not generate 
poverty but rather provides alternative livelihoods to poachers and other illegal resource 
Page  3
usersThe management of the Nyika and Vwaza blocks will be done jointly by Zambia#s 
ZAWA and/or Malawi#s Department of National Parks and Wildlife (DNPW). The 
management of the third block, the proposed Chama Nature Park in Zambia, will be 
supported by a joint venture ZAWA/Zambian Forestry Department (ZFD)/NGO 
Partner/Community association.  The activities proposed in each block include: (1) 
Capacity building for planning, management and reporting, (2) infrastructure 
development and maintenance such as staff houses, offices, workshops, airstrips, water 
crossing structures, tracks, fences and firebreaks, (3) Habitat management and resource 
protection and monitoring including patrol operations, and (4) research and monitoring 
such as data collection, aerial surveys and research programs, (5)  implementation of an 
action plan to be designed on a case by case basis using the Process Framework to ensure 
that the Project provides livelihood alternative to poachers and other illegal users of 
resources, and (6) establishment of two tourism camps in Chama Nature Park as well as 
training and mentoring of its employees issued from the community including illegal 
users of resources.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Nyika TFCA is one of two Malawi-Zambia TFCAs.  It spans over a total area of 
19,280 km2 and consists of different types of interconnected protected areas under 
various management and conservation regimes.  However, not all the TFCA is included 
in this Project.  
 
Three Nyika TFCA ecosystem-management blocks have been identified for the Project: 
(i) Nyika block comprising of Malawi Nyika National Park, Zambia Nyika National Park 
and Zambia Mitenge Forest Reserve (over 4,500 km2), (ii) Vwaza block comprising of 
Malawi Vwaza Marsh Wildlife Reserve and transboundary Bambanda-Zaro Sanctuary 
(part of the Lundazi Forest Reserve (over 1,500 km2), and (iii) the proposed Zambia 
Chama Nature Park (part of the current Lundazi Forest Reserve) (about 1,000 km2).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This is a conservation operation that seeks to improve the status of biodiversity in the 
Nyika TFCA.  The Project is classified as category B as there will be site-specific 
investments such as small infrastructures (houses, gravel roads, culverts) that can affect 
locally the environment and wildlife as well as the local communities of the TFCA.  
 
The activities and investment funded by the project will have no large scale and no 
irreversible environmental or social impacts.  
 
OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is triggered but no significant adverse impact on 
the environment was identified for the type of project activities being considered. Rather, 
anticipated impacts will be positive. Small infrastructure investments and activities such 
as anti-poaching or support to conservation farming can affect locally the environment as 
well as the local communities.  The impacts of specific investments could not be 
identified during preparation but may materialize only during implementation.  As a 
consequence, the client prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) to detect and mitigate environment and social impacts when small infrastructures 
are designed.  
 
OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats is triggered as most of the TFCA is natural habitat such as 
miombos, mopane and Nyika grassland.  The Project aims to enhance its conservation but 
there is possibility that new tracks through sensitive areas locally increase the ecosystem 
disturbance.  A 3,000 hectare portion of the Lundazi National Forest will be degazetted 
prior to project start.  That land has been settled and little natural habitat remains. This 
will be largely compensated by the increased conservation status of another 100,000 
hectare of that national forest land.  
 
OP 4.36 on Forests is triggered since a concession for logging of a non-native pine 
forest is planned in the Nyika National Park as part of eradication of a species that has 
now become invasive.  
 
OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered as in most conservation projects, since 
there is an element of improved resource protection and law enforcement which will 
restrict access to wildlife from people who were using it before, albeit illegally. Also, in 
the Lundazi Forest Reserve on the Zambian side, the Project will facilitate the creation of 
a
new protected area of higher conservation status (Chama Nature Park).  The design 
process so far has been fully participatory. Still, this process may lead to increased 
limitation in access to natural resources and agricultural land from some of the 
community members even though they actually reside and farm outside the Project area.  
As a consequence, community engagement needs to follow a process that is in 
accordance with the Bank resettlement policy.  The client therefore prepared a Process 
Framework (PF), which indicates a process for identifying those protected area 
stakeholders who might lose access to natural resources and how they could become 
Page  5
eligible for support under the Project as Persons Affected by the project (PAPs).  Before 
the Project mobilizes its own financing to support a PAP, and in order to avoid 
duplication or to work at cross purpose, it will first verify whether another existing 
project is not already attempting to provide or providing an alternative livelihood for this 
particular PAP.  Because, a few families reside in the area currently proposed for Chama 
Nature Park, and even though there is no plan or budget to resettle these families under 
this Project, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was also prepared to ensure that 
that the Project is equipped with a set of rules and processes to handle resettlement issues 
should they become unavoidable.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Social and environmental impacts within the Nyika TFCA area are expected to be 
positive, providing for enhanced natural resource conservation, sustainable resource use 
and improved livelihoods of fringe communities.  
 
There is no envisioned long-term negative environment and social impact that could be 
generated by the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will be implemented by the Department of National Park and Wildlife 
(DNPW) in Malawi and jointly by the Zambia Forest Department (ZFD) and Zambia 
Wildlife Authority (ZAWA) in Zambia. For this project, the environmental and social 
safeguards issues will be addressed in the usual manner for World Bank-supported 
projects, not through the Use of Country Systems. Thus, OP 4.00 is not applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Both countries have adequate legislation and reasonable capacity to review EAs but not 
the full range of Bank safeguards. The preparation of the safeguard documents (ESMF, 
PF, RPF) has been outsourced to consultants under supervision of the the Peace Park 
Foundation (project preparation grant executing agency).  The Implementation agencies 
(DNPW, ZAWA, ZFD) will oversee compliance with these instruments in cooperation 
with the national and local stakeholders involved and the district authorities.  
 
The ESMF is a framework document which will be activated to detect and mitigate 
environment and social impacts in the development of the greater TFCA.  The Project 
will apply the guidelines contained in this framework to promote a participatory process 
of community involvement to support an accurate assessment of such impact before the 
project activities commence. The ESMF provides a management framework for how the 
Project will ensure compliance with defined national and World Bank safeguard policies 
to avoid undesirable project impact as well as a required process for monitoring the 
Page  6
effectiveness of these safeguards.  Note that the ESMF does not require detailed 
assessments, action plans, resettlement plans and procedures, but rather a framework 
within which such plans and procedures can be developed.  This ESMF therefore 
involves a methodology designed to identify potentially negative environment and social 
impacts, streamline appropriate steps that enhance environmental and social assessment 
and impacts mitigation through environment and/or social management plans.  To 
achieve this aim while also complying with WB safeguards, the ESMF proposes planning 
tools, administrative procedures and a consultation plan that are appropriate for a wide 
range of environmental and social management applications.  
 
Other ongoing projects that are not implemented within the Project boundary, but with 
communities that live outside of the Project area may find themselves complementary to 
the Nyika Project.  Because they operate outside the Project boundary and because they 
have been initiated before the Project, they are not compelled, and have not committed to 
comply with World Bank safeguards.  Two such projects need to be cited: the 
Community Market for Conservation (COMACO in Zambia) and the Kulera Biodiversity 
(in Malawi). They are mentioned because (1) they assist communities from which 
possibly originates community members who enter the Project areas to illegally collect 
natural resources and, who, as a result of the Project, may lose access to such resources 
and thus become a Person Affected by the Project (PAP).  Because such PAP reside 
outside the Project area where these two projects operate, it may be that one of them is 
already providing e such PAPs supports toward alternative livelihoods.  If and when, this 
is the case, the Project would assess whether or not the PAP requires livelihood support 
from the Project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/24/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/11/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/19/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/24/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/11/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/19/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  7
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  8
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Michel G. Pavy 
01/18/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
12/22/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
01/14/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef 
01/19/2011 
Comments:   
