Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/08/2011 
Report No.:  AC5987
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P119380 
Project Name:  Second APL (APL-B1) West Af. Reg. Fisheries Program (Guinea Bissau) 
Task Team Leader:  John Virdin 
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters 
Global Supplemental ID: P122182 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 24, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (50%);Environmental 
policies and institutions (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
2.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the West Africa Regional Fisheries Program (WARFP) is 
to sustainably increase the overall wealth generated by the exploitation of the marine 
fisheries resources of West Africa, and the proportion of that wealth captured by West 
African countries. The WARFP will achieve this objective by: (i) strengthening the 
countries'capacity to sustainably govern and manage their fisheries; (ii) reducing illegal 
fishing; and (iii) increasing the value and profitability generated by fish resources and the 
proportion of that value captured by the countries.  
 
The development objective of this WARFP investment in Guinea-Bissau (i.e. the 
project) is to strengthen the country's capacity to govern and manage targeted fisheries, 
reduce illegal fishing and increase local value added to fish products. The targeted 
fisheries for this first phase include, among others: coastal demersal fish species (e.g. 
croakers, groupers, snappers, etc.), coastal shrimp and cephalopods (e.g. octopus and 
cuttlefish).   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project will have four components:  
 
Component 1:  Good Governance and Sustainable Management of the Fisheries. This 
component aims to build the capacity of the Government and stakeholders to develop and 
implement policies through a shared approach that would ensure that the fish resources 
are used in a manner that is environmentally sustainable, socially equitable and 
economically profitable.  
 
Component 2: Reduction of Illegal Fishing. The component aims to reduce the illegal 
fishing activities threatening the sustainable management of the country's fish resources.  
 
Component 3: Increasing the Contribution of the Fish Resources to the Local Economy. 
The component aims to identify and implement measures to increase the benefits to 
Guinea-Bissau from the fish resources, by increasing the share of the value-added 
captured in the country.  
 
Component 4: Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation and Project Management. The 
component aims to support project implementation and regional coordination, ensuring 
that regular monitoring and evaluation is conducted, and the results are fed back into 
decision-making and project management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project targets marine fisheries, to introduce more effective management of 
what are essentially foreign fleets fishing in the country's waters. The project will include 
investments in soft activities such as technical assistance (Component 1), as well as some 
physical goods, works and services for fisheries surveillance (Component 2). The 
safeguard analysis therefore takes into account any potential environmental impacts that 
might occur as a result of small works to support increased fisheries surveillance 
(Component 2, e.g. small rehabilitation of existing coastal surveillance stations). These 
works will not lead to any land acquisition and involuntary resettlement and hence there 
is no anticipation of adverse social impacts. Instead this will enhance the social and 
economic dimensions of the project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN) 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Unlike many of the other countries participating in the West Africa Regional Fisheries 
Program, Guinea-Bissau does not have a tradition or culture of fishing. Artisanal fishing 
by citizens is at a relatively lower scale and will tend to benefit from the project's 
intervention. There will be no restrictions on the activities of local artisanal fishers. They 
will rather be assisted through the project to have better governance structures that will 
boost their activities in a sustainable manner. Many coastal communities engage in 
farming foremost, rather than fishing.  For this reason, the country has always employed 
a
strategy of essentially 'renting out' its fish resources, by selling access to the fisheries to 
foreign and/or industrial fleets in the form of licenses.  This is unlikely to change in the 
near to medium term, and the focus of this investment is on helping the Government 
better manage these largely foreign fisheries, reduce the high volume of illegal fishing 
that is occurring in these waters right now (again largely from foreign and/or industrial 
vessels).  Therefore, unlike in many of the other countries in the WARFP, the project is 
not expected to have significant adverse social impacts as it supports a transition to 
greater management over access to the resources. The majority of the project's activities 
will concentrate on fisheries resource management at the national scale, rather than 
specific interventions or access restrictions at the local or community scale.  
 
However, given the program#s long-term objective of strengthening management of the 
fish resources, the potential for involuntary restrictions on traditional access to the fish 
resources as a result of World Bank investments must be considered.  Throughout the 
region the marine fish resources are utilized through a system of open access that has 
allowed essentially more fishers and fishing pressure than the resources can sustain.  The 
program addresses this constraint by supporting governments like Guinea-Bissau to 
transition away from open access to more regulated fisheries, where access to specific 
areas or types of fisheries would be controlled or restricted. The Regional Process 
Framework, which has been developed, reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, has 
been provided to the Government of Guinea-Bissau for guidance on consultations and 
any potential for restriction of access and impacts on livelihoods.  
Page  4
The project will support small works and goods for strengthened surveillance of the 
fisheries, but these are expected to have relatively minor impacts on the environment, and 
are the subject of an Environmental Assessment and Environmental and Social 
Management Framework. These small works, such as rehabilitations to existing coastal 
surveillance stations, will not result in land take or involuntary resettlement, and will be 
determined during the course of implementation as the surveillance system of the 
Government is finalized.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term impacts could include the reduction of foreign fishers in targeted fisheries that 
are currently overexploited, as a result of increased resource management and 
surveillance. With the implementation of project activities, it is expected that there will 
be better management, ownership and value added to the fisheries industry for the benefit 
of local communities in the short- medium term and a long term overall positive impact 
for the country as a whole. Furthermore, participants in the project will acquire skills like 
community-based management, transparency and accountability skills that can be applied 
to other sectors to bring about other benefits from the project. In the long term, it is 
possible some fishers will lose their livelihood although this is not certain at this stage. 
The  Regional Process Framework will guide the Government in verifying and addressing 
this possibility and clear measures for mitigation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF), with appropriate budget and resources included in the project to ensure 
implementation of the Framework. The ESMF includes the biophysical and socio-
economic environment, legal, policy and institutional framework including the role of 
sub-national institutions. The ESMF identifies the impacts and outlines mitigation 
measures to address them. The Framework further discusses the capacity issues, 
monitoring and Evaluation, a timetable and a budget for implementation. In addition, it 
highlights  public consultations carried out as part of the preparation of the ESMF. The 
borrower, represented by the Fisheries Secretariat, has weak capacity on safeguards 
issues and associated World Bank procedures. Nonetheless, the Regional Coordinating 
Unit (RCU) for the project will be working with the country teams on the safeguards and 
with the support of reputable and knowledgeable consultants and civil society groups in 
country. In order to enable Government play its role of monitoring and evaluating the 
safeguards activities and do proper reviews, the in country team will be trained on the 
policies and their responsibilities on safeguards as is relevant to their total performance 
and ensuring safeguards compliance and achieving social benefits. The project also has a 
Regional Process Framework which has been disclosed.  
 
Page  5
The project does not trigger the OP 4.12, based on footnote 8 of the policy*, which 
indicates that the operational policy does not apply to regulations of natural resources on 
a
regional, national and/or sub-national level (such as watershed management, ground 
water management, fisheries management, coastal zone management, etc.) unless such 
activities or regulation involve Bank-assisted investments that require the taking of land, 
which is not the case with this project. (* Management informed the Executive Directors 
in April 2010 of a Clarification of OP 4.12, Footnote 8 regarding Application of Land 
Use Planning Projects (SecM2010-0199)). As part of due diligence, a number of 
measures have been put in place to ensure that the project focuses on activities agreed 
upon at project preparation stage, and does not involve land acquisition/involuntary 
resettlement. The project#s consultations indicate the communities# commitment to 
ensuring sustainability of the natural resources-fisheries. As good practice, the project 
will conduct a social assessment and include actions that will ensure that there are no 
negative impacts on vulnerable groups as a result of project activities but rather that such 
groups tend to benefit.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the project is the population of Guinea-Bissau, whose economy 
will benefit significantly as a result of the increased public revenues generated by more 
sustainably managed fisheries. Other specific stakeholders include the institutions at the 
national level involved in fisheries, the nationals who work in the fishing sector and civil 
society organizations among others. Some of the issues raised in the consultations are 
capacity to manage the resources and the new activities, fish preservation, transparency 
issues. Consultations on the draft ESMF took place in September 2010.  The Fisheries 
Secretariat will work together with stakeholder groups to ensure that compliance with 
safeguard issues are monitored and reported on as part of standard project reports 
throughout the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/27/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Virdin 
02/07/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Maman-Sani Issa 
02/07/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah 
02/07/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/08/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
02/08/2011 
Comments:   
