Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5799 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/11/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P124351 
Project Name: Power Transmission Line Upgrade Project 
Task Team Leader: Abdolreza B. Rezaian 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 8, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
30.00 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
10.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to increase transmission capacity and efficiency along the 
Kafue - Muzuma-Victoria Falls transmission line.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project activities will comprise:   (i) Replacement of the existing 341 km 220kv transmission 
conductor from Kafue-town through Muzuma and to Livingstone on the existing 330KV towers;  
 
(ii) Construction of a 5-km  330kv transmission line and associate towers  from Kafue town to 
Kafue West, construction of new high voltage substation at Kafue West , and reinforcement of 
the existing  high voltage substation at Kafue-town; (iii) Reinforcement of the high voltage 
substations at Muzuma, and construction of new high voltage substation at Livingstone ; (iv) 
Engineering consulting service and project management; (v) Environmental and social 
mitigation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  2
The project will be implemented in the Southern Region of Zambia, between Kafue West and 
Victoria Falls in Livingstone   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
ZESCO, the implementing agency for the project, has a well established Environmental and 
Social Management Unit which is decentralized to the various regions of the country. The 
Environmental Council of Zambia (ECZ) which is the agency mandated with the responsibility 
for ensuring compliance with environmental legislation in the country, is well capacitated for 
reviewing Environmental Briefs and EIAs for projects with smaller and larger negative impacts 
respectively. For all projects requiring an EIA, ECZ has established a review panel of 
professional experts which comprises Directors from the various sector Ministries.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is expected to have site - specific, limited, and mostly mitigated impacts on the 
environment. The client will prepare an EIA for the project. The EIA will provide environmental 
management plans for identified potential impacts. The EIA will be consulted upon and 
disclosed both in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop .   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project may have an impact on natural habitats. Impacts on Natural habitats will be 
determined during the preparation of the EIA for the project. To the extent possible, critical 
habitats will be avoided unless there are no feasible alternatives for the project and its siting, and 
comprehensive analysis demonstrates that overall benefits from the project substantially 
outweigh the environmental costs.  If the environmental assessment indicates that the project will 
significantly convert or degrade natural habitats, the project will include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The project is not likely to impact on forests as existing towers will be used for the upgrade 
of the voltage. The EIA will provide any additional information in this regard, including 
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The extent of chemical use during construction and maintenance stages of the project will be 
determined during the EIA preparation for the project. If deemed necessary, a Pest Management 
Plan will be prepared along with the EIA.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The EIA will determine if physical cultural resources are in the project area. A physical 
cultural resources management plan would be prepared for chance finds during construction 
phase.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
I
t
is not likely that the policy would be triggered as the upgrading of the transmission line 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
will use existing towers and the RoW.  However, management will review the situation on the 
ground and decide whether or not an RPF should be prepared before appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/28/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EIA will be prepared, disclosed, and consulted upon before appraisal .   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdolreza B. Rezaian 
01/11/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
01/11/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
01/11/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
