Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5445 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/26/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P122040 
Project Name: Southern Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project - Phase 1 
Task Team Leader: Emmanuel A. James 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 7, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (50%);Public administration- Transportation (20%);General 
industry and trade sector (20%);Railways (10%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (60%);Regional integration (40%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.10
0.10 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Southern Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation (SATTF) project is to 
support economic growth in southern Africa by facilitating the movement of goods and people 
and fostering regional integration among the countries served by the corridor.  The specific sub-
objectives of this Regional grant would be to (i) strengthen one of the key institutions charged 
with improving the operations of the Dar es Salaam corridor and (ii) support key elements of its 
work program including a diagnosis of the issues affecting railway freight transport in the 
corridor.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed SATTF project is conceived as a multi-country and multi-phase project intended to 
further facilitate trade integration in the region by addressing institutional, legal, policy and 
infrastructure constraints. Hence the SATTF project would support Bank and country goals for 
improved management of public and private resources through promoting a more efficient 
operation of road and rail transport, enhancing border crossing and sea-ports operations, 
supporting regional integration by increasing cooperation between the border crossing agencies, 
Page  2
as well as harmonizing procedures and enhancing transparency for all aspects of transit 
operations, including customs revenue collection.  
 
This phase of the project will be focused on institution building for management of the Dar 
corridor which must be accorded a high priority, given the issues related to the transport of goods 
for DRC, Zambia and Malawi, to and from Dar es Salaam port. The importance of the Dar 
corridor to the landlocked countries, the extensive long-distance transport operations, and the 
logistics and supply chain complexities caused the countries involved to legally establish the Dar 
Corridor Committee (DCC) as the entity for coordinating the design and implementation of 
improvement initiatives for corridor and border crossing operations and management, and in 
particular to deal with Non-Tariff Barriers (NTB) . An effective DCC will be essential to 
ensuring stakeholder involvement in the SATTF project as a whole.   The total cost of the project 
would be about US6.1M. The components will include:  
 
(i) 
Institutional arrangements for transit and transport Facilitation:  
 
Support the strengthening of the DCC as an institution that can better formulate and promote 
reforms to transit and transport operations along the corridor;  
 
Support specific components of the DCC work program for the Dar corridor;  
 
(ii) 
 Assess the optimal economic role for each railway in moving mining freight between 
Dar es Salaam port and the copper belt in Zambia and the DRC.  The development of an action 
plan (focusing on the policy and institutional aspects) for improving freight movements to and 
from the Copperbelt.  
 
The proposed project will build on the lessons learned from other technical assistance 
operations. For example, (i) tasks need to be tailored to support timely and specific steps of the 
institutional work program; (ii) strong champions need to be identified in the key agencies of 
each DCC country; (iii) coordination and information sharing needs to be emphasized 
continually with all stakeholders; and (iv) railway reform is particularly difficult and needs a 
long term involvement by all stakeholders.  
 
Key Risks and Issues  
 
The risks derive really from the tendency of stakeholders to assign higher priorities to local 
issues and benefits, sometimes at the expense of regional goals which could nonetheless have 
higher returns.  To some extent, DCC#s relative newness and small size may make it appear less 
threatening and hence more readily obtain the cooperation needed.  The railway agenda has so 
far proved intractable even for existing agencies, but the timing seems opportune for another 
attempt at improving performance.  
 
IMPLEMENTING AGENCY ASSESSMENT  
 
Page  3
DCC will be the implementing entity with overall fiduciary responsibility for project execution. 
DCC has very limited experience with previous Bank projects but has worked successfully with 
USAID procedures and can adapt to Bank requirements. The responsibilities of DCC will 
include (i) the management of the designated account; (ii) financial management, auditing, and 
reporting on the overall project; and (iii) preparation of quarterly financial and bi-annual 
progress reports.  
 
DCC meets the criteria for the Regional Grant. The key criteria are the: (i) Recipient is a bona 
fide regional organization that has the legal status and fiduciary capacity to receive grant funding 
and the legal authority to carry out the activities financed; (ii) activities are related to regional 
infrastructure development, institutional cooperation for economic integration, and coordinated 
interventions in regional public goods; and (iii) Regional entity is associated with an IDA funded 
regional operation involving some of the participating states.  
 
PROJECT STAKEHOLDER ASSESSMENT  
 
The project is not very complex but it does need cooperation from a variety of groups. On the 
other hand it may prove helpful that the DCC includes public and private agencies and is 
organized already to manage different interest groups and to serve as a liaison between the 
different countries and members.  
 
The DCC will have to pay special attention to coordinating the myriad interests of the different 
public institutions, and private actors involved. Also many private stakeholders, truckers, freight 
forwarders, clearing agents, private operators, etc. may have vested interests that need to be 
taken into account and managed throughout the process.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Tanzania, Zambia ( Dar Corridor)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is a Technical Assistance operation and is not expected to trigger any safeguards policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS) 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/15/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Emmanuel A. James 
01/18/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
01/19/2011 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
01/20/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
