                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/16/2011                                    Report No.: AC5982
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Africa                              Project ID: P094919
Project Name: WAPP: Inter-Zonal Transmission Hub Project (Phase 1, APL3)
Task Team Leader: Issa Diaw
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 27, 2011     Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTEG                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: Power (100%)
Theme: Regional integration (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             41.10
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            6.70
         FRANCE: French Agency for Development                        32.30
         EC: European Investment Bank                                 30.90
         Financing Gap                                                 0.00
                                                                      69.90
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The PDO is to reduce the cost of and improve the security of electricity supply to Burkina
Faso, increase Ghana#s electricity export capacity and increase the overall reliability and
stability of the WAPP zone A transmission network.

3. Project Description
- Component 1: Transmission Line between Bolgatanga, Ghana, and Ouagadougou,
Burkina Faso. This component will finance (i) the construction of 210 km of 225 kV
transmission line from Bolgatanga in the northern part of Ghana to the capital of Burkina
Faso (ii) the construction/extension of substations at Ouagadougou and Bolgatanga and
(iii) installation of telecommunication systems and Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) as well Energy Management Systems (EMS) and (iv)
implementation of Environmental Management and Resettlement Action Plan and
strengthening the management of the Kabore Tambi National Park.
 - Component 2: Reinforcement of transmission grid in Ghana. This component will fund
key non- funded reinforcements needed to strengthen the northern region network and to
increase capacity export to Burkina Faso from 20 to 100 MW and it will include the
provision of an additional 330/161kV transformer. The component will also finance the
feasibility, engineering and environmental studies of the 161kV Atebubu-Tamale line.

 - Component 3: Electrification of rural localities along the right of way in Burkina
Faso:Design and engineering studies as well as works to electrify 24 localities not more
than 6km from the right of way using the shieldwire of the 225kV transmission line.

 - Component 4: Supervision/Owner’s engineer: This component will finance an Owner’s
Engineer to supervise the procurement process and works in both Ghana and Burkina
Faso to ensure proper coordination between the two utilities.

 - Component 5: Capacity building and institutional support to GRIDCo and SONABEL
for project implementation: Training and technical assistance in: (i) HV Planning,
Hotwire; (ii) O&M of HV transmission systems; (iii) Development, operation and
maintenance of SCADA systems; (iv) commercial trading of electricity; and (v)
Telecommunications and HV network protection. It will also cover the acquisition of
equipments and operational expenses of the Project Implementation Units.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located in both Burkina Faso and Northern Ghana. The transmission line
connecting Burkina Faso and Ghana will connect the cities of Ouagadougou (Burkina
Faso) and Bolgatanga (Ghana) through the most direct routing optimized to minimize
social and environmental consequences.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
   Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)
   Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSS4)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The WAPP APL3 - Phase 1 project falls into environmental category B as no major
adverse long term impacts are anticipated. The World Bank policies for Involuntary
Resettlement (OP/BP4.12), Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.01) are triggered as
well. A number of potentially negative impacts have been identified in the ESIAs and
accordingly mitigation measures have been prepared in the Environmental and Social
Management Plans. They include potential resettlement and compensation of people
living in the RoW of the Transmission Line affecting 110 residential properties
(population 1,178) and 236 owners of trees and agricultural land in Burkina, and 87
residential properties (population 1166) and 89 owners of trees and agricultural land in
Ghana. The total number of people to be resettled in Ghana and Burkina Faso is 2344.
The Rural Electrification Component planned for Burkina Faso may have some minor
impacts on economically valuable trees, but because detailed designs are not yet available
it is not possible to estimate the resettlement impacts necessitating the preparation of an
Resettlement Policy Framework as an annex to the Resettlement Action Plan.
  Environmental impacts will include clearing of vegetation for route survey and
construction activities, noise, potential impacts on flora and fauna, public health risks, etc
etc. The transmission line will affect the Kabore Tambi National Park, which has the
status of a protected area managed for ecosystem protection and recreation. The
vegetation is mainly savanna strewn with some gallery forests in some areas. The
transmission line will follow mostly an existing road to minimize impacts. The ESMP
includes replanting an equivalent number/species of trees in denuded areas within the
Park boundaries to replace trees cut down to allow for the construction of the
transmission line. Furthermore and in accordance with OP4.04, the project includes
provision for additional resources to the park rangers to assist in the implementation of
the ESMP in the park.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
In general, the WAPP APL3 is expected to positively affect the beneficiary communities
and individuals in several ways, including a projected region-wide lowering of electricity
supply costs than would be achievable on an individual country basis, and an improved
reliability and security of supply leading to reduced overall vulnerability to drought-
induced power supply disruptions. The rehabilitations and installations of electricity
infrastructure will not only improve the way of life of the people in terms of having
improved access to less costly electricity, but will also serve as the basis for their social
and economic empowerment and reduction in poverty levels. Moreover, WAPP provides
tangible demonstration that regionally integrated infrastructure initiatives are powerful
drivers for more comprehensive socio-economic and political integration.

 The right of way of the project will require the permanent displacement of 110
households in Burkina Faso, and 87 households in Ghana. Social disruption will be
minimized through the provision of resettlement sites adjacent to original place residence,
provision of adequate compensation and resettlement assistance as part of a Resettlement
Action Plan. The project will also require the permanent removal of economically
productive trees, and encroachment on some culturally sensitive zones, which will be
offset through compensation, reforestation, and pacification rituals.

 When erected in place, the pylons may be considered imposing and in areas close to
settlements and at entry points into substations, they create visual intrusion. The
suspected health effects of electromagnetic fields have not been conclusively linked to
adverse health effects, but nonetheless, power lines and installations will be located at a
safe distance from residential premises.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
All viable alternative project designs have been explored by GridCo and SONABEL to
avoid or minimize the need for resettlement and in general to avoid environmentally and
socially sensitive sites including schools, clinics, other community properties, sacred
shrines and delicate habitats that may harbor rare and endangered species. Where this was
not possible, mitigating measures have been identified to minimize the significance and
likelihoods of the potential impacts. Impacts may be further limited, to the extent
practicable, during final route alignment. The current routing has already been selected to
avoid villages and other developed and sensitive areas and to run beside the existing
roads right-of-way as much as possible.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Management Plan (ESIAs and
ESMPs respectively) and Resettlement Instruments (RAPs for both Ghana and Burkina
and an RPF for the Rural Electrification Component in Burkina)have been developed to
address triggered safeguard issues.

  Specific mitigation measures planned for Kabore National Park in Burkina Faso include
  the replacement of trees cut down to allow for the construction of the transmission line.
The current intention in the ESMP is to replant an equivalent number of trees in denuded
areas within the Park boundaries. This would contribute to the ability of the Park to
sustain its existing fauna that is currently under pressure from the declining habitat due to
human activity within the Park. As regards the risks to bird life from contact with the HV
line, it is already envisaged in the ESMP that the cables in the Park section would be
equipped with bird deterrent devices to reduce the risk of strikes. Other physical devices
will be used on the pylons to prevent other animals to climb up to the level of the cables.
Additional support to the Park Management will help to improve access road planning
strengthen the surveillance, maintain surface water drainage, improvefire management
etc.

 The GridCo and SONABEL have adequate capacity to satisfactorily manage the
potential negative dimensions of transmission line projects and substations construction.
Standard environmental and resettlement management practices will suffice to minimize
any concerns during construction and operation.

 The ESIAs contain acceptable Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)
that describe the environmental management structure of the GridCo and SONABEL; the
qualifications and functions of the respective project environmental and social teams;
general health, safety, pollution prevention, and waste disposal procedures; and training
program for project management and contractor personnel. The ESMPs specifies
mitigation measures for various potential adverse impacts in the pre-construction,
construction and operation phases of the project. Funds for implementing the ESMPs are
also included in the project cost estimates.

 In addition Resettlement Instruments (RAPs and RPF) have been developed to mitigate
the potential negative impacts for the people living in the RoW of the TL. These include
compensation and resettlement assistance measures, as well as provisions for consultation
and grievance redress. Both SONABEL and GRIDCo have specialist who have
experience in successfully implementing Resettlement Action Plans.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
To ensure an adequate flow of information on projects, public consultation has been
made an integral part of the ESIA. This includes consultations during the preparation of
the safeguard instruments (ESIA, ESMP reports). Also as part of the RAP, community
consultations were held.

  All the relevant bodies have been adequately informed of the Project and on the process
leading from census to construction. Concerns of the communities and some details of
consultations have been provided as Appendix of the ESIAs and RAPs. These landowner
users, as well other stakeholders such as District Assemblies, other Government agencies
and NGOs, were also consulted during the ESIA and RAP studies. They will be consulted
again when the final alignment is set and other preparations. Local concerns were
generally about the loss of crops and land use, sacred groves/shrines and failed payment
of compensation by for past developments in the area. These concerns have been
addressed through the inclusion of a comprehensive set of compensation and resettlement
assistance measures as well as robust grievance redress mechanism.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/25/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/07/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/14/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/25/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/07/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/25/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Issa Diaw                                 05/10/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba                    05/10/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Paula F. Lytle                            05/10/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Martin Henry Lenihan                      05/10/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     05/10/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer                       05/10/2011
  Comments:
