Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/28/2011 
Report No.:  AC5864
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P113167 
Project Name:  Enhancing Institutional Capacities on REDD issues for Sustainable Forest 
Management in the Congo Basin 
Task Team Leader:  Carole Megevand 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (40%);Biodiversity (40%);Environmental policies and 
institutions (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
13.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00
3.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacities of the Congo Basin 
countries on REDD+ issues and on forest carbon stock measurements.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Improving Knowledge and Coordination on REDD + in the Congo Basin.  
 
While the six Congo Basin countries are advancing on their REDD Readiness process at 
the national level, many capacity building and training needs are common across the 
different countries, and significant economies of scale and value-added can be achieved 
through enhanced information exchange and sharing of country experiences. The 
Component will:  
 
(i) 
Strengthen regional dialogue and coordination functions for REDD+ across the 
Congo Basin countries with a specific focus on learning and exchange at the political and 
technical levels, as well as between policy makers and technical experts. At the policy 
Page  2
level, the Climate Working Group will receive facilitation and capacity building support 
and cross-sectoral policy dialogue will be advanced through the engagement with 
CEEAC (i.e. the regional economic union). Further, South-South cooperation will be 
supported between the Congo basin countries and other mayor tropical forest regions 
(Amazonia and Southeast Asia).  
 
(ii) 
Promote inclusive participation and representation of stakeholder groups in policy 
and strategy discussions at the regional level, focusing on support to CEFDHAC 
networks, specifically REPALEAC, a network for indigenous people, as well as REPAR, 
a
network of Central African parliamentarians. Support will particularly strengthen the 
connection between the national representative networks and local populations, 
complementing support to the regional level networks that is provided by other technical 
partners. Key topics identified by the two networks in the context of REDD+ are land 
tenure reform, customary rights, and benefits sharing mechanisms for forest/carbon 
revenues.  
 
(iii) 
Respond to incremental capacity building needs at the national REDD 
coordination to maintain regional cohesion. While some needs are common to all six 
countries and can be covered at the regional level, there are others that are country-
specific but that also deserve to be responded to in order to maintain regional cohesion. 
Consequently, moderate envelopes will be provided to national REDD coordination 
teams to support country-specific activities that complement supports provided from 
FCPF, UNREDD, and other donors. GEF financing will provide strategic input to enable 
countries to fully engage and contribute to regional processes.  
 
Component 2: Building Technical Capacities for measurement and monitoring of carbon 
stocks in the Congo Basin forests.  
 
This component will build technical capacities to help countries in the longer process of 
establishing systems to measure and monitor forest carbon stocks in line with the 
transparency, comparability, completeness, and accuracy principles expected by the 
IPCC. More specifically, this component will address the current constraint of the 
uncertainties of current carbon stock estimates in the Congo Basin with the elaboration of 
allometric equations that are specific to the Congo Basin forests. This will be an 
important building block for the overall MRV systems that are established in parallel for 
the Congo Basin countries under a regional approach by the FAO with financing of the 
CBFF. For this purpose, this component will:  
 
(i) 
Set up a scientific partnership for forest carbon measurement and monitoring, to 
support coordination of the numerous related activities in the Congo Basin and thus 
maximize impact for the countries. Regional scientific knowledge exchange through a 
network of international experts and national research institutions will also support the 
creation of pool of national experts on carbon measurements.  
 
(ii) 
Elaborate allometric equations for the key forest types of the Congo Basin, to 
address the current challenge of reliable and accurate data availability for forest carbon 
stock estimates in the Congo Basin and to lay the foundations for a MRV system 
necessary for a future result-based financial incentive system for REDD+. Activities 
supported by the Project will include (a) the definition of a methodology in compliance 
with IPCC guidelines, including a sampling strategy to guide fieldwork to be carried out 
Page  3
in the six countries, (b) the data collection in the six countries, based on sampling 
strategy spelt out in the proposed methodology and (c) the data analysis and the 
elaboration of a publically accessible database of carbon measurements. These activities 
will all be carried out in close collaboration with national research institutions and forest 
management agencies and will include an important component of capacity building and 
knowledge transfer.  
 
Component 3: Mainstreaming REDD + concept in SFM projects.  
 
This component will support REDD+ project developers with targeted capacity building 
and information exchange. Compiling experience from pilot projects on the ground will 
further inform the development of National REDD Strategies and build a dialogue and 
process of learning between practitioners in the field and policy makers at the national 
strategy level. This Component will:  
 
(i) 
Set up an Incubator to promote REDD+ pilot projects in the Congo Basin. Aside 
from practical guidance on market opportunities and project development, support will 
place special emphasis on social and environmental standards and their application in 
pilot projects. Building on the inventory of sub-national REDD+ pilot initiatives set up 
during the preparation phase, the Project will strengthen a network of practitioners to 
support knowledge exchange and learning. Further, Governments are looking towards 
learning from experiences made under REDD+ pilot projects to inform their national-
level REDD strategies: the Incubator will also facilitate the two-way communication 
between policy-makers and private REDD practitioners.  
 
(ii) 
Define methodologies to promote REDD+ in the Congo Basin. The Project will 
support targeted analytical works to further investigate critical issues related to REDD, 
with a specific attention to social and environmental dimensions of REDD. Priority 
analytical works for the first year of implementation have been identified, one of them 
being the Regional Environmental and Social Assessment of REDD (RESA). The RESA 
will provide a broad regional assessment of the existing environmental and social 
challenges related to REDD implementation in the Congo Basin (including issues related 
to benefit-sharing mechanisms, land tenure and carbon right aspects). The RESA will 
serve two main purposes: Primarily, it will serve as a risk mitigation instrument for 
activities that will be implemented under the Regional REDD Project. Secondly, it will 
serve to develop technical guidelines that guide countries with the safeguards process for 
REDD readiness at the national level. Such technical guidance will support countries 
with the preparation of their national-level SESAs. Additionally the RESA, to be 
launched at the very beginning of the project implementation, will serve as the Safeguard 
instrument for the Project. Given the highly dynamic REDD+ policy context, further 
analytical works will be identified as part of work plan development on an annual basis. 
Based on the findings of analytical work, technical guidelines will be established that 
provide guidance to project developers.  
 
Component 4: Project Management.  
 
This component will support costs of project management that are incremental to the 
operational cost of COMIFAC#s Executive Secretariat. GEF financing will mainly 
finance salaries of the staff of the Project Management Unit (PMU), attached to 
Page  4
COMIFAC Executive Secretariat with offices based in Yaoundé, Cameroon, The PMU 
will be composed of a Project Manager, a Financial Management Specialist and a 
Procurement Specialist, needed to ensure fiduciary standards and accountability as well 
as the program manager. GEF will further contribute to cost related to other support staff, 
facilities, operating cost and travel. COMIFAC will contribute to all of the latter costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This Project does not entail specific investment activities on the ground. It is instead 
focused on providing technical assistance to the Central African Forest Commission 
(COMIFAC) and governments of the six highly forested Congo Basin countries. On the 
ground activities are limited to data collection for the elaboration forest carbon stocks. 
These activities will be carried out throughout the geographic area of the six countries 
hosting the tropical forest ecosystems of the Congo Basin (i.e. Cameroon, CAR, DRC, 
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and Republic of Congo). Though not yet completed defined, it 
is likely that the research activities conducted under the Component 3 will cover different 
forest ecosystems in different geo-climatic areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr Mohammed A. Bekhechi (LEGEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is a Technical Assistance project aiming at fostering regional coordination on 
REDD across the Congo Basin. It will finance activities that strengthen capacity, improve 
regional institutional processes, generate and diffuse knowledge, and support regional 
learning processes.  
 
The Project will not finance any concrete investment activities on the ground and is thus 
not expected to have any direct environmental and social impact on the ground. However, 
Page  5
it is considered that the Project might have indirect impacts in the sense that the findings 
from analytical work carried out under the Project may influence the design of the 
national REDD+ strategies in the six Congo basin countries (i.e. second generation 
activities).  
 
In line with the above, it has been decided that the OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental 
Assessment be triggered, to ensure that the potential environmental and social adverse 
impacts caused by second-generation activities are adequately prevented and/or 
mitigated. Due to the Technical Assistance nature of the Project, other safeguard policies, 
i.e. OB/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples, OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, OB/BP 4.36 
Forests, and OB/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats, have not been triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As the Project will be Technical Assistance delivering support for regional coordination, 
capacity building, and applied research activities, it will not include any concrete 
investment activities to be implemented on the ground. As such, the project will only 
have indirect environmental or social impact described above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Project initially had a focus on research activities related to the drivers of 
deforestation. However, a multitude of parallel analytical work is already being carried 
out in the region. Consequently, during project preparation more emphasis was placed on 
analytical work that aims to better understand social dimension of REDD+ and ultimately 
provide guidance on improved participation and representation of local stakeholders in 
policy debates and recommendations for benefit sharing mechanisms for future REDD+ 
implementation. For example, the project will invest in analytical work (under 
Component 3b) on land tenure and carbon property rights that will provide guidance for 
participatory land mapping and categorization of land user rights at the various levels.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Considering the type of financing instrument (i.e. Technical Assistance) as well as the 
regional nature of the Project, a Regional Environmental and Social Assessment of 
REDD (RESA) was identified as the appropriate safeguards# instrument for the Regional 
REDD Project. While all the six Congo Basin countries are members of the Forest 
Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) and thus committed to conduct a Strategic 
Environmental and Social Assessment as part of the their Readiness Process, the 
proposed RESA will not duplicate aspects that are anticipated to be covered by the 
national-level SESAs (including diagnostic work) but will rather focus on environmental 
and social issues of regional relevance, i.e. issues that:  
 
-
result from macro-level effects in the region or globally and have impact beyond the 
national (e.g. commodity price variations with impact on regional markets),  
 
-
relate to trans-boundary issues (i.e. trans-boundary migration, leakage of timber and/or 
wildlife trade),  
Page  6
-
result from cumulative impact (i.e. impact that is minor at a local or national scale, but 
significant at the regional scale (i.e. scattered small-scale slash-and-burn agriculture), or  
 
-
relate to issues that are common to all six Congo Basin countries (i.e. land-tenure 
aspects, lack of benefit sharing arrangements for forest carbon revenue, etc) for which 
guidelines could be sought at the regional. Consultations in all six countries would 
support the process of identifying such regionally relevant environmental and social 
issues.  
 
Generally, the RESA will serve two main purposes.  
 
a) 
The RESA will serve as a risk mitigation instrument for activities to be 
implemented under the Regional REDD Project: More specifically, a framework (or 
checklist) will be compiled, that lists prioritized environmental and social considerations 
that are relevant at the regional level, according to the above-mentioned criteria. The 
checklist will be defined based on findings and feedback from regional consultations to 
be carried out during the first year of project implementation.  
 
The Checklist will be used by the Project Management Unit as a guiding tool when it 
develops the semi-annual work plans and by the Project Steering Committee to review 
these work plans. All planned project activities will be screened against this checklist. 
The screening process will ensure that all project activities adequately take into 
consideration environmental and social considerations and thus comply with the World 
Bank Safeguards Policies. If necessary, the scope of planned activities would be adjusted 
to ensure this compliance.  
 
In practice, the checklist will also guide the identification of project activities (training, 
analytical work, guidelines) to be carried out during Year 3-5: the details for consultation 
and capacity building (as per Component 1a and b), as well as analytical work and 
technical guidelines (as per Component 3b) have purposefully not yet been fully defined.  
 
b) 
The RESA will further serve to identify and develop  a set of technical guidelines 
to address social and environmental issues that have regional relevance or commonalities 
across the different countries: The purpose of such technical guidelines would be to help 
Congo Basin countries to address environmental and social issues as part of their 
respective national SESA process and identify approaches to implement REDD in a 
socially and environmentally-sound manner. The technical guidelines are anticipated to 
cover issues that that are common to all six Congo Basin countries (i.e. land-tenure 
aspects, lack of benefit sharing arrangements for forest carbon revenue, etc).  
 
Developing such technical guidelines on environmental and social considerations of 
regional relevance will not only generate economies of scale, but more importantly, will 
accelerate the SESA process in those countries where the REDD readiness process is less 
advanced. It will further enhance mutual learning among the countries and help with 
harmonization of countries# approaches to address, mitigate and prevent negative social 
and environmental issues. The type of technical guidelines to be developed will be 
Page  7
determined based on prioritization of environmental and social considerations resulting 
from stakeholder consultations that will be carried out during the first year of the Project.  
 
Different time-tracks and resulting multi-directional feedback mechanisms: Depending 
on the progress with REDD readiness activities in each of the six Congo Basin countries, 
the RESA will either precede the SESA (anticipated scenario for Gabon, Equatorial 
Guinea), be carried out in parallel with the SESA (anticipated scenario for Cameroon, 
Republic of Congo, Central African Republic), or be carried out slightly subsequent to 
the SESA (anticipated scenario for DRC).  Taking into account the different time track of 
REDD readiness in each of the countries, the feedback process between the RESA and 
the various national-level SESAs will be multidirectional. For example, the consultation 
and prioritization process on environmental and social considerations for REDD is 
expected to advance substantially in DRC through during 2011-2012 and will thus 
provide input into the RESA. However, with view to the other Congo Basin countries, 
such country to region input is not anticipated. Instead the technical guidelines developed 
within the framework of the RESA (i.e. as per second objective), will serve to guide 
countries with their national-level SESA process and their identification of planned 
mitigation actions.  
 
National capacity for monitoring safeguard application varies across the countries. 
Cameroon and Gabon have had a longer term engagement with the World Bank in the 
forest sector and as a result have capacity within the Government to address safeguard 
policy issues. However, capacities related to safeguard implementation and monitoring 
remains low in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Republic of Congo, the Central 
African Republic, and Equatorial Guinea.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Project design incorporates extensive consultation activities and associated capacity 
building for key local level stakeholders with the objective to enhance their participation 
in the regional dialogue on REDD+. Under Component 1 b), the Project will facilitate 
enhanced inclusion and representation of civil society in the regional dialogue on 
REDD+: specific attention will be given to the representation of the Indigenous Peoples, 
as the project will support the Regional Network of Local and Indigenous Populations for 
the Sustainable Management of Forest Ecosystems in Central Africa (REPALEAC).  
 
In line with safeguard policies for Technical Assistance, detailed Terms of Reference 
for the RESA will be publically disclosed prior to appraisal of the Project. The RESA 
itself will be carried out at the initiation of the project implementation and disclosed 
publically once it has been completed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  8
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/18/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is a Technical Assistance Project. As such, detailed Terms of Reference for a 
Regional Environmental and Social Assessment (RESA) at the regional level are 
prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal of the project; however, the actual Regional 
Environmental and Social Assessment will be carried out as part of project 
implementation.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  9
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Carole Megevand 
02/28/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammed A. Bekhechi 
02/28/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
02/28/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/28/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
02/28/2011 
Comments:   
