Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5742 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/27/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P116542 
Project Name: AFR:Central African Backbone - APL1B 
Task Team Leader: Jerome Bezzina 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 16, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2011 
Managing Unit: TWICT 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (34%);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (33%);Regional integration (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
8.00
8.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project (APL 1B) is the same as the PDO for the 
APL1A: To contribute to increase geographical reach and usage of regional broadband network 
services and reduce their prices.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
As detailed in the Core CAB Program PAD, APL1 (APL1A and APL1B) will leverage the 
existing fiber-optic network laid along the Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline to form the core CAB 
network and support the deployment of the Regional network.  
 
The APL1B is aiming at financing activities to effectively establish the CAB networks in 
Cameroon, CAR and Chad to set-up the core regional broadband network linking Central 
African countries.  
 
The project will have two components:  
Page  2
Component 1: Connectivity. This component will support the deployment of interconnected 
networks to form a Regional network. It will include the following activities: broadband 
equipments to complement equipment financed by the private sector (i.e. fibre-optic cables, 
terminal equipments and switches), the lease of existing infrastructure (i.e. capacity bought on 
existing infrastructure or dark fibres to complete the Regional network), additional technical 
assistance or support for an effective management and monitoring of CAB networks.  
 
Component 2: Project Management. This component will finance management related issues at 
the Project level.  This component will help to strengthen the existing PIUs established at 
national level.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The APL1B is aiming at financing activities to effectively establish the CAB networks in 
Cameroon, CAR and Chad to set-up the core regional broadband network linking Central 
African countries.  
 
Exact location of the network is going to be known before the end of March 2011.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Program will have many positive social impacts, as indicated in other parts of this 
document. The only potential negative impact relates to land acquisition for the construction of 
telecommunications and ancillary infrastructure which could prompt the need for involuntary 
resettlement of the affected populations. However, this potential impact is considered unlikely, 
given that the proposed telecommunications facilities (mainly buried fiber-optic backbone) will 
be constructed alongside existing national road infrastructure. 
 
If land acquisition is necessary, a Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared. All resettlement 
compensation will be provided by the Government. This arrangement will be included in the 
financing agreement as a Disbursement condition relating to the financing of the Connectivity 
infrastructure of the CAB Program. Also the mechanisms to follow the supply and installation of 
the CAB networks (e.g. supervision engineer) will be included in the bidding documents for the 
CAB networks. 
 
In the APL1B, the project will only finance fiber-optic cables and terminal equipments laid next 
to main national roads (no rural networks and landing stations will be financed by APL1B). 
Therefore we expect limited negative social impact. 
 
Taking account the specificity of each country (Chad, Cameroon and CAR), a RPF for APL1 
has been prepared in compliance with the policies and principles of the World Bank under 
APL1A. The RPF has been consulted upon, reviewed and approved by the Bank, and has been 
publicly disclosed prior to appraisal in all countries participating in the first phase of CAB. It is 
also available at the InfoShop.  
 
Specific coasted Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary for the 
terrestrial facilities during project implementation, in line with the RPF, once the exact locations 
of those facilities have been identified. However we expect low or no resettlement activities. 
Therefore the reliance on national capacity is therefore not needed. However, the project has 
Page  3
planned to include an environmental expert in the national CAB committees and will provide 
training on the related issues to all sector stakeholders.  
 
IDA will not finance Resettlements expenses under CAB APL1 (in CAB APL 1B, IDA will 
finance CAB infrastructure and counterpart financing, including by the participating government, 
will be mobilized to cover resettlement expenses).  
 
Capacity building on safeguards issues will be provided to the Project Coordination Unit to 
implement the ESMF, ESIAs/ESMPs, RPF and RAPs.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will entail placement of buried fiber-optic cables along the sides of roads and 
other Rights-of-Way. Environmental impacts are expected to be moderate and will be mitigated 
by clean-up after the cables are buried. An ESMF will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed 
before appraisal. Environmental Management Plans will be prepared as necessary.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
To be determined at the time of appraisal.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
To be determined at the time of appraisal. The ESMF and bidding documents will include a 
"chance finds" procedure.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
To be determined at the time of appraisal. If necessary, an Indigenous Peoples# Planning 
Framework in Cameroon and/or Central African Republic.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As the project may involve land acquisition and/or restrictions of access to resources and/or 
livelihoods, an RPF is being prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal. RAPs will 
be prepared as necessary.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
To be determined at appraisal. The policy may have to be triggered because cable 
infrastructure is being laid along Lake Chad.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
04/28/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF and RPF will be disclosed in each country as well as in The World Bank's 
Infoshop before Appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jerome Bezzina 
04/27/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/27/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
04/27/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
