Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5916 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/19/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P122402 
Project Name: West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Project - APL-1B 
Task Team Leader: Boutheina Guermazi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2011 
Managing Unit: TWICT 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (50%);General information and communications sector 
(50%) 
Theme: Regional integration (40%);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(40%);Regulation and competition policy (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The program development objective for WARCIP 1-B is to contribute to increasing the 
geographical reach of broadband networks and reducing costs of communications services in The 
Gambia, Guinea and in Burkina Faso.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1- Supporting Connectivity: The connectivity component will focus on (i) support to 
provide access to The Gambia and Guinea to the Africa Coast to Europe (ACE) submarine cable 
and (ii) supporting Burkina Faso with limited/ indirect access to international connectivity to 
have alternative access to improve terms of access to capacity and lower cost. In addition to 
international connectivity, this component will include financing additional links to national 
infrastructure and landing points, purchase of capacity on fiber-based transmission networks, 
including electricity, to connect rural and underserved areas, as well as targeted users (eg. 
schools, universities, hospitals, and other priority groups) with discounted capacity prices and the 
establishment of national and regional Internet Exchange Points (IXPs).  
 
Page  2
Component 2 - Creating an enabling environment for connectivity: This component will focus 
on (i) the transaction design and operating model for ownership and management of 
international, regional and national infrastructure, (ii) related open access principles to create an 
enabling environment for improved connectivity  and (iii) strengthening of policymaking and 
regulatory functions in the three countries.  
 
Component 3:  Project Implementation: This activity will provide support needed to strengthen 
the capacity of the Governments to implement the connectivity project, including setting up very 
small Project Implementation Units (PIUs) which will be mainstreamed into the respective 
Executing Agencies. The core PIUs consist of a project coordinator, procurement specialist, 
finance specialist, accountant and an office assistant. Technical specialists may also be hired if 
required for implementation of the project. The component will also cover office equipment, 
incremental operating costs, audits and communications.  The component will also cover M&E, 
environmental and social studies, their implementation and/or the monitoring of their 
implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Burkina Faso, The Gambia, and Guinea.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The institutional responsibilities for preparing the various safeguards instruments would lie with 
the implementing agency of each participating country. The agency responsible for 
implementation is the respective Ministries of Communications and ICT [to be confirmed].  The 
respective Ministries have some limited capacity for safeguards. However, given that a lot more 
will be required for ensuring compliance from safeguards instrument preparation and reviews to 
implementation, there will be the need for capacity building. Any specific required action for 
some of the Civil Works will be taken into account during project implementation. Institutional 
responsibilities for preparing the safeguard assessment strategy will be defined closely with the 
Safeguards Team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP) 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson (AFTEN) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Assessment needed to  (i) provide qualitative and quantitative analysis  of project impacts,(ii) 
determination of tangible measures to prevent, minimize, mitigate or compensate for these 
adverse impacts, (iii) identification of mitigation, monitoring and institutional measures to be 
taken during design, implementation, operation of maintenance phases of the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Need to identify impacts
on biodiversity and species and to determine endemism, endangered 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
species and to determine project impacts on these species and to propose acceptable mitigation 
and monitoring measures.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Disturbance and or destruction of PCR in places of worship, buried artifacts, cemeteries and 
archeological assets or other places as defined by the policy by the projects activities is not 
likely. Desk studies and site inspection will define whether this policy will be triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy s triggered because building of the landing stations and the regional networks 
could result in involuntary taking of land resulting in (i) relocation or loss of shelter, (ii) loss of 
assets or access to assets or (iii) loss of income sources or livelihoods. Where the sites for any of 
the activities that may lead to involuntary resettlement are known (Gambia and Guinea) 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated RAPs (ARAPs) will be prepared through 
consultative process, cleared and disclosed prior to appraisal. Where, the sites are not known 
until during implementation (Burkina Faso) , Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs) will be 
prepared through consultation, cleared and disclosed prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
04/28/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
For The Gambia and Guinea where the landing site is already known and process for 
acquisition is being finalized, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and/or 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be prepared before appraisal . In 
addition, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) (if project affected persons (PAPs) are two 
hundred -200 or more) or  Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) where the PAPs 
are less than two hundred will be prepared in response to the OP 4.12 which has been 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
triggered. These documents will be prepared through consultations and will be reviewed and 
cleared by the World Bank before being disclosed in each country prior to appraisal.  
 
In the case of Burkina Faso, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the regional connectivity component will be 
prepared prior to Project appraisal. These documents will be reviewed and cleared by the 
World Bank and publicly disclosed.  
 
Once the final sites are chosen in Burkina Faso and the specific civil works identified, an 
Environmental and Social Assessment including an ESMP, and a RAP or ARAP- whichever 
will be appropriate will also be prepared.  
 
While possible impacts on critical habitats and/or physical cultural resources are not known 
at the sites in The Gambia and Guinea, these will be assessed before appraisal as the ESIAs 
and/or ESMPs are prepared. As the site for Burkina Faso is not known at this time, potential 
environmental impacts on critical habitats, physical cultural resources, forests, etc. will be 
addressed in the ESMF.  
 
Finally, since the Program will involve PPP schemes, appropriate  technical clauses will be 
prepared and included in the biddings/binding documents for the Private Entity when 
necessary, to ensure the execution  of agreed environmental and social safeguards measures  
and implementation of the recommendations in the instruments.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Boutheina Guermazi 
04/18/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/19/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
04/18/2011 
Comments:   
