Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/15/2011 
Report No.:  AC6235
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P079736 
Original Project Name: CEMAC - 
Transport-Transit Facilitation 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P125915 
Project Name:  Africa:  CEMAC Transport and Transit Facil - Second Add'l Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (85%);Central government administration (15%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (60%);Regional integration (40%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
112.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to facilitate regional trade among the CEMAC 
member states and improve the Central African Republic, the Republic of Cameroon's 
and the Republic of Chad's access to world markets.   
 
3. Project Description 
General initial project and program description  
 
The CEMAC Transport and Transit Facilitation Project is financed by five IDA credits 
and grants, totaling US$418 million (approved in 2007 and 2009). This comprehensive 
program tackles most of the transit facilitation dimensions along the two targeted 
corridors: road rehabilitation, railway modernization, customs reform, transport 
regulation, support to the Douala single window and - though to a more modest scale, 
port modernization. A key project's objective is to reduce the dwell time in the Douala 
port (around 20 days) and the transit time from Douala to N'Djamena (15 days) and from 
Douala to Bangui (10 days). In addition to the IDA support, this program is also 
supported by the AfDB and the European Union.  
Page  2
The original project and its first additional financing have three components to be 
implemented in Cameroon, CAR and Chad:  
 
(i) 
First component: Roads and Railway Infrastructure Improvement. Activities 
include: (a) periodic maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading works on selected road 
section along the corridors; (b) paving of existing gravel road sections; (c) harmonization 
and enforcement of axle load control policies; (d) construction and improvement of rest 
areas; (e) rehabilitation of critical rail infrastructure; and (f) implementation of HIV-
AIDS awareness and mitigation measures. This component finances in particular the 
rehabilitation of the following road se
ctions: in Cameroon: Mbéré - Ngaoundéré (86 km), 
Ngaoundéré - Garoua (275 km) and Dabanga - Kousseri (78 km); in Chad: Bongor - Eré - 
Kelo (131 km); in CAR: Fambélé - Baboua (34 km), Fambélé - Bouar (33 km) and 
Bossembélé - Yaloké (10 km). It also finances the rehabilitation of 175 km of railway 
tracks in Cameroon (Batchenga - Ka'a).  
 
(ii) 
Second component: Transit and Transport Facilitation Investments. Activities 
include: (a) communication between stakeholders, especially within the port community, 
including Information and Communication Technology (ICT) interfacing; (b) transit 
regime and border crossing improvements through cargo tracking, border posts 
constructions and improvement; (c) port safety and security strengthening; and (d) 
improvement in intermodal interfaces. This component finances in particular the 
improvement of multimodal platforms in Ngaoundéré and Douala (Cameroon) and the 
construction of a bus station in Bouar (CAR).  
 
(iii) 
Third component: Customs and Transport Sector Institutional Strengthening and 
Capacity Building. Activities include: (a) CEMAC Customs Union and national customs 
strengthening; (b) institutional support for transport facilitation institutions; and (c) 
coordination and management of the project's activities. This component finances in 
particular the improvement of local customs' offices in Garoua Boulai - Touboro and 
Kousseri (Cameroon) and in Belabo (CAR), as well as the construction of a training 
center for the Cameroonian customs and of new offices for the "cellule BAM-BAD", the 
project implementing unit in the Cameroonian Ministry of Public Works.  
 
The proposed second additional financing includes the following additional activities to 
be executed in Cameroon:  
 
-
The rehabilitation of the road Magada - Maroua (about 60 km) whose design 
study has already been completed (financed by the EU). A possible separate financing on 
part of that section is envisaged with the EU, subject to confirmation of additional 
financing from that donor. If confirmed, the EU financing would focus in priority on 
furthering the proposed works (urban sections in Maroua and Magada).  
 
-
The reconstruction of the Tilde bridge, a major bottleneck for transit in Northern 
Cameroon.  
 
-
Road safety investments on the targeted corridors (such as the repair or 
replacement of crash/traffic barriers), using the conclusions from a road safety audit 
Page  3
financed by the EU on the Douala - Yaounde section. It is envisaged to finance under this 
component a similar road safety assessment on the rest of the corridors. All road safety 
activities would be closely coordinated with the other donors and with the WB - TOTAL 
road safety initiative recently launched in the CEMAC sub-region.  
 
-
Depending on the residual resources (such as the ones that could potentially be 
freed from the separate financing arrangement with the EU on Magada - Maroua), this 
component may finance additional spot interventions or rehabilitation/maintenance 
activities on other sections of the targeted corridors (particularly on the Maroua - 
Dabanga section in Northern Cameroon).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The initial project finances activities at several different sites in Cameroon, CAR and 
Chad, including (a) several sections of the road corridors linking N'Djamena and Bangui 
to Douala that need upgrading or long term maintenance; (b) rail sections in Cameroon 
between Yaoundé and Belabo and near Douala that need to be rehabilitated; and (c) a 
number of trade-related investment and technical assistance in the three countries.  
 
Safeguards issues concern relatively minimal environmental and social impact resulting 
from the road, railway and bridge investment components of the project in Cameroon. In 
general, key social issues relevant to the project objectives are mostly in relation to social 
impacts of the road improvements in Cameroon.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson (AFTEN) 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef (AFTEN) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project finances activities at several different sites in Cameroon, CAR and Chad, 
including (a) several sections of the road corridors linking N'Djamena and Bangui to 
Douala that need upgrading or long term maintenance; (b) rail sections in Cameroon 
between Yaoundé and Belabo and near Douala that need to be rehabilitated; and (c) a 
number of trade-related investment and technical assistance in the three countries.  
 
Safeguards issues concern relatively minimal environmental and social impact resulting 
from the road, bridge and rail investment components of the project in Cameroon, CAR 
and Chad, and to a more limited extent by some of the trade facilitation activities. 
Specific safeguards instruments have been prepared in application of the activated 
safeguards policies. In particular:  
 
-
When the original project was prepared, three separate environment and social 
impact assessment studies (ESIAs) were prepared, one for Cameroon, one for Central 
African Republic and one for Chad. Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMPs) were prepared, based on the ESIAs.  
 
-
Regarding the railway works, an Environmental and Safety Management Plan 
(ESMP) has been updated in 2007, based on the ESMF prepared for the purpose of an 
earlier IDA-financed project to support the railway concession.  
 
-
When the original project was prepared, three separate resettlement action plans 
(RAP) were also prepared, one for each country.  
 
-
When the first additional financing was prepared, it was determined that the 
Kousseri by-pass required a specific environmental and social management plan (ESMF).  
 
The Environmental Assessments of the road, bridge and rail track works has not 
revealed any significant direct environmental impacts.  
 
The studies that have been prepared for the purpose of the original project have been 
disclosed both in country and in the Bank's Infoshop on February 15, 2007. The Kousseri 
by-pass study was disclosed in country on September 1st, 2009 and in the Bank's 
Infoshop on September 2, 2009.  
 
For the purpose of the second additional financing, the following safeguards have been 
prepared:  
 
(a) 
Regarding the Magada - Maroua road: An Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) - including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been 
prepared to mitigate the negative impacts caused by the rehabilitation of the Magada 
road. This ESIA was submitted for disclosure to the World Bank Infoshop on March 18, 
2011 and published in country on March 23, 2011. A field mission of the Ministry of 
Public Works' environmental and social unit has confirmed that no involuntary 
resettlement were expected prior to or during works' execution.  
Page  5
(b) 
Regarding the Tilde bridge: An abbreviated RAP (ARAP) has been prepared by 
the Ministry of Public Works in order to mitigate the negative impacts caused by the 
displacement of 13 families as a result of the Tilde bridge reconstruction works. This 
ARAP has been disclosed in country on March 23rd, 2011 and submitted for disclosure 
to the World Bank Infoshop on March 18, 2011. The Tilde bridge is located on the road 
section Dabanga - Kousseri (78 km) which is being rehabilitated, together with the 
Kousseri by-pass, as part of the 1st Additional Financing to the CEMAC Transport and 
Transit Facilitation Project. The corresponding ESIA and ESMP were prepared and 
disclosed in country on September 1st, 2009 and in the World Bank Infoshop on 
September 2nd, 2009.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
During the construction phase, negative environmental and social impacts may include 
the destruction of physical habitat and the logging of fruit-trees along the road. However, 
no new road section will be constructed and the widening of some sections will only 
affect very partially the local agricultural activity and local habitat. As a side-effect of the 
physical works, the agricultural workforce may be slightly reduced in the region. Air 
quality in works areas will be somewhat degraded by intensive use of gas-powered 
machines and repetitive truck movements, but this air pollution will be limited in time 
and importance. Works can also affect rainwater streaming and the soils physical 
properties. After pavement, the road will become a waterproof strip that can considerably 
modify water streaming.  
 
In the railway sector, the World Bank is monitoring the implementation of IDA-
financed works and compliance with the specific Environmental and Safety Action Plan 
updated in 2007. Through its regular supervision activities, the World Bank is also 
monitoring the implementation of linked activities financed by the Government of 
Cameroon.  
 
ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs were prepared and disclosed in each country in order to 
mitigate these negative risks. Proper environmental measures can avoid most of the 
negative environmental impacts resulting from the physical works and these measures 
will be included in all the procurement documents. For instance, in Cameroon, strict 
water sanitation and drainage precautions have to be taken to avoid important changes in 
rainfall runoff causing erosion. A specific budget has also been allotted for the 
environmental mitigation measures to be undertaken in the three countries. A RAP was 
prepared in each country to address some small trader housing displacement issues. In 
particular, a RAP was prepared to mitigate the negative impact of resettlements to 
proceed with the Kousseri by-pass works at the border with Chad. As indicated above, an 
additional ESIA/EMP, and Abbreviated RAP have been prepared for works financed 
under the second Additional Financing.  
 
A
major environmental benefit of the pavement of roads in this region lies in reduction 
of dust generation, particularly important on dirt roads during the dry season.  
Page  6
Impacts during the operational phase of these facilities include increased noise and 
accident risks due to the increased traffic and HIV/AIDS propagation. High attention will 
be paid to road safety improvement. A dedicated part of the financing from the 
development partner community has been allotted to sensitize the local population to 
fight against HIV and promote road safety and environmental conservation. The second 
additional financing includes specific resources to improve the road safety condition 
along the targeted corridors. These actions will be closely coordinated with other 
initiatives aiming at improving road safety, in particular with other activities 
implemented by the EU and a new launched initiative between the World Bank and 
TOTAL corporation in Africa.  
 
Other possible long term adverse impacts identified by the ESIA in Cameroon include 
the potential increase in pressure on natural resources, particularly through illegal logging 
and the bush meat trade. Through this project, the relevant ministry in Cameroon has 
received assistance to acquire equipments (motorcycles and a vehicle) to ensure a better 
control of such illegal activities. The Government has also indicated its willingness to 
send more field staff in this region. Furthermore, during the civil works phase, the team 
will ensure that sensitive areas and natural habitats like national park or protected areas 
will not be encroached by the project activities.  
 
As the ESIA does not identify any sensitive cultural/archeological sites around the 
project area, all mitigation measures will be taken in case of a fortuitous finding of any 
archeological remains or high value cultural site.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternative has been considered to minimize adverse impacts. As for road 
investments, the operation consists mainly in a rehabilitation of existing roads so no 
alternative plotting is therefore conceivable. The most sustainable technical option has 
then been chosen with respect to the project's available resources. The project will ensure 
that all mitigation measures are taken to reduce or avoid environmental and socials 
impacts/ risks.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In each of the three countries, national institutions have been identified and strengthened 
to ensure the proper implementation of the safeguards instruments that have been 
prepared for the purpose for the original project and its two additional financing:  
 
-
In Cameroon, the Ministry in charge of Environment is responsible for the 
approval of the ESIA, the ESMP, the RAP and the ARAP. Since the beginning of the 
1990s, the government of Cameroon has significantly improved the legal framework for 
environmental management. Law no. 96/12 of August 5, 1996 sets the framework for 
environmental matters. The decree no. 2005/0577/PM of February 23, 2005 provides 
guidance for the EIA. The creation of the Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection 
Page  7
in 2004 has reinforced the institutional capacity of the government to monitor 
environmental matters. An Inter-ministerial commission exists through the 96 
Environment Law and plays its role in term of approving EIA and EMP. The Ministry of 
Public Works has a special unit for environmental and social issues - the Division de la 
Protection du Patrimoine et de l'Environnement (DPPER). This Unit presents all 
competencies able to ensure the implementation of the process with the monitoring of the 
Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection and its creation was set up through IDA 
funding under the Transport Sector Project. This unit closely coordinates with the 
Ministry of Fauna and Forest (MINFOF) regarding the control of bush meat trade and 
other environmental mitigation activities (tree planting in particular). The members of 
this Unit receive training financed by the project in the area of Bank social safeguards to 
allow them to properly monitor the implementation of the ESIAs and RAPs. The project 
also provides capacity-building targeting the Ministry of Environment and Nature 
Protection, and the Ministry of Forests and Wildlife. So far, the country has performed a 
good follow up of environmental and social dimensions in the project, fact that is very 
encouraging. Nevertheless, this performance has to be further continued and strengthened 
through the present additional financing.  
 
-
In CAR, imp
lementation is supported by the Unité Environnementale et Sociale 
(UES) within MED, in close coordination with the Ministry of Environment (MEFCPE). 
A
specific attention is brought to the issue of timber trade. For instance, the project 
supports the internet publication of the timber trade data being provided by MEFCPE. 
The UES has been also actively engaged in preparing and supervising the implementation 
of a detailed action plan to address some social and environmental issues detected in the 
execution of the Fambele - Baboua works.  
 
-
In Chad, the project is building capacity in the Ministry of Infrastructure, in 
coordination with the Ministry of Environment and Water.  
 
In the three countries, the project is providing targeted technical assistance and 
institutional strengthening to the identified social and environmental institution.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders have been identified in the ESIA and RAP. However, these should also 
include representatives from the following entities, State at different levels, private 
sector, NGOs, local communities, elected authorities and development partners. The 
Consultation Mechanisms will be as follows:  
 
All safeguards instruments were carried out on the basis of a participative approach. 
Individual interviews, group discussions and several meetings were organized during the 
execution of the study and will be planned during the approval process. The project 
contents, in terms of economic, social, cultural, environmental stakes, as well as 
mitigation impacts and compensations measures were developed and discussed with 
diverse stakeholders.  
 
Page  8
In particular, a consultation was organized during the preparation of Magada-Maroua 
road section and Tilde bridge design and the associated ESIA and ARAP. Regarding the 
Tilde bridge, a consultation was organized with community leaders from the Tilde 
village. Translation in local language (Kotoko) was ensured. During the consultation, 
local stakeholders raised the issue that many owners did not have official land titles and 
that some affected people may be renting the land. Measures in line with the World Bank 
policy on involuntary resettlements (OP 4.12) were included in the ARAP to address 
these issues.  Regarding the ESIA, a consultation of local stakeholders was performed by 
the Social and Environmental Unit of the Ministry of Public Works during the period 
February 7-14, 2011. Consultations highlighted the benefits that the proposed 
rehabilitation of the Magada - Maroua road would bring to the local populations and the 
strong support for the project expressed by the local authorities.  
 
The team will ensure that this participatory consultation process continues on a regular 
basis during project implementation. Supervision missions will be the opportunity to 
assess the whole process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/20/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/23/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/18/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/23/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/18/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  9
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge 
03/21/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna 
03/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor 
03/22/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson 
03/22/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/30/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Emmanuel A. James 
03/30/2011 
Comments:   
