Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/28/2011 
Report No.:  AC6016
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P079734 
Original Project Name: East Africa Trade 
and Transport Facilitation Project 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P121354 
Project Name:  East Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Program (EATTFP) - 
Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Solomon Muhuthu Waithaka 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (40%);Railways (40%);General public 
administration sector (20%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (60%);Trade facilitation and market access (40%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The revised Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to:  (i) enhance efficiency of the 
customs agencies clearance processes in the participating EAC Custom Unions to 
facilitate trade; (ii) improve efficiency and reliability of transport and logistics services 
along the key corridors; and (iii) enhance safety in identified areas and reduce 
governments# transfers to railway by rationalizing the work force on the Kenya-Uganda 
Railway.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is conceived as a multi-sector program to facilitate further trade 
integration in the region by addressing institutional, legal, and infrastructure constraints. 
The project is expected to comprise the following components: (a) EAC Customs Union 
Implementation - provide training, technical assistance and equipment to implement a 
modern customs interconnection system and common data base linking the customs 
departments in the member states to the EAC Customs directory in Arusha; (b) 
Page  2
Institutional support for transport facilitation: Strengthen the Northern Corridor Transit 
Transport Coordination Authority (NCTTCA), and support to establish an appropriate 
management mechanism for the Central Transport Corridor connecting Dar es salaam 
with the Great Lakes countries; (c) Investment support for transport facilitation: Upgrade 
Corridor efficiency by (i) financing a regional electronic cargo tracking system from the 
ports of Mombasa and Dar es Salaam throughout the EAC, (ii) reviewing and updating 
the axle load control policy, (iii) improving Port Security and Port Facilitation in 
Mombasa and Dar es Salaam; and (iv) financing the establishment of seven joint border 
posts at main cross border points within the region (Malaba, Busia, and five others to be 
determined); and (d) Support to railway concessioning: Facilitate the joint concession of 
the Kenya and Uganda Railways, and improve its interface to the Tanzanian network, 
complementing existing support to the process in Uganda. This would comprise, among 
others, financing of severance packages and environmental and social mitigation plans in 
Kenya, technical support to the proposed Kenya Railways Asset Authority, and possibly 
the provision of a Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) for both countries.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance activities at several different sites in Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda 
and Tanzania, including: (a) those parts of the existing railway lines in Uganda and 
Kenya which are to be concessioned to a private consortium; (b) existing border posts 
between Kenya and Uganda, Uganda and Rwanda, and Tanzania and Kenya, which are to 
be upgraded; and (c) a number of trade-related agencies in the four countries.  Because 
the works to be carried out under (b) and (c) are of limited scope at existing sites, they are 
not being treated as safeguards issues. Environment and social safeguards apply mainly 
to activities for improving the concessioned rail system in the yards and along the rail 
lines and construction of facilities in the one-stop border posts (OSBPs).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTWR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was completed for the project 
and disclosed in the Bank's InfoShop in June 8, 2005. The ESIA was applied to the 
project components where the specific locations of construction were to be determined. 
In 2009, when the location of OSBPs were identified, Environmental Impact 
Assessments (EIAs) examined the potential positive and negative impacts of  project 
activities on the immediate surroundings with due regard to construction, occupation, and 
decommissioning. It encompassed the physical, ecological, socio-cultural, health and 
safety conditions at the relocation sites and its environs during and after construction. The 
Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) section of the EIA contains guidelines for 
protecting, managing and responding to processes, situations, and conditions that might 
compromise health, safety and security of workers and ecological wellbeing.  
 
A
separate EIA was completed for the Kenya-Uganda railway line and disclosed in the 
Bank's InfoShop in June 8, 2005.  This EIA documented oil spills, poor containment and 
disposal of toxic and other wastes, damage to local water supplies, degraded or eroded 
slopes and other environmental hazards along various portions of the lines. Polluted sites 
are mainly found around stations and works yards. While the total number of such sites is 
large, the damage at each site is of limited significance and can be reversed with proper 
rehabilitation measures in all the important cases. There is asbestos pollution in Uganda 
as well as in Kenya. Occupational Health and Safety procedures need to be improved. A 
separate EIA was conducted along the rail line segments in Kibera and Mukuru in 2005 
where the proposed replacement units and footpath were to be constructed. This EIA 
ensures that proper environmental appraisal is done on the site, including drainage and 
sewerage for the housing units.  This EIA was updated in 2010 and redisclosed in 
February 2011, after the update of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was completed. 
In other segments of the rail line crossing Uganda and Kenya, various locations along the 
railway right of way (RoW) have been similarly encroached by commercial activities, 
housing, and social institutions.  These human encroachments have several serious 
consequences to the surrounding environment among them: (i) risks to human safety due 
to proximity to active railway traffic; (ii) risks to property in the event of accidents or 
derailments; (iii) risks to human health from dumping of waste onto the railway track 
which impedes track drainage and compromises track stability; (iv) exposure of 
maintenance personnel to unhygienic working conditions and disease due to disposal of 
faecal and other waste on the track; (v) slow train speeds which caused inordinate delays 
in transport and travel; and (vi) inefficient use of the railway due to inability to increase 
freight carriage constrained  by the need to reduce train operational speeds.  
 
The project completed a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the relocation of 3,500 
households in the railway RoW in the Kibera and Mukuru segments. This RAP was 
disclosed in the Bank's InfoShop in June 8, 2005. However, the Government of Kenya 
(GoK)  was unable to implement this RAP throughout the period when the area was 
unstable due to violence and conflicts, especially in Kibera. In addition, GoK decided in 
Page  4
2007 to expand the 10.4 m provision in the 2005 RAP for an "immediate safety zone" 
and increased the width to 40 m for operational and safety reasons. A  Bank railway 
expert analysis concurred with the decision to increase the railway width for clearance. In 
2009, this decision was  borne out by a derailment accident in the area that resulted in 
significant human health impacts that confirmed the need for a much wider "protection" 
or safety zone. Finally, the updated RAP recognized the historical fact that the Kenya-
Uganda railway's reserve, throughout the 1,920 km length of the line, was defined as 
200ft (60m) wide, which was confirmed by the railway technical manuals.  
 
The three-fold increase in the number of project affected households, whose number has 
risen from 3,500 in 2005 to 10,006 in 2010 is one of the main reasons for the proposed 
additional financing. RAP implementation costs increased from $11.0 m in 2005 to $39.1 
m, resulting in a funding gap of USD28.1 million.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Proper environmental management can both rehabilitate damaged sites and ensure that 
indirect or long-term adverse impacts and further damage are either avoided or 
minimized. The inclusion of Social, Health and Environment clauses in the concession 
arrangements to be signed between the Concessionaire and the two Governments should 
guarantee the improvement of the situation compared to the current patterns of the 
existing public railways. The concession agreement will include the requirement of the 
Concessionaire to prepare and implement his own Safety, Health and Environment 
Management Plan (SHE Plan). The SHE Plan will be based on the Environmental Action 
Plans elaborated in the Environmental Audits carried out at the time of project 
preparation. SHE Plan of the concessionaire is approved by the Kenyan and Ugandan 
Environmental Authorities and by the World Bank safeguard specialists. There is 
however, some danger that cleared safety zones along the rail lines at "hot spots" may 
reoccur so the project has put in place mitigation measures in line with updated RAP.  
 
The updated RAP noted the risk of increased encroachments in the area, which is 
anticipated due to the high volume of pedestrian traffic and after improvements have 
been introduced. A socio-economic baseline survey was completed in 2005, and updated 
in 2010. The impact audits and resettlement reports in 2008 and 2009 documented severe 
safety hazards at several specific "hot spots" where encroachment along the tracks and 
use of the tracks for pedestrian traffic and trading are heaviest. The community leaders in 
Kibera and Mukuru identified these areas for the pedestrian foot bridges. Clearance of 
safety zones at these sites will be monitored by Kenya Railway Corporation (KRC) and a 
committee from the affected areas will be formed to assist in safety sensitization and 
awareness (especially since the train derailment in 2009).  A grievance mechanism was 
set up and has been functional since 2006.  To date, more than one hundred claims were 
filed referring to housing preferences, locations of services, etc, and most of these 
complaints or concerns have been taken into account in the updated RAP.   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
To avoid or reduce negative environmental impacts, mitigation measures were proposed 
and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) formulated for the Kibera and Mukuru 
relocation sites. The EMP includes an  annual environmental audit once construction is 
completed. An EMP outline was developed to ensure sustainability of the site activities 
during construction and thereafter. The plan provides a general outlay of the activities, 
associated impacts, mitigation plans and appropriate indicators for monitoring. 
Implementation timeframes and responsibilities are defined, and where practicable, the 
cost estimates for recommended measures are provided. There are also guidelines for 
addressing environmental health and safety. For example, in construction of facilities for 
the OSBPs, EHS clauses were included in the contracts and monitoring of adherence to 
these clauses will be done by an independent engineer who will supervise civil works. 
The construction design and works  must be approved by the relevant Government 
Departments i.e. Physical planning, Ministry of Lands and Housing, Health etc. During 
construction, warning/informative signs (bill boards) will be erected at the site. These 
should indicate the operation hours and when works are likely to be started and 
completed.  
 
The updated 2010 RAP recommended: (i) Demarcation of a "Protection" Safety Zone:  
There will be provision of about 40m wide (20m on each side) "protection" safety zone, 
which will be cleared of any structures and whose boundaries will be demarcated by a 
wall (that also serves as the outer wall of the multi-storey replacement housing units). For 
Mukuru, the width  is 50m since the resettlement will be on one side of the line. (ii) 
Construction of Resettlement Units: The solutions for both Kibera and Mukuru were 
developed in consultation with the affected communities. The RAP proposes construction 
of multi-story replacement housing - both business and residential - along the outer 10 m 
width on both sides of the reserve within the current settlements in Kibera, and on one 
side of the railway line, similar structures for Mukuru will be constructed. These form 
part of the land-for-land exchange that the KRC allocated, including GoK cost-sharing to 
cover some of the RAP implementation infrastructure. Because of the presence of a high 
voltage line on one side, and an oil pipeline on the other side,  only a 1.0 km strip is 
available for resettlement within the current settlement in Mukuru.  The RAP identified a 
relocation area located 2.5 km away from Mukuru towards the CBD, on the northern side 
of the railway reserve, parallel to Jogoo road and between Lunga Lunga and Likoni 
Bridges. (iii) Support to Schools: The RAP reports that there are 43 informal schools in 
Kibera with 7,056 pupils and 5 in Mukuru with 1,497 pupils. It recommends that the 
children be relocated to public schools that are in the vicinity of the resettlement areas, 
many of which are currently operating below capacity. Five such schools have been 
identified in Kibera and six in Mukuru.  The Government provides free primary 
education in public schools and it is a requirement that the schools take all children who 
present themselves within the class capacity. As needed, rehabilitation and enhancements 
of school facilities will be covered. (iv) Provision of 45-year Lease:  In addition to the 
land-for-land exchange, KRC  will provide a 45-year lease for the resettled PAPs (at a 
nominal fee that will be used to maintain the replacement units). KRC has currently a 
working mechanism for leasing its land and property and similar arrangements will be 
Page  6
followed. This provision of a 45-year lease has been discussed and coordinated with 
relevant GoK agencies dealing with urban housing and resettlement.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The participating countries (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda) in this regional project 
have undertaken extensive environmental and social audits of the port, border posts, and 
railway lines. The Rift Valley Railways (RVR) created a special unit with environment 
and social specialists and they have retained the consultants who prepared the EMPs and 
RAPs to continue with their implementation and to manage the reduction of 
environmental and social risks.  These safeguards documents also received strong in-
country ownership and interest on the part of the inter-ministerial teams overseeing the 
concessioning of the railways and the reorganization of the residual assets-holding 
corporations in Kenya and Uganda.  Each of the plans calls for contractors to carry out 
implementation consistent with Kenyan and Ugandan environmental legislation, World 
Bank safeguard policies and Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines.  
 
Under restructuring, the Concessionaire will prepare and implement its own SHE plan 
within six months after the concession starts. This SHE plan will be in compliance with 
World Bank Safeguard Policies and World Bank Group applicable Environmental, 
Health and Safety Guidelines (Rail Transit System, Port and Harbor Facilities, General 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines, which include Occupational Health and 
Safety, Hazardous Materials and Monitoring.  
 
The following have been agreed with GoK and KRC regarding RAP implementation 
arrangements  under the restructured project: (i) Resettlement Management Unit 
(ReMU). KRC has already set up the ReMU and is in the process of hiring the technical 
staff (social/resettlement specialists; environment specialist; engineer; 
consultation/liaison officer; etc). The ReMU will be in charge of ensuring that 
preliminary designs and  bidding documents for civil works are completed by April/May 
2011.  The ReMU will coordinate with relevant GoK agency for supervising construction 
of the civil works, once contracts are awarded. (ii) RAP Advisors: This task will be 
carried out by the RAP consultants as advisors to the ReMU to ensure  a systematic and 
phased relocation of PAPs. As recommended in the RAP, ReMU technical teams will 
work closely with the RAP Advisors and Community Leaders to ensure smooth 
transition. The construction and relocation process will be done in sequential phases, 
except for  Mukuru, since an un-encroached new site is available.  In the case of Kibera, 
the RAP Advisors will enhance consultations to explain the phased movement of people 
and clearance of structures by sections. The RAP Advisors are also expected to assist in 
the implementation of the livelihood restoration and community development programs. 
(iii) Independent Review: The RAP implementation will be assessed through an 
independent review. This will include programs like social accountability and audits of 
RAP implementation performance. A follow-up socio-economic survey, building upon 
the baseline survey that was completed in 2004 and in 2009, will be completed one year 
after relocation to track changes in PAPs living conditions and incomes. (iv) Project 
Implementation Team (PIT): The PIT will continue its decision making and oversight 
Page  7
functions with respect to RAP implementation. The inter-agency composition of the PIT, 
and its mandate to oversee general project implementation, allows a linkage of the RAP 
implementation activities to the other components of the project. (v) Communications: 
This is a vital aspect of RAP implementation. The ReMU will have a dedicated 
communications and liaison specialist who will develop a public consultation and 
disclosure plan and a communications strategy. A draft program was prepared and will be 
approved by the PIT by August 2011 (before the PAPs are relocated). The restructured 
project has provisions to assist GoK implement a communications  program.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
On the social safeguard side: Affected people include residents, vendors, etc occupying 
parts of the RoW of the railway that need to be cleared to ensure that the agreed 
minimum safety standards (safety and protection zone) can be met in the high density rail 
segments in Kibera and Mukuru rail segments. The communities in these areas include 
many civil society groups, institutional leaders (in churches, advocacy and service 
organizations), and administrative representatives, who are all stakeholders in the 
process. At the national level, key decision makers are in the respective railroad 
corporations, Ministries of Transport, Ministries of Finance (in both privatization units 
and as the counterparts of the World Bank), Ministries of Housing, National 
Environmental Agencies and other agencies.  For all the key stakeholders, consultations 
have taken place in project presentation meetings, discussions of the issues involved, and 
in the case of the Kenya RAP, participation in the enumeration process during the 
preparation of the 2005 RAP and updated RAP (2011). The Non-Governmental 
Organization (NGO) - Pamoja Trust has been a key partner/consultant in developing the 
RAP and the RAP Update. The process involved creation of an inter-ministerial 
committee (including the urban housing agencies) and other NGOs working on urban 
housing issues. Several neighborhood consultation teams were formed and more than 100 
meetings and summaries of consultations are recorded.  Finally, affected people have 
been consulted and actively involved in neighborhood meetings. Pamoja Trust 
maximized the use of existing urban institutions (e.g. cooperatives) in carrying out the 
consultation and grievance resolution processes. The 2005 RAP has been disclosed in 
Kenya and has been made available to local organizations and administrators for 
consultation by affected and interested parties. The updated RAP (2011) is similarly 
disclosed and consultations are ongoing, including translating the key RAP provisions in 
the local dialects. Kenyan and Ugandan EA/EMPs have also been disclosed and 
translated, carefully explaining the activities to affected people through focus groups 
meetings and public consultations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/26/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2005 
 
Page  8
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/08/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/26/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/08/2005 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The RAP was disclosed in 2005, but was redisclosed in 2011; The EIA for the Kibera and 
Mukuru area was redisclosed in 2011.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  9
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Solomon Muhuthu Waithaka 
04/26/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
04/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz 
04/14/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/26/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
04/26/2011 
Comments:   
