Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2011 
Report No.:  AC5124
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P097201 
Original Project Name: Regional and 
Domestic Power Markets Development 
Project  (Southern Africa Power Market 
Project:  APL-1b) 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P114782 
Project Name:  Additonal Financing for the Regional and Domestic Power Market 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Philippe J-P. Durand 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 19, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (67%);Power (25%);Central government administration (8%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (25%);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (25%);Export development and competitiveness (24%);Corporate 
governance (13%);Regional integration (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
288.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.00 
 
African Development Bank 
32.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
54.00
97.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the additional financing have been re-stated as follows:  to 
improve operational efficiency in the electricity sector and expand renewable generation, 
transmission and distribution capacity in order to better serve domestic power demand 
and to support regional power market integration.   
 
3. Project Description 
The PMEDE Project first approved in May 2007, consists of five main components: (i) 
Generation - rehabilitation of  Inga 1 and Inga 2 hydropower stations; (ii) Transmission - 
construction of a new 400 kV transmission line from Inga to Kinshasa; (iii) Distribution- 
Page  2
rehabilitation, reinforcement and expansion of the power distribution system in  
Kinshasa; (iv) Capacity building - strengthening of SNEL's operational capabilities 
including activities regarding the governance within the utility specifically and in the 
sector generally; and (v) Project Implementation - provision of consulting services for 
engineering, management and supervision of implementation, procurement and financial 
management services. The Project provides the required resources to develop GoDRC's 
goal of quickly improving the governance of the sector and of SNEL's performance 
through a management contract. Some of the benefits of the Project depend on the proper 
execution of the ongoing Southern Africa Power Market Transmission Project (SAPMP).  
 
The Additional Financing request is for an additional grant of US$288 million 
equivalent to cover increases in costs due to under-estimation at appraisal, financing gap 
on specific components, expansion of the power distribution component, and 
unanticipated additional works of degraded energy facilities.  The Project Paper also 
seeks approval for formal restructuring of the Project for the following changes:  
 
(i) 
Modification of the Project Development Objective;  
 
(ii) 
Extension of the Grant's Closing Date from December 31, 2012 to June 30, 2016, 
to enable completion of Project activities;  
 
(iii) 
Increase in the scope of the distribution component to alleviate congestion and 
increase power supply to households, particularly in Kinshasa;  
 
(iv) 
Changes in the results framework, including mainly new indicators and targets to 
reflect the new Project implementation schedule, the project restructuring and capture the 
additional focus on corporate governance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
There are three locations at which physical activities relevant to the safeguard analysis 
will be undertaken as a result of the Project:  
 
(i) 
The Inga site on the River Congo, situated approximately 125 miles downriver 
from Kinshasa where the works to be undertaken will be at the Inga 1 and Inga 2 
hydroelectric facilities and intake canal for both facilities;  
 
(ii) 
The route of the new transmission line from the Inga site to Kinshasa ending at 
the Kingatoko substation: the alignment is being optimized and a draft resettlement action 
plan has been prepared. The transmission line from Inga to the Kingatoko substation in 
Kinshasa passes mostly through agricultural land. A sensitive forest area near the Inga 
Hydropower station has been avoided;  
 
(iii) 
In Kinshasa, activities to strengthen the power distribution system: these will 
include rehabilitation activities at two key substations (located at Liminga and Lingwala), 
the extension of the grid into currently un-electrified areas of Kinshasa (namely 30,000 
Page  3
new connections in the Kimbanseke area located to the east of the city, with the 
associated erection of a new substation) and 20,000 new connections in the Kisenso, 
Mpasa 1/2/3 and Malweka areas. The alignments of grid extension have yet to be 
finalized.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The AF focuses on the rehabilitation of Inga 1 and Inga 2 power stations, (i.e. turbines 
and related equipment), the building of a new transmission line and grid extensions. The 
environmental and social impacts of the rehabilitation of the Inga 1 and Inga 2 
hydropower plants are expected to be moderate and manageable; likewise the building of 
the new transmission line and the grid extensions. Adverse environmental and social 
impacts will be mainly related to the construction of the transmission line and the grid 
extensions, and the impacts will therefore be site specific and controllable. Only a 
fraction of the water from the Congo River is diverted into Inga 1 and Inga 2 intake canal 
for hydropower production and there is very little effect on the hydrological regime of the 
Congo River as a result of the Project.  The transmission line from Inga to the Kingatoko 
substation in Kinshasa passes mostly through agricultural land. A sensitive forest area 
near the Inga hydropower station has been avoided, and the transmission lines pose 
manageable environmental and social impacts. An Environmental and Social 
Management Framework, Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, including an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework and Plan, were prepared, consulted 
upon, and disclosed in December, 2006. An Addendum to the ESIA and ESMP based on 
the changes to the transmission line has been disclosed in April 2011.  
 
Pest Management  
Page  4
The project includes control of black flies, a vector for onchocerciasis in the project 
area, through the use of the pesticide permethrine. A pest management plan was 
developed and disclosed in March 2007.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources  
 
A
framework for managing cultural property was prepared and disclosed at the Infoshop 
in January 2007. Potential sensitive sites include caves of potential cultural significance 
in the vicinity of the project area.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement  
 
OP/BP 4.12 were triggered as civil works of the transmission line will require land 
acquisition. A resettlement policy framework (RFP) was prepared and disclosed in-
country 18th January 2007, and at Infoshop also on the same date. A draft resettlement 
action plan (RAP) for the transmission from Inga to the Kingatoko substation in Kinshasa 
has been prepared (see above), and it includes impacts of the extension of the grid. A 
draft resettlement action plan (RAP) has been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in 
April 2011 for the transmission from Inga to the Kingatoko substation in Kinshasa; the 
RAP includes impacts of grid extension and mitigating actions.  
 
Safety of Dams  
 
Consistent with OP 4.37, and according to ToRs developed in consultation with the 
relevant Bank specialist, a review of dam safety at the Inga site was completed in June 
2007. No significant concerns were identified, and a draft program of maintenance, 
monitoring, and emergency preparedness was prepared.  A covenant requiring the 
preparation and adoption by SNEL of an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) by 
December, 2007, was included as a covenant in the legal agreement for the Project; 
however, to-date no such Plan has been adopted. A Bank technical mission in March 
2010 did not find significant dam safety risks and agreed with SNEL on the terms of 
reference for the finalization of the EPP. The consulting firm that had prepared the draft 
EPP in 2007 has been recruited to revise and complement the EPP by June 2011. A panel 
of experts on dam safety has been appointed, with five experts on geotechnical, 
electromechanical, dams, sedimentology and concrete, and will initiate its mandate in 
April 2011.  
 
Projects on International Waterways  
 
OP7.50 applies to Projects that involve the use of international waterways. The Inga 
rehabilitation component (Component 1) will involve the use of the River Congo, an 
international waterway that DRC shares with 8 countries and, as such, OP7.50 does 
apply. However, the Inga dam is a "run of the river" plant, and the proposed activities 
(rehabilitation of the dam, dredging and reprofiling of the intake canal) will not modify 
the water volume nor its quality. On this basis, and as set out in paragraph 7(a) of 
OP7.50, this Project is exempt from the requirement to notify other riparian states about 
the Project, as the activities will alter neither the quality nor the quantity of the water 
flowing to other riparian states, nor will the Project be adversely affected by the other 
riparians's possible water use.   
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only potential relevant alternatives that were considered in Project design relate to 
the routing of the transmission line from Inga to Kinshasa. The line passes mostly 
through agricultural land and the alignment is being optimized to avoid densely populated 
areas. A sensitive forest area near the Inga site has been avoided. The transmission lines 
poses manageable environmental impacts which will be mitigated by the actions 
described in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and draft RAP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Social, environmental and resettlement issues are addressed in the context of the Project's 
ESRP, including the set of seven documents relating to environmental, social and 
resettlements aspects of the project, namely: (i) the Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) (ii) Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), (iii) the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), (iv) the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), (v) the Management of Cultural Heritage Framework (MCHF), (vi) 
the ESIA Executive Summary (French); and (vii) the ESIA Executive Summary 
(English), as supplemented by (viii) the Pest Management Plan (PMP). These documents 
set out the measures to be taken by the borrower to manage relevant safeguard policy 
issues, at the level of individual Project components, including applicable environmental 
and social regulations. For the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for 
the Inga-Kinshasa transmission line (currently in draft), the client has opened a special 
account with an installment of US$1.3 million. The adoption by SNEL and appropriate 
disclosure of the final RAP for the Inga-Kinshasa transmission line is a condition for 
appraisal of the additional financing. Finalization and adoption by SNEL of an EPP is a 
condition for effectiveness of the proposed additional financing.  
 
The borrower has laid a solid institutional foundation for managing and monitoring 
adverse environmental and social impacts. SNEL has established an Environmental and 
Social Management Unit which will monitor safeguards compliance of the project. The 
unit (Unité de Gestion Environnementale et Sociale [UGES]) is composed of eight staff 
(5 environmentalists and 3 social scientists). The project is supporting the training of 
UGES staff on Bank safeguards policies. The day to day monitoring of safeguards 
compliance will be ensured by the supervision consultant of the civil works.  
 
The contractors will prepare their own Environmental and Social Management Plan, 
which will be based on the Environmental and Social Management Plan prepared for the 
project.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The preparation of the PMEDE and additional financing has been participatory at several 
levels. Key stakeholders, in addition to SNEL management and staff are the Ministry of 
Energy, the Ministry of Environment, project affected persons (PAPs) and the European 
Investment Bank (EIB) and the African Development Bank (AfDB). A second group of 
stakeholders are the people living at Inga neighboring communities, including the six 
clans that owned the land acquired by SNEL for the construction of the Inga 1 and Inga 2 
hydropower sites, and the inhabitants of Camp Kinshasa, a workers' camp built at the 
time of the construction of Inga 1 and Inga 2. This group of stakeholders was extensively 
consulted in conjunction with the preparation of the safeguards instruments, particularly, 
the ESIA, ESMF, and the RPF. Safeguards documents prepared for the project were 
disclosed in country, and at the Infoshop at the Bank. Copies and summaries of 
safeguards instruments were distributed to relevant local government offices in project 
affected areas. Consultations with local communities will be continuously organized 
during the implementation of all stages of the civil works, to minimize conflicts, enhance 
cooperation, and improve social benefits and performance of the works contracts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/18/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/13/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/18/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/13/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/27/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/13/2011 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
No 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  8
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Philippe J-P. Durand 
04/14/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
04/14/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
04/14/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/14/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
04/14/2011 
Comments:   
