Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/17/2011 
Report No.:  AC6037
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P124351 
Project Name:   Zambia Kafue Town - Muzuma - Victoria Falls Regional Transmission 
Line Reinforcement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Abdolreza B. Rezaian 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 9, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
30.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective for this project is to improve the reliability of 
ZESCO's regional power trade transmission network infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. 
The purpose of this project is to reinforce and upgrade the power transfer 
capability of the main transmission lines in Zambia between Kafue town and Victori a 
Falls power stations to facilitate regional power trade by the Democratic Republic of 
Congo and Zambia, with Namibia and other Southern African Power pool members, and 
to increase the reliability of power transmission throughout the Southern region of 
Zambia.  
 
2. 
 Project activities will comprise: (i) Replacement of the existing 341 km 220 kV 
transmission conductor from Kafue-town through Muzuma and to Livingstone on the 
existing 330-KV towers;(ii) Reinforcement of the high voltage substations at Mu zuma, 
and construction of new high voltage substation at Livingstone; and (iii) Engineering 
Page  2
consulting services for project management, environmental and social mitigation 
activities, and technical assistance.  
 
3. 
Component 1: Upgrading the existing Kafue-Town - Muzuma- Victoria-Falls 
Transmission Line from 220kV to 330kV. The existing line between the Kafue Town and 
Victoria Falls substations is about 341 km. The upgraded 330kV transmission line will 
use the existing steel lattice self supporting towers between the Kafue Town substation 
and the proposed Livingstone substation which is located along the transmission existing 
line, about 5 km from the Victoria Falls substation. The upgrade will be further extended 
from the proposed Livingstone substation to the Victoria Falls substation.  
 
4. 
Component 2: Upgrading the Substations at Kafue Town and Muzuma, and 
construction of new Substation at Livingstone.  This component will support construction 
of the Livingstone 330/220kV substation; and the civil works/ upgrade of 330kV and 
88kV transformer bays and line bays; installation of 330/88/11 kV transformers; 
installation of 330 kV bus bar extensions; installation of 330 kV Shunt Reactors; and 
installation of the associated protection, metering and control equipment as required at 
the Kafue Town, Muzuma, and Livingston substations.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Environmental and Social Mitigation, and TA.  
This component will support (i) hiring of the Owner's Engineering consultants for 
implementation supervision of the investments as described under components 1 and 
2;(ii) environmental and social mitigation activities as described in the Project's 
Environmental Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management 
Framework; and (iii) technical assistance to ZESCO to improve its capacity in designing, 
developing and executing investment projects for improved service delivery electricity 
generation, transmission and distribution.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located in the southern region of Zambia between Kafue town and 
Victoria Falls in Livingstone.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. 
The project has been classified as EA category B and it triggers OP/BP 4.01 for 
Environmental Assessment because of the potential negative impacts from the various 
activities to be undertaken during the upgrading of the transmission line between Kafue 
town and Livingstone, upgrading of Kafue and Muzuma substations and during the 
construction of a new substation at Livingstone. Identified impact s would include 
vegetation clear ing, increased sediment loads to the Kafue River during the upgrading 
period, noise disturbance to communities, pollution from c onstruct ion materials, 
disturbance to wildlife, accidents during construction period, etc. An EIA has been 
prepared for the project which provides mitigation measures for the identified potential 
impacts. The EIA was disclosed in-country on January 25, 2011 and the World Bank's 
InfoShop on February 15, 2011.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
1. 
There are no envisaged potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to 
anticipated future activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
1. 
Upgrading of the existing substation at Kafue town instead of constructing a new 
5km transmission line and decommissioning a section of the existing transmission line 
was considered a better alternative with less negative impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
ZESCO has prepared an Environmental Impact Assessment for the project. Capacity for 
implementing the environmental management plan (EMP) exists within the unit for 
environmental and social management at ZESCO. An RPF has been prepared in the 
unlikely event that project activities impact on assets of persons living near to the 
Page  4
transmission line and sub-station works. If, during the final preparations for civil works, 
it is determined that individuals or households will have their assets negatively impacted, 
a
Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared, and compensation provided, prior to the 
impacted person(s)experiencing a negative impact from project activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Various stakeholders consulted during the EIA process include Chiefs for the various 
villages traversed by the transmission line, community members, and farmers. The main 
stakeholder for the EIA process approval is the Environmental Council of Zambia (ECZ). 
ECZ was consulted throughout the process of the EIA preparation as stipulated in the 
EIA regulations   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/27/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/25/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/09/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/09/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/09/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdolreza B. Rezaian 
03/16/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
03/16/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
03/16/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/16/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
03/16/2011 
Comments:   
Page  6
