Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
RESTRUCTURING STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/09/2010 
Report No.:  AC5828
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P096263 
Project Name:  Land Administration and Management Project (LAMP) 
Task Team Leader:  Stephen George Karam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 14, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 22, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (78%);Central government 
administration (21%);Law and justice (1%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (25%);Personal and property rights 
(25%);Other urban development (24%);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (13%);Legal institutions for a market economy (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
19.96 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00 
 
JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants 
1.54 
 
Municipalities of Borrowing Country 
9.00 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
4.50
21.04 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the Project are to (i) improve the efficiency and effectiveness of land 
administration and management through enhanced tenure security and improved urban 
planning; and (ii) rebuild physical assets and restore essential services in the flood 
affected areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The restructured project will include the following components and changes:  
 
Component A (Security of Tenure and Registration of Immovable Property Rights). 
While activities under Component A are advancing, difficulties arising under the three 
existing first registration contracts indicate that the objective of registering 500,000 
Page  2
properties within the project timeframe (original closing date of December 31, 2011) is 
no longer realistic.  The Bank team therefore assessed with counterparts options going 
forward and agreed that the number of properties would need to be reduced to a more 
reasonable target of 400,000 and that a further extension of time would be needed for 
consultants to fulfill contractual obligations, including holding public displays that will 
ensure adequate consultation with stakeholders and incorporating any necessary changes 
to errors in documentation.  It is estimated that an additional 18 months will be needed to 
accomplish this remaining work load, thus requiring an extension of the closing date 
through June 30, 2013.  All original sub-components and activities would remain in place 
following restructuring.  
 
Component B (Urban Land Management).  Most of the component financing and 
activities originally planned under this component will be completed by December 31, 
2010.  Under sub-component B.1 (Urban Planning Development), representing 66% of 
original component financing, eight municipal territorial plans have been completed and 
public consultations have been held on each.  Sub-component B.2 (Property Valuation 
and Taxation) has not been implemented to date and would be cancelled from the project 
with a reallocation of funding.  Under sub-component B.3 (Formulation of Key Urban 
Land Management Regulations and Policy), assistance has been provided in the drafting 
of the National Territorial Planning Law.  However, no further assistance would be 
provided under this sub-component, as the beneficiary agency is being supported by 
USAID and Council of Europe in preparing secondary legislation, which is expected to 
be completed by January 31, 2011.   At the request of the Government, the Bank will 
continue to provide support to the National Territorial Planning Agency (NTPA), urban 
planning departments of selected local governments, and the general public through 
Bank-financed consultants on implementation of the new urban planning regulatory 
guidelines. Under Sub-components B.4 (Training) and B.5 (Support to NTPA), no further 
activities will be supported after the restructuring and the remaining available financing 
under these sub-component would be reallocated to other components.  
 
Components C (Municipal Investments).  Under Sub-component C.1 (Municipal 
Infrastructure) only 4 of the original 10 municipalities participating in Phase I would be 
supported with small grants due to extensive delays in the project design and tender 
process. All financing reserved for Phase II municipal infrastructure investments would 
be cancelled and reallocated, along with uncommitted Phase I investment funds, to 
Component D (Emergency Response).  In addition, under Sub-component C.2 
(Implementation of Address System), only Phase I, which is at the contract signing stage 
would proceed.     Taken together, this will allow a reallocation of approximately 
US$12.21 million equivalent to a new Component D (Emergency Response).  
 
Component D (Emergency Response) will finance emergency reconstruction minor 
works, and equipment supply to Shkodra Prefecture, which was affected by intensive 
flooding during the period of January to March, and most recently in October and 
November 2010. The emergency recovery investments were identified as priorities by the 
respective water and sanitation utilities and irrigation boards as part of the overall flood 
emergency response effort.  The proposed investments have been reviewed by a Bank-
Page  3
financed Hydrologist and determined to be critical and necessary to restore essential 
services without any significant and irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts.   
The activities will include financing of drainage and water supply pumps that will enable 
the restoration of vital physical assets, many of which are now operating at 50% capacity 
or completely out of commission due to damages incurred during the flooding.  
Replacement pumps will not exceed the capacity of the originals.  Water testing 
equipment for water utilities serving the affected areas will also be financed to ensure 
water supplied to residents in the affected areas is safe for consumption.  Installation of a 
stormwater collector linking two existing sections under a paved surface in Shkodra City 
will enable the city to withstand or mitigate the damages from future heavy rain and flood 
events. A more comprehensive view of the flooding problem and flood management, 
with a view towards the EU Water Framework Directive and Floods Directive, would be 
supported including analysis of flood impacts and the provision of technical support to 
improve flood management capacity and development of longer-term flood protection 
strategies.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is being implemented countrywide. The new Component D will focus on 
financing emergency reconstruction minor works and equipment supply to Shkodra 
Prefecture, which was affected by intensive flooding during the period of January to 
March and October-November 2010.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (ECSS4) 
Ms Esma Kreso (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The list of emergency subprojects identified by Government agencies #including the 
Shkodra Water and Sanitation Utility and Irrigation Board -- has been screened by the 
Page  4
Bank and determined not to have any significant and irreversible adverse environmental 
or social impacts.  As such, there is no need to change the project safeguard 
classification.  The subprojects under Component D will be screened following 
procedures identified in the Environmental Policy Framework prepared in August 2006 
and revised in June 2009, and which has been disclosed to the public through public 
consultations held in Fier and Elbasan municipalities in July 2006. The screening 
procedure within the document closely follows requirements set forth by the World Bank 
Operational Policies and also the Albanian legislation in force, and sets forth provisions 
that would exclude subprojects equivalent to World Bank Category A from being 
financed. Projects identified as World Bank Category B or C are eligible for financing, 
but only after having developed Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for Category 
B
investments acceptable to the Bank and meeting Albanian environmental impact 
assessment legislation and permitting procedures.  Public consultations will be held in 
Shkodra to discuss with local stakeholders the proposed pump installation and related 
works activities prior to the construction phase and as part of the EMP preparation.  
 
Component D will support 12 sub-projects, these include: replacement of water supply 
pumps in four existing pumping stations and provision of water testing equipment for 
municipal water supply utilities. Replacement pumps will not exceed the design capacity 
of the existing pumps.  Linking two segments of the existing storm-water drainage 
system at a collection point in the City of Shkodra will also be supported.  Another four 
sub-projects will replace drainage and irrigation pumps in existing facilities to restore 
pumping capacity to the original design levels. None of these sub-projects will involve 
land acquisition or significant environmental impacts.  
 
An exception to the OP 7.50 on International Waterways was granted on September 27, 
2006 for the Project, including Shkodra as one of the project areas, and also defining 
small urban infrastructure investments such as rehabilitation and improvements of 
existing drainage systems, water supply distribution networks and sanitation systems. 
Based on the fact that there will be no additional use of water under the project, and no 
change in water quality.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental and social implications of the physical investments to be 
supported under the project are described in the Environmental Policy Framework (EPF) 
and the Land Acquisition and Policy Framework (LAPF) developed by the Government 
during project preparation. No significant indirect or long-term environmental impacts 
are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of project preparation, the Government prepared two documents, the EPF and 
LAPF, to address environment, potential land acquisition, as well as cultural property 
issues associated with the infrastructure investments. These two documents meet the 
current Albanian legislation and relevant World Bank operational policies on EA, 
involuntary resettlement and cultural property. The EPF reviews the Albanian 
environmental safeguard systems and administrative framework and sets procedures to be 
followed during implementation (e.g., procedures for public consultations, the approach 
to streamline the EA screening process applicable to those investments proposed under 
the Project, preparation of a specific sub-project EMP and its implementation and 
monitoring, etc.) Specific protocols have been prepared to manage any construction 
phase impacts in compliance with OP 4.12.  
 
Some institutions responsible for project implementation (MoPWT, MoE) have been 
already involved with the implementation of World Bank projects and therefore have 
institutional capacity to apply the Bank's operational policies, including sub-projects 
screening and mitigation of environmental impacts. The project is also supporting 
capacity building to the IPRO and the municipalities for further strengthening their 
environmental capacity to supervise affiliated investments, including training.  The PIU 
is in the process of hiring an environmental specialist with experience in implementation 
of WB environmental and social Safeguards to help prepare EMPs and RAPs as required, 
and to monitor and report on compliance during implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the project include the MoPWT, MOE, MOA, MoF, Ministry of 
Interior, IPRO, the selected municipalities as well as international organizations (SIDA, 
Japan).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/01/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/01/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  6
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  7
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen George Karam 
12/08/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Esma Kreso 
12/09/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/09/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
12/09/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
12/09/2010 
Comments:   
