Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/20/2011 
Report No.:  AC5884
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P096360 
Original Project Name: Water Sector 
Institutional Development 
Country:  Angola 
Project ID:  P124511 
Project Name:  Water Sector Institutional Development AF (PDISA-AF) 
Task Team Leader:  Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (90%);Water resource management (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) of the combined parent project and the 
Additional Financing is to strengthen the institutional capacity and efficiency of agencies 
in the water sector to expand access to water service delivery.   
 
3. Project Description 
The parent project includes four components which are summarized below:  
 
Component 1 - Development of Institutions in the Water Supply and Sanitation Sub-
Sector: The objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional framework for 
the water supply subsector at both the central and regional levels. The objective will be 
achieved through the implementation of three related subcomponents: (1) development of 
the Asset Management Unit; (2) creation of PWSUs; and (3) development of a 
Regulatory Agency for the water supply and sanitation subsector.  
 
Page  2
Component 2 - Water Resources Management: The objective of this component is to 
support the strengthening of the institutional framework for the water resources 
management subsector. This objective will be achieved through three subcomponents 
which are: (1) development of an institution for water resources management; (2) 
development of systems for water resources management; and (3) rehabilitation of water 
resources management systems.  
 
Component 3 - Rehabilitation of Water Supply Systems: The objective of this 
component is to support the physical rehabilitation of selected urban water supply 
systems due to the critical need to reverse many years of inadequate investments and 
maintenance. This objective will be achieved through two subcomponents: (1) the 
construction of approximately 240 kilometers of water supply networks and about 72,000 
domestic house connections; and (2) the preparation of technical cadastre and 
implementation of an information system.  
 
Component 4 - Capacity Building and Change Management: The overall objective of 
this component is to strengthen the ability of government to improve efficiency of water 
supply in Angola by engaging stakeholders, managing and communicating change, and 
improving the abilities of individuals to play their parts, especially at management but 
also at technical levels. Included in the support at the technical level is the 
implementation unit which MINEA has established (Financial and Contract Management 
Unit) to manage the implementation of all projects in the sector regardless of the source 
of financing. The objectives will be achieved through three subcomponents: (1) capacity 
building at the national and provincial levels; (2) capacity building and training at the 
utility level; and (3) technical assistance to facilitate change management and good 
governance, largely through communications.  
 
Additional activities supported by the Additional Financing are:  
 
Components 1 and 4 - No changes are expected.  
 
Component 2 - No changes are expected other than the identifying replacement river 
basins proposed for piloting capacity building for river basin management.  Both the 
parent project and the Additional Financing will support studies carried out as part of 
capacity building by the Borrower; there is no expectation that the project or the 
Additional Financing will support investments in the basins subject to pilot studies. The 
parent project proposed the Cuanza and Cubango river basins as pilots; the Additional 
Financing proposes to substitute the Cubal da Hanha-Catumbela-Cavaco-Caporolo 
watersheds as pilots in place of the Cubango.  
 
Component 3 - Specifically, the Additional Financing will scale-up the activities 
included in component 3 and will rehabilitate the water production and expand the 
distribution systems through investments in the nine cities included in the parent project.  
These investments include: the rehabilitation of production facilities, new water 
distribution reservoirs, new facilities such as water quality laboratories and related 
equipment, replacement of electro-mechanical equipment, installation of new wells in 
Page  3
existing well fields, installation of approximately 380 kilometers of water supply 
networks and about 60,000 domestic connections, and technical assistance mainly for 
supervision of construction contracts.  The Additional Financing will also prepare the 
technical cadastre and information systems for the increased number of connections.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will support physical works associated with the water supply network in nine 
cities: M'Banza Congo, Menongue, Lubango, Luena, Malange, Kuito, N'Dalatando, 
Huambo, and Uige. The project will also support physical works at approximately 189 
hydrometric stations nationwide along with the physical rehabilitation of up to ten 
buildings in an existing research center located in the outskirts of Luanda. It is envisaged 
that project activities under Subcomponent 2.3 (rehabilitation of the national hydrometric 
network), Subcomponent 3.1 (installation of approximately 620 kilometers of piped water 
supply networks and some 132,000 new domestic connections in urban and peri-urban 
areas in the 9 target cities), Subcomponent 3.2 (purchase of chemicals for water 
treatment), Subcomponents 4.1 (rehabilitation of the Onga Zanga Investigation and 
Research Center near Luanda) and 4.2 (funding for small civil works projects to serve 
peri-urban areas) may generate temporary adverse environmental and social impacts 
limited primarily to construction activities. The nature of the civil works and project 
activities associated with each of the aforementioned subcomponents are as follows:  
 
Subcomponent 2.3 - Rehabilitation of the hydrometric network:  
 
A. GAUGING STANDARD STATIONS:  
 
-
Improve existing access to the station.  
 
-
Removal and disposal of damaged components of the existing station.  
 
-
Repair damaged or destroyed infrastructure (restore damaged concrete pillars, replace 
metal pipe, replace and weld metal supports, replace cover sheets in the shelter, apply  
 
anticorrosive paints, repair or replace damaged scales).  
 
-
Install water meter devices on river banks inside shelter that use 12V batteries or 
photovoltaic cells.  
 
B. WEIRS:  
 
-
Removal and disposal of damaged components of the existing weir.  
 
-
Repair damaged or destroyed infrastructure (restore damaged concrete foundation and 
wall, weld metal supports, apply anticorrosive paints, repair or replace damaged scales).  
 
Subcomponent 3.1 - Installation of water supply networks and household connections in 
urban and peri-urban areas in nine cities:  
 
-
Prepare alternative accesses during construction.  
 
-
Dig trenches (approximately 1 m deep), install HDPE tubing and cover with soil.  
 
-
Connect selected households to distribution network and install water meters and back 
yard taps.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2 - Purchase of chemicals for water treatment:  
 
-
Supply of chlorine, aluminum sulfate and caustic soda  
 
-
Construction of adequate storage for annual supply of chemicals.  
 
-
Handling of chemicals and packaging.  
 
-
Disposal of empty chemical packaging.  
Page  4
Subcomponent 4.1 - Rehabilitation of the Onga Zanga Investigation and Research 
Center (CIPOZ):  
 
-
Removal and disposal of debris of the existing buildings.  
 
-
Rehabilitate existing buildings: concrete repairs, wall repairs, cover sheets 
replacement, wood and glass repairs and replacement, plastering, painting, plumbing, 
electrical works, etc.  
 
-
Rehabilitate water supply, sewerage and electrical components of the buildings.  
 
Subcomponent 4.2 - Small water projects that will extend networks and standposts to 
serve peri-urban areas:  
 
-
Prepare alternative access.  
 
-
Dig trenches (approximately 1 m deep), install plastic HDPE pipe and fittings, connect 
pipe to existing network and cover trench with soil.  
 
-
Construct water points (chafarizes/fontenarios) and connect to distribution system; dig 
foundations, reinforce concrete works, plumbing works and drainage system.  
 
It is important to note that the project activities will complement water supply network 
investments already being financed through the World Bank's Emergency Multi-Sector 
Recovery Program and projects financed by the Government of China in a number of the 
target cities. This project will build on these works and, as such, may contribute to the 
generation of cumulative adverse environmental and social impacts. The Bank and the 
Borrower are aware of the need to coordinate oversight and management of the various 
projects to ensure compliance with national laws and Bank safeguard policies and to 
minimize any cumulative impacts that the various projects may have on the environment 
and local communities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The additional financing will support more of the activities identified in the parent 
project, which was designated as a Category B project consistent with the provisions of 
OP/BP 4.01. Safeguard policies triggered by the Project include: Environmental 
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  The project will 
finance extension of water supply distribution networks in select cities (construction and 
rehabilitation) and construction and rehabilitation of the deteriorated national 
hydrometric network along with rehabilitation of select learning and research facilities 
located in the outskirts of Luanda. The potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts related to this project were addressed during project preparation. At appraisal, it 
was determined that no large scale, significant, or irreversible adverse environmental or 
social impacts are expected. No major works are expected. The principal safeguard issue 
with respect to OP/BP 4.01 is construction site impacts that are relatively small in scale, 
time bound and manageable in terms of complying with Bank Safeguard Policies. The 
contribution to any potential cumulative impacts associated with other water supply 
network investments in select cities are expected to be minimal; nevertheless, the Bank 
team and the Borrower are making concerted efforts to coordinate the other water sector 
projects in the nine cities to ensure compatability of investments and avoid cumulative 
impacts.  
 
Specific adverse environmental and social impacts that may occur during project 
implementation as a result of certain types of activities are as follows:  
 
Purchase of bulk (annual) supplies of various water treatment plant chemicals:  
 
-
Corrosion of building elements due to improper storage of chemicals  
 
-
Health risks associated with improper handling and disposal of chemicals  
 
Rehabilitation of the national hydrometric network:  
 
-
Loss of vegetation or sensitive habitats due to location of infrastructure  
 
-
Nuisance to local residents during construction if station is located near a residential 
center (restricted site access and noise pollution)  
 
-
Erosion undermining access platform  
 
-
Concrete manufacture, anti-corrosive paint and metal work may result in localized soil 
and water pollution  
 
-
Accumulation of solid waste due to construction activities creates health risks and 
negative aesthetic impacts on local communities  
 
-
Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil  
 
-
Improper disposal of construction materials creating localized pollution and health 
risks to the work force and local communities.  
 
Water supply networks and domestic connections in urban and peri-urban areas:  
 
-
Loss of vegetation or sensitive habitats due to location of infrastructure  
 
-
Loss of inhabited or productive land and damage to assets due to location of 
infrastructure  
 
-
Nuisance to local residents during construction especially with regards to access and 
noise  
Page  6
-
Spillage around water standposts providing breeding ground for water borne diseases  
 
-
Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil  
 
-
Accumulation of solid waste during construction activities creating health risks and 
negative aesthetics  
 
-
Potential spread of HIV/AIDs due to presence of work force in local communities  
 
-
Breakage of network and domestic connections through improper use causing 
accidents among local residents and work force  
 
-
Water connection surroundings becoming littered with debris (e.g., plastic bags) 
resulting in impeded drainage and localized flooding  
 
Rehabilitation of the Onga Zanga Research Center:  
 
-
Loss of natural vegetation or sensitive habitats due to improper location of temporary 
store yards, work areas, housing, etc.  
 
-
Loss of productive land and assets due to location of infrastructure and vehicle 
movement  
 
-
Nuisance to local residents during construction (restricted access, noise, dust and 
vehicle movement)  
 
-
Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil  
 
-
Accumulation of solid waste due to construction activities creating health risks and 
negative aesthetics  
 
-
Potential spread of HIV/AIDs due to presence of work force in local communities  
 
Water Supply Projects in peri-urban areas as part of the Learning-by-Doing initiative:  
 
-
Destruction of vegetation or sensitive habitats during alignment of the pipe to the 
water standpost  
 
-
Inadequate drainage for residual water from standpost site and localized erosion  
 
-
Debris, noise pollution and restricted site access in local communities during 
construction  
 
-
Increase in water borne diseases due to poor drainage at standpost site  
 
-
Soil pollution due to improper storage, handling and disposal of fuels  
 
-
Solid waste accumulation due to lack of proper and timely disposal  
 
-
Spread of HIV/AIDs by workers among local residents  
 
-
Flooding of depressions near the standpost  
 
-
Improper use of standpost by users may cause accidents among local residents.  
 
Project activities that may require land acquisition or have an impact on assets are not 
expected to occur, but if they were to happen the most likely activities that would 
produce such impacts include: construction of small buildings to house and protect 
instruments near hydrometric stations, rehabilitation or construction of access tracks to 
hydrometric stations, installation of buried pipes in peri-urban areas for water supply 
systems, small pilot projects such as installation of community water fountains and 
temporary worker camps, spoil dumps, and material laydown areas.  
 
To ensure project compliance with Bank safeguard policies and national laws, the 
Borrower prepared a detailed Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) as part of the parent project.  Since 
the activities supported by the additional financing are essentially identical to those 
proposed under the parent project, the ESMF and RPF prepared for the parent project 
Page  7
remain relevant and are applicable to the current Additional Financing project.  The 
ESMF lists the potential impacts of the project and establishes clear procedures for 
environmental screening along with measures to mitigate and reduce the impact of each 
type of activity that may result in adverse environmental and social impacts during the 
planning, construction and operational phases of the project.  The Environment and 
Social Unit (ESU) established by the Ministry of Energy and Water (MINEA) will hold 
primary responsibility for implementing and monitoring the ESMF and RPF to ensure 
that project activities are in compliance with World Bank safeguard policies and national 
laws. Both Frameworks specify the roles and responsibilities of the ESU and MINEA 
agents and outline necessary reporting procedures for managing and monitoring 
environmental and social impacts related to project investments. The ESMF specifies the 
training, capacity building and technical assistance needed to ensure that the ESU can 
successfully implement both Frameworks.  The Safeguards instruments to be produced 
during project implementation are expected to be Environmental and Social Management 
Plans for construction, and Abbreviated Resettlement Plans in the event there is 
acquisition of land, either permanent or temporary, or impact on assets or livelihood 
because of the taking of land.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The civil works and other construction and rehabilitation activities proposed under the 
project are relatively small in scale and the potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts are expected to be minor and localized. Indirect and long-term impacts are not 
expected at this time barring any major cumulative impacts caused by the larger water 
sector investments in select target cities that are being implemented in tandem with some 
of the activities of this project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower prepared the ESMF and RPF to ensure that the project remains in full 
compliance with Bank Safeguard Policies as well as national legislation throughout 
project implementation.  Both the ESMF and RPF include clear guidelines and measures 
to mitigate any adverse environmental and social impacts of the project, almost all of 
which are construction related. The ESMF provides a screening process for establishing 
the level of environmental management required for each type of project activity.  With 
respect to implementation of the two Frameworks, an Environmental Social Unit (ESU) 
will be created within the Technical Support area, established by MINEA, that will hold 
primary responsibility for all environmental and social issues of the project including 
implementation of the ESMF and RPF.  
 
However, it remains clear that the institutional and human capacity to effectively 
address and mitigate environmental and social impacts of the project in accordance with 
Page  8
Bank standards is limited at the Provincial level. Furthermore, the institutional capacity to 
implement measures outlined in the ESMF and RPF were considered to be weak.  To 
address this gap, the ESMF and project design identifies specific training and capacity 
building for:  
 
1.
Hydrometric technicians from the Department of Water Resources  
 
2.
Technical staff of the ESU  
 
3.
Managers of water points and other community water supply projects  
 
4.
Construction personnel  
 
5.
Personnel dealing with chemicals for the water treatment plants  
 
The project will finance all training and capacity building activities associated with 
ensuring that the borrower has sufficient capacity to implement and supervise the ESMF 
and RPF, and subsequent Environmental and Social Management Plans for construction 
and Abbreviated RAPS (if required) throughout project implementation.  Due to 
circumstances outside the project, progress on effectiveness of the parent project had 
been significantly delayed; however, during preparation of the Additional Financing, the 
team visited selected cities among the nine in which similar investments were carried out 
under Bank funding as part of the Emergency Multi-Sector Recovery Program (EMRP1 
and 2).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key project stakeholders are the Ministry of Energy and Water, provincial 
governments and households in the nine target cities. Public consultations were held as 
part of the parent project during project preparation to disseminate and review the 
objectives, scope and design of the Project as well as the purpose and content of the 
ESMF and RPF. Project beneficiaries were included in the project development 
consultation process and were consulted directly with respect to the ESMF and RPF. The 
target audience for the public consultations was national and provincial governments, 
civil society and local communities in the nine cities where the bulk of the project 
activities will be implemented. In addition, workshops were held in Luanda during 
project preparation to engage and consult with members of national government, the 
private sector as well as civil society on project design.  Provincial governments 
disclosed the ESMF and RPF to households in the nine target cities and requested 
feedback on the measures and processes established to mitigate and reduce any adverse 
environmental and social impact of the project. All project beneficiaries have access to 
the Portuguese version of the summaries of the ESMF and RPF in their city. English 
versions of the ESMF and RPF were disclosed prior to appraisal in the InfoShop.  The 
issues, stakeholders, and nine target cities remain unchanged from the parent project; 
therefore, additional consultation as part of the Additional Financing is not necessary.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2008 
 
Page  9
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  10
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares 
01/17/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen 
01/17/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
01/17/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mathewos Woldu 
01/18/2011 
Comments:  The RSA has reviewed and cleared the first AF PAD-ISDS on 5 January 2011. 
