Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/22/2011 
Report No.:  60433
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P125151 
Project Name:  Second Norte Grande Water Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader:  Patricia Lopez Martinez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 24, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (50%);Pollution management and 
environmental health (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
40.00
40.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to increase sustainable access to sanitation and 
water supply services in the Norte Grande region of Argentina, by providing investments 
in infrastructure and supporting institutional development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has been designed as a framework project comprising several sanitation and 
water subprojects, each of which will be selected for funding during project 
implementation from a pipeline of potential investments (the Project will focus on 
sanitation investments although it could eventually fund water supply investments that 
are considered Category A as per the World Bank Environmental Assessment Safeguard 
Policy (OP/BP 4.01) and thus would be excluded for funding under the first Norte 
Grande Water Infrastructure Project). At this stage no subprojects has been approved for 
financing under the Project and in order to be approved, all subprojects without exception 
will need to comply with the eligibility criteria established for inclusion in the Project, 
which include having background studies and consultation processes that meet Bank 
standards. The pipeline subprojects were identified by the UCPyPFE based on the 
Page  2
priorities indicated by provinces during the preparation of the ongoing IADB financed 
Water Infrastructure Project (Water Infrastructure Project: Northern Provinces 
Development (AR-L1015), IADB, 2007. This Project is part of the overarching Norte 
Grande Development and Integration Program). The investments will be fully funded by 
the federal Government from loan proceeds and will be transferred to the provinces once 
completed. The Project will also provide technical assistance to support pipeline 
development and subproject preparation through its component 2. To help encourage 
investment in sanitation and provide capacity building in the NGR, the technical 
assistance would include a broader group of municipalities and provinces than those that 
would be ultimately funded under the investment component of the project.  
 
Specific subprojects approved for funding will need to comply with the technical, 
economic, financial, institutional, environmental and social eligibility criteria set forth in 
the Project's Operational Manual, as well as with consultation and disclosure 
requirements. Consideration for funding will be made on first-come, first-served, basis 
from those subprojects that are ready for implementation. Subproject proposals will be 
examined in the context of: (i) consistency with Project objectives, in particular their 
poverty reduction potential; (ii) compliance with all eligibility criteria; and (iii) level of 
subproject's ownership and results of stakeholder consultation at the local level.  
 
Works financed under the subprojects will be operated by the providers in charge of the 
services within the different provinces, who will commit to provide O&M funding and 
operate the subproject in accordance with Project rules and an Action Plan to be prepared 
by the Province for the sustainability of the investments. During the preparation of each 
specific subproject, the relevant service provider will undertake a capacity and needs 
assessment and will benefit from an institutional and operational strengthening program 
financed under the Project to help address the established targets and address identified 
weaknesses.  
 
Project components  
 
Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation Infrastructure (US$209 million, with 
US$169.5 million of Bank funding)(These amount include price and physical 
contingencies): Carrying out of demand-driven Subprojects consisting of the 
rehabilitation, upgrading and/or reconstruction of Participating Provinces#: (i) 
wastewater collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal systems, such as wastewater 
treatment plants, pumping stations, main collectors and secondary sewerage networks; 
and (ii) water supply systems including, for instance, production and distribution systems 
that are considered category A from their environmental impact assessment perspective.  
 
Component 2: Institutional and Operational Development and Technical Assistance 
(US$15 million, all financed by the Bank): (i) Carrying out of tailored institutional and/or 
operational strengthening programs and provision of technical assistance for participating 
WSS Service Providers to improve their institutional organization, investment planning, 
management capabilities and technical, operational, commercial and financial efficiency 
including, for instance: (a) the development of WSS-related management and information 
Page  3
systems; (b) the development of WSS customer databases and cadastres; (c) the provision 
of technical assistance related to strategic planning, energy efficiency and operational 
efficiency programs; (d) the carrying out of analysis of cost-recovery options and 
optimization of rates and subsidy structures; (e) design and implementation of macro- and 
micro-metering (including minor works), and non-revenue water reduction programs; (f) 
the provision of technical assistance for institutional reorganization; and (g) the design of 
training programs for operation and maintenance of systems and installations (focused on 
wastewater treatment plants, water treatment plants and pumping stations), and the 
carrying out of studies related thereto, all under terms of reference acceptable to the 
Bank;(  If both the first (P120211) and second (P125151) NG Water Infrastructure 
Projects were to finance works operated by the same service provider, only one Project 
would generally support the entire institutional strengthening program for that service 
provider. This component, and subcomponent (ii) can also support service providers or 
subproject preparation in provinces that do not have an infrastructure subproject financed 
under Component 1.) (ii) Carrying out of technical studies required to support the 
preparation and implementation of Subprojects, for instance, feasibility studies, analysis 
of alternatives, engineering designs, economic and financial analysis, socio-economic 
surveys, environmental and social impact assessments and management plans (including 
screening and risk assessments, support to the preparation of safeguard instruments and 
monitoring) and other studies related thereto, all under terms of reference acceptable to 
the Bank; and (iii) Carrying out of communication plans, dissemination and knowledge-
sharing activities related to the Project, and training and capacity building for the 
institutional strengthening of UCPyPFE and Participating Provinces.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Supervision (US$15 million, all financed by the 
Bank): (i) Carrying out of specialized independent technical, environmental and social 
supervision of Subprojects' implementation, as required; (ii) Carrying out of Project 
audits and monitoring and evaluation activities under the Project; and (iii) Provision of 
administrative and operational support (including the provision of Operating Costs) to 
UCPyPFE in the administration, monitoring, coordination and supervision of Project 
implementation. (As mentioned in paragraph 10 above, implementation arrangements for 
both the first and the second NG Water Infrastructure Projects are the same. Each Project 
will fund its share of the combined management and supervision costs).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Subprojects will finance the rehabilitation, upgrading and/or reconstruction of sanitation 
and water supply systems mostly in urban areas in the NGR. In general, these areas of the 
proposed subprojects are located in areas with high urban poverty. These areas 
commonly suffer from the following environmental problems: (i) wastewater discharge 
and infiltration into the groundwater and pollution of surface water bodies; (ii) the 
presence of contaminated open urban lagoons; (iv) poorly built and maintained septic 
tanks and conveyance systems causing spillage in areas such yards, canals, roads and 
other accessible areas; and (v) exposure to the wastewater increasing the risk of 
transmission of waterborne disease. If this is left unchanged it is very probable that the 
Page  4
environmental situation will deteriorate even further, with higher levels of pollution and 
incidence of disease with the associated costs from healthcare and lost work days.  
 
In terms of the water quality of receiving waters in the Norte Grande region, there is no 
systematic baseline information, or environmental monitoring efforts with some isolated 
efforts in a few cities and basins. However, many participating provinces have approved 
local standards for wastewaters which in itself represent an important progress to ensure 
water resources pollution control. As part of project preparation, detailed Terms of 
Reference for the establishment of baseline data and other studies and environmental 
monitoring have been developed by the GoA with Bank's assistance for use during 
implementation.  
 
Wastewater treatment plants to be constructed under the project would generally be 
based on process technologies selected from a list of recommended unit processes (or 
combinations of such processes). The treatment processes in the list have low investment 
and O&M costs and are relatively simple operation. These processes, when combined can 
meet even the most stringent effluent standards. Considering the effluent quality 
standards required in most provinces in the NGR, it is anticipated that most of the 
treatment processes presented can achieve the required effluent quality, without the need 
to combine two or more of the processes into a single treatment plant. The lower O&M 
costs and the simplicity of operation improve the sustainability of the investments, which 
is one of the main objectives of the project. The use of technologies with lower 
investment costs would also allow the project investments to cover a larger population in 
different provinces, maximizing the value of the federal subsidy. However this list does 
exclude any wastewater treatment technology and each case will be analyzed on its own 
merits based on specific requirements and technical and environmental sustainability 
aspects.  
 
In addition, subproject preparation will explore the viability of capturing biogas for 
energy use in wastewater treatment plants that use as the first treatment stage anaerobic 
processes. The income from the utilization of biogas can contribute to covering O&M 
costs. It may also be possible to obtain carbon credits for reducing the emission of 
methane, a strong greenhouse gas, and thus generate additional income from the 
anaerobic process.  
 
In a broader scale, the Norte Grande region involves three trans-boundary eco-regions 
which have been part of comprehensive eco-regional planning exercises: (i) the Great 
American Chaco; (ii) the Upper Paraná Atlantic Forest; and (iii) the Yungas. In addition 
to this, the Norte Grande encompasses other eco-regions such as the Puna and Altos 
Andes. In most of the eco-regions mentioned above, there is baseline information 
available in terms of biodiversity conservation and sustainable development which has 
been agreed upon on a consensual basis by different stakeholders within the last ten 
years. This implies that all the infrastructure developments will at least have to consider 
environmental priorities in each eco-region. In some provinces, these priorities have 
gained a legal status, while in others it remains a basis of information. This provides the 
project with a framework to design proper environmental management measures in a 
Page  5
well-defined ecological framework which will be addressed by the application of the 
Natural Habitats policy in future subprojects, if relevant.  
 
The proposed Project (P125151) - like the first Norte Grande Water Infrastructure 
Project (P120211) - has been designed as a framework operation. At the onset of Project 
preparation, two sanitation subprojects that had reached an advanced preparation stage 
under the IADB financed Water Infrastructure Project were proposed by the Government 
for funding under the proposed Project. These subprojects are the Gran Resistencia 
Metropolitan Area Sanitation System in Chaco Province and the Santiago del Estero 
Sanitation and Wastewater System in Santiago del Estero Province. Preparatory activities 
were launched with the objective of including these two subprojects as fully prepared 
investments ready for financing during the first year of Project implementation (as 
described in the ISDS from 07/30/2010 according to the original Project (P120211) 
design). However, the assessment concluded that in-depth additional discussion and 
studies would be needed to identify the best technical solutions and to ascertain the 
economic and environmental sustainability of these subprojects.  
 
The overall design and structure of the Project was therefore revised to adopt a 
framework approach that accommodates the need to undertake such studies and allows 
flexibility in the final choice of investments. This design provides the opportunity to 
include these and/or other subprojects as they are identified, designed and shown to meet 
eligibility criteria. The review of the documentation and subprojects proposals served as a 
means of scoping anticipated impacts, flagging important gaps in analysis and identifying 
capacity constraints for use in developing the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework that would be applied to all subprojects, as well as scoping additional studies 
and activities that would be required in the process of determining eligibility of these 
specific subprojects.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Graciela Sanchez Martinez (LCSSO) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Anticipated general environment impacts of participating subprojects.  
 
Overall the works associated with construction and rehabilitation of the sanitation and 
wastewater systems in the possible subprojects to be financed under the Project are 
expected to be environmentally beneficial and sustainable, if they are properly managed 
using good practice standards. The construction of an efficient wastewater treatment 
system will reduce the discharge of contaminated wastewater into the local water bodies. 
It will also help improve the quality of life of the local population by reducing the risk of 
contracting waterborne diseases and improving the surrounding environment by reducing 
water pollution.  
 
Impacts during the construction phase: During construction, the main potential 
environmental impacts will be temporary and typical of the construction of large-scale 
civil works such as the expansion of sanitation systems. Possible impacts and risks 
include the following: (i) temporary disruption to local traffic flows; (ii) temporary loss 
of access to recreational, residential and commercial areas during the construction period; 
(iii) dust and noise; (iv) handling and management of wastes and construction materials; 
(v) occupational emergency response planning; (vi) erosion and sediment control; (vii) 
disposal of construction debris; (viii) chance archeological finds; and (ix) excavation for 
the new plants/lagoons, transportation of sand, concrete and construction materials, earth 
compacting, concrete pouring and operation of heavy construction equipment. With 
appropriate prevention, mitigation and supervision measures, these impacts are 
considered moderate and temporary and readily manageable. The management of 
construction impacts will be the responsibility of contractors and specific environmental 
measures will be specified within the construction contract.  
 
Impacts during the operational phase: During the operational phase, the main 
environmental impacts and risks relate to: (i) the risk of poor operation resulting in 
environmental and human health effects from the wastewater discharges; (ii) the potential 
environmental and human health risks associated with the management and disposal of 
continuously generated bio-solids and sludges; (iii) odor and noise nuisances; and (iv) 
health and safety risks.  
 
Cumulative Impacts:  The Project is expected to contribute to significant improvements 
in the water quality and quality of life for the population living in targeted areas and 
along the coasts of the receiving water bodies. Cumulative impacts should be highly 
positive if the sanitation systems are built and operated with appropriate supervision and 
environmental management. The cumulative benefits to the region will depend on the 
combined effectiveness of all the various programs in the Norte Grande region, the 
growth and development trends in the different basins as well as other development 
projects currently being developed or planned.  
 
Page  7
The Rapid Social Assessment (SA) undertaken during preparation concluded that the 
subprojects to be funded under the Project are anticipated to have an overall positive 
impact.  The main opportunities for positive impacts during the construction and 
operation phases arise from: (a) direct and indirect employment creation and multiplier 
effects in the provision of goods, supplies, equipment, services and income generation, 
which will contribute to growth of local economies and discourage out-migration; and (b) 
better health and hygiene conditions stemming from increased access to WSS and 
reduced contact with untreated and polluted wastewater sources, and decreasing costs 
associated with treating these health problems; and (c) reducing vulnerability to flooding 
through more and better urban drainage systems.  
 
Potential negative social impacts of the subprojects are few, temporary and mostly 
affecting localized population during the construction phase (public safety, movement or 
excavations of land and possible collapse of housing and public facilities foundations, 
disruptions of water, gas, energy, commerce and industries, noise and other nuisance).  
 
The Rapid SA also identified significant urban population growth resulting from 
migration from rural areas due to land tenure and natural resources pressure, which has 
increased human informal settlements, including indigenous peoples mostly integrated to 
the urban communities. Potential impacts of the subprojects on these groups are expected 
to be highly more positive than negative due mainly to the social and environmental 
setting of the project: (i) essentially rehabilitation and expansion of existing systems in 
urban areas integrated in the existing land-use legal framework; and (ii) access to WSS 
services and urban drainage systems in these urban areas have been a long-standing 
aspiration of these communities, including indigenous peoples.  
 
General Risks and Impacts anticipated for Indigenous Peoples: An Indigenous Peoples 
Policy Framework (IPPF) for the Project has been developed (see below for summary) to 
guide the preparation of specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) during subproject 
implementation for cases in which Indigenous People (IPs) could be affected under 
potential subprojects.  
 
Environmental safeguards policies triggered  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01): The Project has been classified as a Category A 
following the Environmental Assessment safeguard policy (OP4.01), in consideration of 
the impacts and mitigation programs needed as part of the construction and rehabilitation 
of large scale wastewater treatment systems which are anticipated to be funded under the 
project. In addition to this, the categorization process takes into account: (i) the social and 
environmental sensitivities of the project area, (ii) the types of proposed investments, (iii) 
the weak provincial, municipal or utilities capacities; and (iv) the unknown scope of 
future investments.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). The screening process and environmental analysis 
undertaken for the example subprojects highlighted that discharges from a new 
wastewater system subproject could occur in wetlands or important riparian areas that 
Page  8
would require careful design accounting for contingencies and distance to important 
habitats. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF, see next 
section for details) prepared for the Project includes provisions to understand the 
applicability and ensure compliance with this policy.  
 
Pest management (OP 4.09). Some pesticides could be used during the closure of old 
infrastructure or during the maintenance of new infrastructure. Products to be procured 
could include defoliators, soil sterilizers, herbicides, pesticides, disinfectants or polymers. 
The ESMF includes specific requirements to ensure that all construction contracts will 
include measures to manage pesticides following Bank#s policy.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). It is possible that the civil works constructed 
under the Project may directly or indirectly affect physical cultural property in cities. 
These could include known local structures or sites of historic or cultural importance. The 
ESMF includes specific requirements to screen for these impacts and includes mitigation 
measures.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). This policy is triggered as the Project may finance 
projects that do not include the construction of a new dam but could rely on the 
performance of an existing dam or a dam under construction (DUC) such as water supply 
systems that draw directly from a reservoir controlled by an existing dam or a DUC; 
hydraulic structures downstream from an existing dam or a DUC, where failure of the 
upstream dam could cause extensive damage to or failure of the new Bank-funded 
structure; and water supply projects that will depend on the storage and operation of an 
existing dam or a DUC for their supply of water and could not function if the dam failed. 
The ESMF includes appropriate guidance to identify and manage impacts when 
identifying these types of subprojects during implementation.  
 
Forests. (OP/BP4.36).  Some subprojects could affect small fractions of native forest in 
the locations of the wastewater treatment plants.  In these cases the EA to be undertaken 
for each future subproject will analyze this issue in depth, and the EMP will determine 
the specific management measures and eventual compensation measures following the 
ESMF guidelines.  If the relevant forest were to involve natural habitats, these would be 
analyzed as per the requirements of OP 4.04.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). This policy is triggered as the 
subprojects to be considered for funding may be located on waterways that form part of 
the Paraná/Paraguay River system which originates in Brazil and flows into Bolivia and 
Paraguay (the Paraguay River) and Paraguay and Argentina (the Paraná River). The 
Paraguay discharges its water in the Parana and further downstream it merges with the 
Uruguay River to form the La Plata River, a river that flows from Argentina to Uruguay. 
This system comprises an international waterway for purposes of The World Bank's OP 
7.50 paragraph 1. It is the assessment of Bank staff that the Project will not cause 
appreciable harm to other riparians and will not be appreciably harmed by the other 
riparian's possible water use.  
 
Page  9
Following OP/BP 7.50 requirements, a formal notification of the proposed Project and 
its details has been sent by the Bank to the Republic of Paraguay and the Oriental 
Republic of Uruguay on behalf of the Government of the Argentine Republic through 
their Executive Director at the Bank.  The notification period expired on March 3 and no 
response has been received.  
 
Social Safeguards triggered  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). The Project triggers OP/BP 4.10 due to the presence 
of approximately 122,863 indigenous peoples living or having collective attachment in 
the NGR and the fact that the definition of specific subprojects and thus their exact 
location and associated social risks and impacts, including both positive and negative 
effects on indigenous peoples, will only be known during implementation. Therefore, an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) following the domestic's legislation and 
OP/BP 4.10 has been prepared by the Borrower and disclosed for public consultations 
since September 28, 2010.  The IPPF will guide subproject screening and requirements 
for preparation and implementation of specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) for cases 
in which IPs are affected.  
 
The IPPF takes into account some key aspects, which include: (i) a social assessment 
and prior, free and informed consultations for affected IP; (ii) an action plan duly 
budgeted with measures to ensure that IP obtain adequate social and economic benefits 
generated by the project as appropriate or to prevent, reduce, mitigate or compensate 
negative effects; and (iii) a monitoring and grievance mechanism. The IPPF was also 
based on the Rapid SA of the Project, which evaluated the broader social opportunities 
and risks in the region for IP and solicited feedback from interviews with the National 
Coordinator of the National Institute for Indigenous Affairs (Instituto Nacional de 
Asuntos Indígenas) and members of the Council of Indigenous Participation (Consejo de 
Participación Indígena). For any subprojects where indigenous peoples (IP) are present in 
the subproject area of influence, a specific social assessment will be carried out to 
evaluate the benefits and risks and define the need for a specific IPP.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Any resettlement required as a result of the 
construction activities will follow the guidelines of the Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) prepared for the Project.  This RPF has been prepared by the Borrower according 
to the Argentina Legislation and in line with the Bank's OP/BP 4.12, and was first 
disclosed in-country on September 28, 2010 and in the Bank's Infoshop on October 20, 
2010. The RPF will guide the Borrower to prepare Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as 
required. It covers physical displacement, impact on building structures, possible loss of 
income as well as involuntary restriction of access to legally designated parks and 
protected areas. The RPF includes inter alia: (i) freedom of choice of the compensatory 
measure; and (ii) compensation at cost reposition when appropriate and finalized before 
starting of civil works.   
 
Page  10
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is expected to contribute to significant improvements in water quality and the 
quality of life of the population living in targeted areas and along the coasts of the 
receiving water bodies. Cumulative impacts should be highly positive if the sanitation 
systems are built and operated with good supervision and environmental management. 
The likelihood of the overall Project strategy meeting its long term objectives will depend 
on the combined effectiveness of all the various programs in the Norte Grande region. 
This includes the construction, operation and maintenance of other infrastructure or 
management plans. The success of the strategy will also partly depend on growth and 
development trends in the basins as well as other development projects currently being 
developed or planned. The interaction of these various factors may have an important 
regional or cumulative impact, which cannot be addressed by a single project entity.  
 
From the social standpoint, as mentioned, the project's SA has identified the risk of high 
population growth rates in urban areas of the NG region as a result of in-migration from 
rural areas due to land tenure and natural resources pressure causing an increased number 
of informal settlements, including indigenous peoples that are mostly integrated to the 
communities of urban areas. No indirect or long term social impacts are expected to be 
caused by the subprojects. Nevertheless, since the SA of the project identified the above-
described social groups that are already affected by the pressures on land tenure and 
access to natural resources, and if because of the subprojects, impacts could become 
cumulative, particular provisions to assess and manage them, including social inclusion 
measures, will be added to each subproject's EMP.  
 
In addition, a series of inclusiveness measures to identify and address negative or 
enhance positive impacts on vulnerable groups (attending to factors like ethnicity, 
gender, age or other characteristics) are foreseen within the subprojects' communication 
and social programs, as identified in the Social Frameworks of the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) which is part of the Project's Operations Manual 
(OM). These activities include as needed: (i) capacity building in inter-institutional-based 
planning of enhancement and expansion of WSS within agencies in charge of water, land 
use, natural resources exploitation, indigenous peoples, health, education, and income 
generation, (ii) social impact analysis, including gender-based, to determine differences 
in affordability, roles and uses of WSS services and to predict how these groups, 
particularly women, can participate in and be affected by the planned investment; and 
(iii) educational and local culturally adequate campaigns to specific groups such as 
squatter communities and indigenous peoples nearby the subproject's areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The environmental and social analysis of technical alternatives for sanitation and water 
supply in subprojects to be selected during implementation will be part of the 
environmental assessment process of subprojects and will be carried out based on the 
guidelines contained in the ESMF.In particular, the EA prepared under the ESMF 
principles, will analyze the sites selection processes in order to determine the nature of 
Page  11
risks and to avoid potential conflicts.  While in some cases sites are pre-existing and that 
the option of selecting alternative sites may be constrained, sites will be carefully 
analyzed in order to determine the relevant environmental and social management 
measures.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Given the framework nature of the Project, no individual subproject has been approved 
yet for financing under the Project. In order to be approved, all subprojects without 
exception would need to comply with the criteria established for inclusion in the 
program, which include having background studies and consultation processes that meet 
Bank standards and comply with Bank safeguard policies.  
 
The safeguards approach under the Project was developed to accommodate this 
approach and the scope of the redesigned project but also to take advantage of the 
analysis done under the initial larger project. In particular, the preparation of instruments 
to address safeguard policy issues includes three key aspects: (i) scoping of potential 
subproject issues using the analysis of these two potential subprojects from the 
preliminary pipeline of investments and through a rapid social assessment and an 
environmental analysis undertaken for the entire Project; (ii) development of an 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) that includes detailed due 
diligence for safeguards compliance and meaningful consultations for Category A 
subprojects; and (iii) institutional assessment and capacity building program.  
 
A
scoping process was undertaken to identify the main potential environmental and 
social issues and the potential applicability of the World Bank's safeguards policies to the 
Project.  The scoping activities included a Rapid Social Assessment of the Project that 
reviews the overall social context, and included: (i) diversity and gender; (ii) analysis of 
main stakeholders; (iii) institutional framework, including formal and informal rules; (iv) 
culture of participation; (v) social opportunities, risks and impacts, among them those 
related to social safeguards; (vi) mitigation and compensation measures and (vii) impacts 
on indigenous peoples.  
 
Eligibility and Readiness Criteria: Subprojects to be designed during project 
implementation will need to meet eligibility and readiness criteria, including 
environmental and social assessments, as well as other relevant safeguard instruments 
required.  In addition, each subproject must comply with the applicable environmental 
laws in the relevant province as well as the safeguard policies of the Bank, which will be 
set forth in the Project's Operational Manual (OM). Specifically, future subprojects will 
comply with the following criteria:  
 
i) 
The subproject must provide an EIA acceptable to the environmental authority of 
the relevant province and the Bank. The EIA will incorporate the results of public 
consultations, prepared following the guidelines of the ESMF.  
 
ii) 
The EIA must include mitigation measures and programs for the construction and 
operation phases. In the case of subprojects involving involuntary resettlement or 
Page  12
affecting indigenous peoples, specific provisions will be outlined in a Resettlement Plan 
(RP) or Indigenous People Plan (IPP).  
 
iii) 
All costs associated with the implementation of the subproject EMP, RP and/or 
IPP and any mitigation measures and monitoring programs must be budgeted for (under 
Component two of the Project).  
 
iv) 
The subproject must demonstrate sustainability from an environmental and social 
standpoint, which entails preventing: (i) permanent negative impacts on protected areas 
or cultural heritage; (ii) negative impacts on species threatened by extinction; (iii) 
negative environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated to acceptable levels; and (iv) 
social costs deemed unacceptable and/or unable to be mitigated by the affected 
communities.  
 
Environmental and Social Management Framework.  The GoA has developed an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which covers the 
Environmental Assessment process and includes an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), hereafter ESMF, and a 
Communication Framework: dissemination and consultation. Once specific investment 
proposals are firmed-up, the subprojects will be required to follow the procedures 
outlined in the ESMF to ensure they meet eligibility criteria and are compliant with 
safeguards policies applicable to the subproject.  
 
The ESMF addresses several goals, including: (i) ensuring the environmental and social 
sustainability of the subprojects; (ii) complying with national environmental legislation; 
(iii) complying with the Bank#s environmental and social safeguards policies; and (iv) 
defining institutional responsibilities for the environmental and social management 
instruments.  
 
The ESMF comprises a methodology for subproject screening and consultation, 
including a Screening Datasheet with criteria to guide the environmental and social 
classification of potential works and a negative list of actions/activities to allow exclusion 
of works. After the screening stage, the Borrower will ensure that an environmental and 
social assessment is performed to analyze specific environmental and social impacts and 
identify additional studies and consultation processes required to follow ESMF 
requirements (e.g, local regulations and Bank safeguard policies). The ESMF also 
contains tools and procedures for carrying out preparation, implementation and 
monitoring of environmental and social management plans associated with the 
subprojects.  In particular,  as stated above, the EA prepared under the ESMF principles, 
will analyze the sites selection processes in order to determine the nature of risks and to 
avoid potential conflicts.  
 
The ESMF contains procedures for undertaking consultation and public disclosure as 
per World Bank safeguards policies and Policy on Information Disclosure. Disclosure 
requirements for category A will follow a rule of having the documents available for 
meaningful consultations and to ensure the time required for the consultation of TOR of 
the EIA of category A subprojects.  
 
Page  13
The ESMF also includes specific requirements for monitoring compliance with 
environmental and social requirements for both the construction and operational phases 
in subprojects. Any associated costs would be incorporated in the relevant contracts when 
applicable. Service providers will have the primary responsibility for establishing 
baselines and monitoring specific activities under construction and plant operations, 
under the supervision of the UCPyPFE.  
 
For subprojects, the EIA process will solicit stakeholder concerns and provide an open 
process of debate and discussion about the subproject objectives and goals. Other 
stakeholder consultation events to disseminate information on the Project and gather 
stakeholder views will be planned during implementation as part of the specific 
subprojects EMPs. Previous, open and informed consultations to the indigenous 
communities will follow specific provisions that are respectful of their culture as foreseen 
in the IPPF. This process will include measures such as works announcements in the 
language of each ethnic group and utilization of disclosure materials considering the 
cultural diversity of indigenous peoples.  
 
All subprojects will have the required environmental permits and all studies will be 
conducted according to the current national requirements and approved in due course by 
the local authorities.  
 
Institutional Arrangements  
 
The ESMF defines clear roles and responsibilities for preparing, implementing and 
monitoring of safeguards work.  
 
UCPyPFE's role. The UCPyPFE (through a dedicated unit) within the MFP at the 
federal government level will be responsible for ESMF implementation, including 
safeguard compliance and supervision of environmental and social management issues. 
The UCPyPFE will assign qualified staff dedicated to supervise the implementation of 
EMPs (and IPP and/or RP if applicable) during subproject construction and ensure 
periodic independent audits, and supervise environmental and social performance by 
contractors, the provinces and service providers. The UCPyPFE will also provide support 
in coordinating information disclosure and consultations.  
 
Contractor's role. All construction contractors will be required to assign an 
environmental engineer or other suitably qualified staff, including a social specialist, to 
oversee compliance with the EMP (construction phase) and IPP and/or RP if applicable, 
on a day-to-day basis. The specific requirements for environmental and social mitigation 
measures will be included in bidding documents and as part of the construction contract.  
 
Province and Service Provider role. As part of the PTA to be signed between the federal 
and provincial governments, the UCPyPFE will transfer to the provincial level the 
following roles and responsibilities: co-participation with the UCPyPFE in subprojects# 
screening, consultations processes, environmental and social assessments, design and 
implementation of IPPs and RPs, and monitoring and supervision. The WSS service 
Page  14
providers will have the primary responsibility for establishing baselines and monitoring 
specific activities under the construction and operation of the systems. This co-
participated transfer of roles and responsibilities will also include coordination 
arrangements to ensure that local service providers internalize capacity towards the 
operation of the proposed works. This capacity will be created in collaboration with the 
UCPyPFE during construction, though it will continue during the operation as necessary.  
 
During the operational phase, the relevant WSS service provider in charge of operating 
the applicable subproject will have specific institutional responsibilities to address 
prevention and mitigation of operationally related environmental and social impacts. 
Through their staff, utilities will ensure that competent core staff will be available at all 
times to supervise the implementation of environmental and social management measures 
directly under their control and to ensure compliance with the agreed EMPs (operational 
phase) and environmental license obligations. The Project, through component 2, will 
finance capacity building and TA activities to help provide sufficient and qualified 
resources are available for the management of environmental and social aspects related to 
the proposed works during their operation.  
 
Management of Claims and Disputes System. A Management of Claims and Disputes 
System has been established in the ESMF and will be the joint responsibility of the 
UCPyPFE and the participating Provinces, and will be channeled through four levels, one 
internal (at the subproject level in the field through contractors, the Province and the 
UCPyPFE), and the other three external including mediations, ombudsman, and judicial. 
Specific mechanisms will be located in the work sites, in the Provinces, and in the 
UCPyPFE's facilities in Buenos Aires. Channels to receive claims and disputes will 
comprise a phone line, web site, social monitoring, among others, according to the 
characteristics and needs of users, including indigenous peoples as needed. In all cases, a 
systematic record will be kept of the date of reception and resolution of claims.  
 
Institutional Assessment and Capacity Building:  
 
An assessment of the current institutional capacity at the UCPyPPF and local provincial 
levels was conducted during Project preparation. Overall, it was found that the staff in the 
UCPyPFE is competent to manage safeguard issues, but the unit will require an 
additional human resources to handle the increased work load involved by the three new 
Bank financed projects  at the UCPyPFE level and to incorporate specific specialization 
(i.e in the area of communications) Areas that have been identified for strengthening 
include:  (i) the generation of baseline and environmental monitoring studies at the local 
level; (ii) the design and implementation of mitigation measures; (iii) the capacity to 
incorporate social dimensions in EIA processes, including consultation and social 
participation and indigenous peoples planning in all stages of subproject's cycle; (iv) the 
dissemination, consultation and claims and redress mechanisms at the local level, and the 
coordination mechanism with the central level; (v) involuntary resettlement practices; (vi) 
the integration of communication plans into the institutional system both at the federal 
and provincial level; and (vii) capacity for monitoring activity outcomes at both federal 
and provincial levels. A specific assessment of the implementation of environmental and 
Page  15
social instruments will be undertaken within the mid-term evaluation and at Project 
completion stage.  
 
During implementation, the GoA and the Bank will determine the strengthening needs 
in each subproject implementing agency in terms of environmental and social 
management and will propose specific activities for each agency team. The provinces 
will create counterpart teams to lead institutional development efforts, staffed with 
environmental and social specialists as needed. These arrangements would be 
complemented by specific supervision contracts hired by the UCPyPFE at the national 
level to ensure proper safeguards monitoring if this is required during subproject 
implementation. The Project will support capacity expansion requirements due to the 
Bank-funded subprojects and their wide provincial dispersion. Project design includes an 
institutional development component that includes funding for environmental and social 
management activities and technical assistance, including consultants required to 
complement the existing capacity at the provincial level to conduct the screening and 
assessment of subprojects proposed for funding, the monitoring of subprojects in 
execution and the training of permanent staff at the central and local levels in 
environmental and social issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include users, local political leaders (governors and mayors), provincial 
and municipal WSS service providers, environmental agencies, water resources 
management and oversight agencies, WSS regulators, NGOs and indigenous affairs 
institutions, civil society representatives and local community leaders including people 
with improved access to WSS services and population benefiting from improved 
environmental conditions as a result of wastewater treatment. Considering the 
preliminary pipeline of subprojects and the available resources, the project is expected to 
benefit at least 400,000 people through improved sanitation services.  
 
Public disclosure and consultation of Project Safeguards documents. The draft ESMF, 
IPPF and RPF were first disclosed in country on September 28, 2010 and in the Bank's 
Infoshop on October 20, 2010 as part of the original design for the Norte Grande Water 
Infrastructure Project (P120211) which envisaged category A water supply and sanitation 
investments . Updated drafts including the results of recently completed consultations 
(see summary below) were disclosed in-country and through the Bank#s Infoshop on 
February 24, 2011.  
 
All three safeguard frameworks (ESMF, IPPF and RPF) have been consulted through 
three different channels: (i) expert peer review of the documents by two internationally 
recognized  professionals with substantial experience in the WSS sector and also in 
working with indigenous communities in Argentina; (ii) a virtual review through 
communication of the documents to a variety of institutional stakeholders, including 
provincial environmental agencies and institutions related to water resources provision 
and management, NGOs and indigenous affairs institutions; and (iii) organization of 
focus group discussions through targeted meetings in two provinces of the NGR on 
Page  16
January 25-27, 2011, to solicit feedback from the same stakeholders. Details on 
comments received in UCPyPFE#s report on the consultation process, available in 
UCPyPFE website and in the Infoshop.  
 
Additionally, the Communication Framework of the ESMF (dissemination and 
consultation) will continue throughout Project's implementation. The communication 
plan of the ESMF includes specific principles and measures to adequately manage broad 
dissemination of information on the Project and ensure an open process of discussion 
about the Project's objectives and goals. For the subprojects, specific guidelines are 
included in the ESMF to manage meaningful consultation for relevant stakeholders of 
future subprojects to ascertain their views, identify of potential adverse and positive 
impacts, as well as defining accordingly adequate management measures.  
 
Although at this stage no subprojects are approved by the Bank or GoA for inclusion 
under the Project, some of the subprojects proposed by the provinces and included in the 
preliminary pipeline of potential investments, like the sanitation works in Resistencia and 
Santiago del Estero, were consulted in the past following the legal form of an audiencia 
pública ("public audience"). This exercise was led by the provinces with the participation 
of the UCPyPFE.  During the Audiencia Pública held in Santiago del Estero in June 
2010, some objections and questions on the EIA and the consultation process were raised 
from several participants. These objections were reported to the Bank by a representative 
from Universidad  Nacional de Santiago del Estero on November 2010. These objections 
will be taken into account in the environmental and social assessment process to be 
undertaken for this particular subproject under the eligibility criteria and safeguards 
related requirements of the loan. For any subproject to be approved for funding they will 
have to show compliance with eligibility criteria and a meaningful consultation process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/28/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/28/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/19/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
11/09/2010  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/28/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/28/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/18/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/28/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/28/2010 
 
Page  17
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/18/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
Page  18
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  19
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Patricia Lopez Martinez 
02/23/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi 
02/23/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Graciela Sanchez Martinez 
02/23/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/22/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
03/22/2011 
Comments:   
