Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/23/2010 
Report No.:  AC5758
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P121836 
Project Name:  La Rioja SWAP 
Task Team Leader:  Alexandre Arrobbio 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 4, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: February 22, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSPS 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Public administration- Finance (50%);Sub-national government administration 
(30%);Agricultural extension and research (20%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(50%);Decentralization (30%);Rural services and infrastructure (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Program Development Objective for the overall SWAp Adaptable Program (APL) is 
to strengthen the institutions of the public administration of the Province of La Rioja to 
promote effective and sustainable delivery of essential public services for human and 
productive development. It is aligned with Development Objective 7 of the Provincial 
Development Plan.  
 
Given the complexity of Public Sector Reform, this operation is designed in two stages: 
the first Adaptable Program Loan operation (APL1) will focus on cross-cutting public 
sector reforms (tax, budgeting and procurement) and agriculture-focused expenditure 
programs, specifically in water management. Agriculture has been selected as a pilot area 
of intervention because of its importance for inclusive growth but also due to the fact that 
agricultural expenditure programs are traditionally the most volatile and unsustainable in 
Argentina. The second operation (APL2) will then seek to deepen the public sector 
reform agenda and to extend it within agriculture as well as to other sectors related to 
human and productive development. APL2 will be triggered by the satisfactory 
disbursement of APL1 as well as compliance with the performance targets of APL1.  
Page  2
The Project Objective of the APL1 is to create fiscal space by increasing tax collection 
and improving expenditure quality, and to improve access to water resources (irrigation 
and potable water) for the rural population.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of two complementary components: the Public Sector Reform 
Component and the Technical Assistance Component.  
 
The Public Sector Reform component (US$24 million) will disburse against Eligible 
Expenditure Programs (EEPs) on three areas: Tax Administration Improvement; Quality 
of Expenditure; and Service Delivery in Rural Water Management. This component 
follows the SWAp modality and disbursements are linked to the achievement of agreed 
disbursement linked indicators (DLI) and the execution of at least 70 percent of the 
budgeted EEPs expenditures.  
 
The Technical Assistance (TA) component (US$6 million) supports the achievement of 
the Government reform programs in the same three areas; it further assists project 
coordination and management. Each project component is described below.  
 
Component 1:  Government Public Sector Reform Program (EEPs)  
 
Tax Administration Improvement Program: Ministry of Finance  
 
This program is designed to strengthen the provincial tax administration through 
increased tax collection. This Government Program covers the following two sub-
programs: i) modernization of tax collection system, and ii) updating of the provincial 
cadastre. Provincial financing for this program amounts to about US$12.1 million for the 
period 2010-2015, with an annual average allocation of US$2.0 million.  
 
Quality of Expenditure Program: Ministry of Finance and Financial Directorates of 
Ministries  
 
This program aims to increase the quality and efficiency of public expenditures and 
focuses on two areas: budgeting and public procurement. This Government Program 
addresses the need to improve the quality of expenditure to ensure strategic allocation of 
resources and effective and transparent execution of procurable expenditures. Provincial 
financing for this program is estimated at about US$29.3 million for the period 2010-
2015, with an annual average allocation of US$5.1 million per year. This program 
supports the implementation of two main reforms:  
 
#
Introduction of Fundamentals for Performance Oriented Budgeting: strengthening 
of program budgeting; introduction of performance indicators; linkage between budget 
and planning; strengthening of line ministries staff capacities in budgeting; and 
introduction of monitoring & evaluation function.  
Page  3
#
Public Procurement Reform: adoption of a legal framework; establishment of a 
public procurement policy unit; implementation of a public procurement system; and 
professionalization of public procurement staff.  
 
Rural Water Management Program: Ministry of Infrastructure (Secretariat of Water)  
 
This program aims to develop a strategy to improve management of and access to water 
resources. The main objectives of this program are: i) to support water access in remote 
rural areas by expanding and improving simplified water supply systems and distribution 
networks for the rural population; and ii) to assure sustainable and effective functioning 
of irrigation districts by better observance of regulation and improved coordination in the 
provision of technical assistance. Provincial financing for this program is estimated at 
about US$25 million for the period 2010-2015, with an annual average allocation of 
US$4.5 million per year.  
 
The expenditures for all three Government programs, which are eligible for the purpose 
of APL1, include recurrent expenditures such as: salaries, recurrent services, and 
transfers without procurement or where the existing procurement process is acceptable to 
the Bank.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance  
 
This component supports the preparation and implementation of the Government 
Expenditure Programs described under Component 1, and contributes to the fulfillment of 
the disbursement linked performance indicators. Areas of technical assistance include:  
 
#
Improvement of Tax Administration: Provide technical assistance and 
international experience on urban cadastre and taxpayer registry; provide organizational 
and process assistance to improve efficiency of tax administration; provide 
methodological assistance and training on tax audits; and provide technical assistance on 
legal aspects that will enable the province to implement necessary changes to tax 
legislation and regulation.  
 
#
Improvement in Quality of Expenditure:  
 
#
Foundations for Performance Oriented Budgeting: Support to the design of pilot 
sector strategies; provide intensive training in the implementation of program budgeting 
for selected sectors; assist the design of the legal framework for the establishment of a 
monitoring and evaluation unit; provide training program for monitoring and evaluation 
staff.  
 
#
Public Procurement Reform: Provide technical assistance on legal aspects that 
will enable the province to adopt a new legal framework; provide organizational support 
for the establishment of the Public Procurement Policy Unit (PPU); design training and 
accreditation systems for public procurement officers; assist to the design and 
development of a public procurement system.  
 
#
Public Service Delivery for Rural Water Management: Technical Assistance for 
the sector includes support for the preparation of a Sectoral Environmental Assessment 
(SEA) in the water sector; institutional strengthening of the Water Secretariat including 
the development of the Provincial Water Institute; improvement of integrated water 
Page  4
management in rural areas; preparation of strategic plan for the water, agriculture and 
livestock, and land sectors; coordination of rural sector public service provision and 
strengthening of extension and technical assistance services.  
 
#
Project Coordination: The Technical Assistance component will also finance 
project management activities of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the Ministry of 
Finance. It includes i) training to staff responsible for project management and 
implementation support (i.e. financial management, procurement, and M&E of project 
activities), ii) conduct of annual external audit, and iii) studies and other consultancies to 
be determined during project implementation according to procedures set forth in the 
Operational Manual.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Republic of Argentina, Province of La Rioja; the Project will be mainly implemented 
within provincial government offices in the City of La Rioja. Locations of on the ground 
agriculture related activities financed under the Project remain to be defined.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Isabel Tomadin (LCSHH) 
Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As the activities to be financed mostly involve capacity building, negative environmental 
impacts are expected to be low. For the purposes of the Bank#s environmental risk rating, 
the Project is rated as a Category B project. Treatment of safeguard policies will focus on 
the specific non-TA activities to be carried out under the water resources management 
part of Component 1. The WRM activities will be implemented by the Secretariat of 
Water as described in the Operational Manual.  
 
Page  5
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) approach will be 
applied to guide environmental (risk) management: The Project will apply an adjusted 
version of the Environmental and Social Management Manual of the Bank-financed 
Provincial Agricultural Service Program (PROSAP), tailored to the scope of the planned 
WRM activities and the provincial level implementation arrangements. The ESMF has 
been published by the client and the Bank.  
 
The ESMF includes screening criteria for eligible activities and a #negative list# of non-
eligible activities. Each potential activity that may be undertaken will have to comply 
with applicable national and provincial legislation and procedures and the Bank#s 
environmental and social safeguard policies. The ESMF includes screening procedures to 
determine if an activity falls into category B or C; activities of category A will not be 
eligible.  
 
Category B activities will be required to develop a site-specific Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) including specific environmental and social mitigation 
measures to be followed by the Secretariat of Water. The measures will also be included 
in bidding documents so that contractors will be required to carry out their respective part 
of them.  
 
The ESMF includes a Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) for water resources 
management to be conducted for the La Rioja province under Component 2. The SEA 
will provide the basis for any concrete field activity to be financed under the Project, and 
needs to be concluded prior to approval of any on the ground investments. The ToRs of 
the SEA will include considerations of climate change adaptation and social dimensions 
of water use.  
 
Applicable environmental safeguard policies are:  
 
(i) OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment;  
 
(ii) OP 4.04 Natural Habitats: The ESMF includes procedures for reviewing activities 
that might affect natural habitats. An activity screening mechanism and a negative list 
will be used to evaluate activity proposals. Those affecting critical natural habitats, 
protected areas, or other sensitive sites will not be eligible for Bank financing;  
 
(iii) OP 4.09 Pest Management: The ESMF contains provisions for evaluating activities 
that propose to use or procure pesticides. Although not expected, any Project related 
procurement of pesticides or agro-chemicals will be carried out in accordance with the 
Bank policy. The activity screening mechanism will identify those involving pesticides, 
and an appropriate EA and development of an integrated pest management plan will be 
required. No Bank financing will be used for procurement of pesticides or agro-
chemicals;  
 
(iv) OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources: The ESMF contains provisions for accurate 
processing in case of any chance finds; and  
 
(v) OP 4.37 Safety of Dams: The ESMF contains provisions for evaluating activities 
that might affect any existing dams.  
 
Page  6
On social safeguards, OP 4.10 and OP 4.12 have been triggered for precautionary 
reasons. La Rioja#s indigenous population is estimated between 0.3 and 0.5 percent of 
the total provincial population. Although the Project will likely benefit all stakeholders, 
to better understand the Project#s impact on the indigenous population, the Government 
in conjunction with the Bank has i) conducted a preliminary assessment to determine the 
presence of indigenous communities in the province, ii) started to publically announce 
the SWAp Project La Rioja in the media iii) conducted a public consultation with 
approximately 40 civil society organizations, including the indigenous community #In 
Gua-Col#, in which participants expressed their agreement with the Project, and iv) 
prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). A second consultation was 
carried out on November 29th, 2010 to address questions on the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the Project. Both consultations have been 
registered by acts and reflect widespread support. Once the Government included 
stakeholder suggestions, the revised ESMF has been sent to the Bank for No Objection, 
and the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework published by the Bank and the 
Government.  
 
OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement has also been triggered in case economic 
displacement would occur in relation to infrastructure works on water management under 
Component 1. A Resettlement Policy Framework is included in the ESMF, and has been 
published as a stand alone document both by the client and the Bank.  
 
The overall responsibility for ensuring compliance with the ESMF will rest with the 
PCU, where an environmental and social specialist will be hired to secure continuing 
monitoring and advice on the environmental and social aspects of the financed activities, 
whereby the Bank will also provide adequate support. Periodic monitoring of the 
screening and the applicable EA processes will be used to ensure consistency with related 
procedures as well as to update and refine them where necessary. The Bank will also 
review EMPs to be developed for specific activities proposed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is mainly expected to provide positive long term impacts on the agricultural 
sector of the region, as it aims at improving the efficiency of irrigation systems and 
recovering the role of the Provincial Government in overall control and equitable 
distribution of water among farmers, which currently constitute two remarkably differing 
social groups: 1) a small concentrated dynamic group of producers with a high 
technological profile and investment capacity, focused on the production of agriculture 
higher-value export products (olives, grapes, nuts); and 2) small low-income farmers 
operating through traditional labour-intensive technologies, low management, and low 
input and output systems, focused mainly on extensive livestock (bovine and goats) and, 
secondarily, on horticulture production. On average, the latter face low access to water 
resources, as well as a myriad of other disadvantages, e.g. sanitary and phytosanitary 
problems, land tenancy irregularities, and restricted access to credit.  
 
Page  7
The Project is expected to tackle the inadequate basic infrastructure of irrigation systems 
and a serious deficiency in their management, operation and maintenance, which has lead 
to lack of security and confidence in the timely and sufficient delivery of irrigated water.  
 
Currently, lack of institutional capacities and resources allow only a small share of 
farmers to have access to technical assistance and provincial public services. While 
incipient progress has been made on strategic planning since 2008, the Project will 
support specific planning areas to improve public sector management. This support will 
facilitate creation of a planning and a results oriented culture and provide information and 
strengthen its management for decision making.  
 
Evaluation of projected impacts of climate variability and change on water resources 
management will be included in the ToRs of the planned SEA, as well as social 
dimensions of water use.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project will benefit of important synergies with the Provincial Agricultural Services 
Program (PROSAP), which Environmental and Social Management Framework has 
provided the basis for the ESMF of the Project. The Secretariat of Water is familiar with 
the ESMF through preparation of PROSAP projects, and thus has relevant in-house 
capacity. However, while the capacity of the implementing agency was deemed 
satisfactory, capacity-building measures will be provided on a needs basis during Project 
implementation, possibly including the Secretariats of Agriculture and Natural Resource 
Management; Livestock; and Land Management.  
 
An environmental and social specialist will be hired to the PCU to support and monitor 
the implementation of the ESMF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders have been identified and a mechanism for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies has been launched with an emphasis on potentially 
affected people.  
 
Project stakeholders include civil society at large, and specially farmers, farming 
communities, farmer organizations, irrigation consortia and water user organizations that 
may be involved in planned field activities. Since the only planned works at this stage 
imply drilling of water wells for potable water supply to dispersed rural communities, it 
is unlikely that people would be adversely affected.  
 
Page  8
The process of consultation with relevant stakeholders started on September 8, 2010, 
when the Project (objectives, design and activities) was presented to civil society, 
including representatives of communities of indigenous peoples and farmer 
organizations. The process continued with periodic meetings to address questions and 
concerns from stakeholders. A second consultation was carried out on November 29, at 
which time questions about the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) of the Project were addressed.  
 
Both consultations were carefully documented, including capture of the wide support 
received from the public. A draft ESMF and the presentation of the consultant were 
distributed during the consultation. The ESMF will be published by appraisal by the 
Government of La Rioja as well as the Bank InfoShop. According to the federal law, all 
information regarding preservation of environment must be made available to public, and 
the GoLR will be required to establish mechanisms to facilitate diffusion of information. 
In addition, the future stand-alone environmental evaluations and respective 
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for specific activities will be disclosed at the 
website of the Secretariat of Water and the Bank InfoShop.  
 
Although no negative Project impacts are expected, a grievance mechanism has been 
put in place to record concerns, and judicial and customary law mechanisms will be taken 
into account to resolve demands and conflicts that may potentially arise.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/17/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/17/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/23/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/17/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/22/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Page  9
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  10
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexandre Arrobbio 
12/22/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini 
12/22/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Isabel Tomadin 
12/22/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Veronica E. Zavala Lombardi 
12/23/2010 
Comments:   
