Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/29/2011 
Report No.:  61666
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P106685 
Project Name:  Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas 
Task Team Leader:  Renato Nardello 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 5, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 12, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (30%);Rural markets (25%);Indigenous 
peoples (25%);Rural non-farm income generation (15%);Other rural development (5%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
52.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
39.50 
 Local 
Communities 
7.50
47.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to increase the socio-economic inclusion of rural 
poor (small producers, indigenous people, and rural workers) by: (a) strengthening their 
organizational, planning and management capacity to achieve poverty-reduction goals; 
(b) improving their access to community infrastructure and services; and (c) piloting a 
new model for developing sustainable access to market.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Capacity Development (US$30.0m, of which US$2.5m IBRD).  This 
component would finance capacity-building activities (technical assistance, training 
courses, workshops, studies, applied research, stages, etc.) to strengthen the capacity of 
targeted rural stakeholders. The component would aim at increasing the impact of 
development interventions on target groups (small farmers, indigenous people and rural 
workers), by improving the technical, economic, and organizational capacity of 
beneficiary communities and the sustainability of subproject proposals.  In particular, the 
component would provide financial and technical assistance for two groups of activities: 
(i) strengthening rural communities and their organizations to improve their 
Page  2
organizational, planning, and management capacity; and (ii) strengthening rural 
development activities by supporting the preparation of studies, strategies and other 
planning instruments at the local level.  
 
Component 2: Rural Livelihoods (US$47m, of which US$39m IBRD).  This component 
would finance the design and implementation of demand-driven small-scale investment 
subprojects identified and prioritized by beneficiary communities, following a 
participatory process.  Subprojects would mostly consist of small-scale community 
investments (rural infrastructures, food security activities, small-scale water systems, 
natural resources management, etc.).  Community subprojects would aim to improve the 
living conditions of the beneficiary communities by increasing household access to basic 
infrastructure, assets and services. Financing would include both on-farm and household 
investments as well as infrastructure, goods, and services for the community/group. 
Subprojects would be ranked based on social, environmental and technical evaluations 
and be prioritized accordingly.  Participating communities would be expected to co-
finance subprojects in cash, kind or labor for at least 10 percent of their total cost.  
 
Component 3: Access to Markets (US$15.0m of which US$11.0m IBRD).  This 
component would co-finance the identification, preparation and implementation of 
Productive Alliances between producer groups and qualified market agents (buyers). 
Financing of the alliance subprojects would be tailored at achieving the specifications 
(quantity, quality, delivery schedule, etc.) agreed between the producer group and the 
buyer. The focus in this component is on the market opportunities of family producers 
rather than their needs.  Eligible expenses for the producer groups include goods and 
equipment, civil works, and technical assistance, all of which could be at the individual 
farm and/or at the group level. Producer groups would be required to co-finance a 
minimum of 25 percent in cash of the alliance subproject.  Because of its pilot nature, 
Component 3 would be implemented in a limited geographic area (most likely one or two 
contiguous provinces), selected on the basis of transparent criteria, including the number 
and density of small family producers and the existence of a diversified range of value 
chains suitable for the organizational and technical level of this target group.  
 
Component 4:  Project Management (US$7.5m of which US$0.3m IBRD).  This 
component would finance the operating costs of the technical units responsible for 
Project Coordination, Administration, Monitoring & Evaluation, including: incremental 
operational costs; monitoring and evaluation system; technical and financial audits; 
management and oversight of fiduciary activities; incremental operation, and 
maintenance of offices; acquisition, operation and maintenance of equipments, vehicles, 
etc. needed for project activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will have national coverage.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ricardo Larrobla (LCSAR) 
Page  3
Ms Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential environmental impacts can be considered as localized and small-scale, mostly 
caused by activities financed under Components 2 and 3, community and productive 
alliance subprojects.  Impact may include localized negative impacts in forest ecosystems 
or wetlands in case that specific mitigation measures are not taken when implementing 
productive or infrastructure subprojects (such as rehabilitation of rural feeder roads, water 
catchments, small irrigation schemes, etc.).  
 
Concerning the specific safeguard policies triggered:  
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment. The physical interventions resulting from the 
implementation of Components 2 and 3 could have negative, if small-scale and localized, 
impacts on the environment. Expected subproject investments may include: the 
rehabilitation of existing roads; irrigation systems; water systems; rural electricity supply; 
and other small-scale infrastructure. Because these subprojects involve mostly small-
scale activities, the incremental environmental impacts are expected to be low. Since the 
type, scale and localization of specific subprojects was unknown at appraisal, the 
Borrower prepared an Environmental (and Social) Management Framework (ESMF), 
detailing the environmental screening process and a negative list that would exclude any 
sensitive environmental sites from being financed by the Project. The Project will not 
finance any subproject would be considered as a Category A under the World Bank 
definition.  
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats.  Most project activities would be implemented in areas 
already under agricultural production. However, the potential impacts on critical natural 
habitats would be explored as part of the subproject screening process. Subprojects could 
be located in areas close to critical natural habitats or protected areas but subprojects 
which imply significant degradation or conversion of natural habitats would not be 
Page  4
financed. Subprojects within protected areas (national and provincial) would not be 
eligible for funding. Areas with other conservation statuses (Ramsar sites, Birdlife IBAS, 
etc.) would be considered ineligible unless compatible with the ESMF.  
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management. Integrated pest management would be a part of subproject 
activities under Component 2 and Component 3. Any procurement of pesticides would 
comply with the requirements of OP 4.09 which specifies pesticides ineligible for Bank 
financing. A positive list has been prepared to identify pesticides that can be used and is 
included in the ESMF. In addition, the ESMF requires the preparation of Pest 
Management Plans and includes guidelines for Integrated Pest Management.  
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples. The policy is triggered because IP are present in 
many of the targeted provinces. For this reason, and given that the exact location of 
subprojects is not known before implementation, the Borrower prepared an Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), including a Social Assessment, which is part of the 
ESMF.  
 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources. The project would not finance any 
subproject with potential negative impacts of physical cultural resources. However, 
particularly because of intervention in indigenous people areas <chance finds> of cultural 
artifacts during implementation is considered possible. To handle such findings, 
Argentina has a well developed legislative and normative framework which will be 
applied in such cases. The implementing agency also has proven experience and 
appropriate procedures to address <chance finds> in line with these procedures and rules.  
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement. Although involuntary resettlement is not 
foreseen, it is possible that involuntary economic displacement and/or los of assets may 
be generated during infrastructure works, including the following: (i) rehabilitation of 
irrigation or water systems; (ii) rehabilitation of feeder roads; and (iii) rural 
electrification. For this reason, the Borrower prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework, 
which is part of the ESMF.  
 
OP 4.36 Forests. The project screening mechanism would identify subprojects with 
potential impacts on forests. Subprojects impacting forests or involving establishment of 
plantations would require a deeper environmental analysis.  
 
OP 4.37 Safety of Dams. While the project would not finance building of any large dam, 
it is possible that irrigation or water supply subprojects financed under components 1 and 
3
might depend on the storage and operation of an existing dam for their supply of water 
and may not function if the dam failed. The ESMF stipulates that financing of such 
subprojects requires a preliminary specialized safety assessment, including a review and 
evaluation of the operation and maintenance procedures of the existing dam and the 
presentation of a written report including finding and recommendations for any remedial 
work or safety related measures.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
It is anticipated that long term impacts would normally be neutral or slightly positive, 
with a clear positive impact on the micro-territorial scale (also depending on the quality 
of technical capacity and absorptive capacity).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In order to minimize its impact, the project discarded the alternative of financing 
medium-scale, provincial-level rural infrastructure and limited eligible investments to 
small-scale, community-level infrastructure.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the exact nature and location of the activities cannot be identified prior to appraisal, 
to ensure that potential negative environmental and social impacts of future sub-projects 
are appropriately identified and mitigated the Borrower prepared an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and 
an Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF).  
 
The ESMF include a Social and Environmental screening as well as a negative list for 
subprojects. All subprojects that would be consistent with a category A classification 
would be ineligible for financing.  
 
Institutional and procedural mechanisms to ensure compliance with social and 
environmental safeguards are described in the relevant documents and in the Project 
Operation Manual. The Project Coordination Unit (UCAR) already has adequate 
experience and capacity to plan and implement the measures described in these 
documents.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Main stakeholders include rural producers, indigenous people, rural workers, provincial 
governments, the Ministry of Agriculture, as well as residents of the areas affected by the 
project and by its subprojects. The ESMF includes identification and analysis of each 
group of project stakeholders. People potentially affected by a subproject will be first 
consulted during the environmental and social screening process and subsequent 
discussions of mitigation measures. If the screening process required carrying out a 
stand-alone Environmental Impact Assessment, the affected stakeholders would be 
thoroughly consulted and adequate mitigation measures identified taking into account the 
feedback received. Access to the results of the consultations would be public.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  6
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/22/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/25/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/22/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/25/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/22/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/25/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/22/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/25/2011 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Page  7
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  8
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Renato Nardello 
04/04/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ricardo Larrobla 
04/04/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lilian Pedersen 
04/04/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
04/04/2011 
Comments:   
