Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/12/2011 
Report No.:  61319
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P106735 
Project Name:  Provincial Public Health Insurance Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Rafael A. Cortez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 28, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (60%);Child health (20%);Population and 
reproductive health (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDOs are to: (a) increase utilization and quality of key health services for the 
uninsured target population; and (b) improve institutional management by strengthening 
the incentives for results in Participating Provinces and among Authorized Providers. The 
latter will be achieved through capacity building, monitoring and evaluation systems, and 
fiduciary arrangements.  
 
The Project will have the following specific targets: (a) increase heath care coverage 
among targeted groups; (b) ensure the financial sustainability of the provincial health care 
insurance programs; (c) improve the results-based financing mechanism at the provincial 
level to achieve quality and health equity targets; and (d) reinforce the target 
population#s rights to access health services. The targeted groups include uninsured 
children under 10, youth 10-19 and women 20-64 years of age.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will focus on: (a) enhancing health protection policies by expanding 
population coverage under provincial health insurance, and (b) improving the health 
Page  2
system#s performance by strengthening incentives at the provincial and health service 
provider levels. With regard to (a), the Project would produce results at the provincial 
level that can be verified by achievement of tracer targets. These targets will be 
established in the Annual Performance Agreements signed by the MSN and MSPs. 
Concerning to (b), the provincial public insurance programs will be coordinated and 
developed within the national health strategy of improving MSN#s capacity to manage 
results-oriented health insurance. The Project will include three components to improve 
health sector performance and governance.  
 
Component 1: Supporting Provincial Public Health Insurance (US$290 million). 
Making of capitation payments for PHIP services for the provision of: (a) general health 
interventions; and (b) selected health interventions for catastrophic diseases. This 
component includes financing to assure capitation payments by MSN to participating 
provinces on a declining basis. The health service package will contribute to improving 
the quality of services as well as extending coverage on a per capita basis.  Results will 
be monitored using supervision protocols and information systems, and will be verified 
by an independent technical auditor.  
 
The MSN carried out an actuarial calculation in order to estimate the incremental cost of 
the health service package to be financed by the Project considering (i) estimated target 
population, (ii) the incidence and prevalence of the pathologies that covers the Project 
through a health service package to the target population; (iii) the utilization rates and (iv) 
quality guidelines. The unit cost was estimated on the basis of a strategy that finances a 
selected group of health care interventions including the direct expenses (human 
resources and inputs) and indirect costs including administration costs and depreciation 
of the medical equipment and the infrastructure in the interventions that form the health 
service package.  
 
The Project will implement incentives at the provincial level. The Project supports 
incentives that encourage each level of the health care system to take steps to improve 
coverage, quality, and results. The province will receive a payment (that will function 
somewhat like an insurance premium) for each eligible beneficiary enrolled with 
effective coverage. The MSN will transfer the payments on a per capita basis to the 
provincial ministries in two steps: a share of the financing (60 percent) will be provided 
after the effective coverage is verified,  and the remaining share (40 percent) will be 
transferred when the specified health tracers are achieved. Tracers and targets will be 
equal for all provinces. For each tracer, a set of targets will be defined with three 
thresholds (minimum, medium, and high) to be met in each four-month period, linked to 
three levels of payments. Each province will then receive a payment based on the 
threshold level achieved for each tracer. The targets will be included in the Performance 
Agreements to be signed by the provinces, and will be agreed upon by the Bank. This 
initial four#month period may be modified if necessary, in a manner satisfactory to the 
Bank, as defined in the Operations Manual.  
 
The provinces will transfer funds to the contracted health care providers based on 
services provided to beneficiaries, with a fee for health care service mechanism that 
Page  3
supports payments for quality of care. A list of eligible health interventions was identified 
to respond to specific diseases in a cost-effective manner. Payments to health care 
providers will be made through a fee-for-service mechanism subject to quality and 
utilization goals. Beneficiaries have to be identified and certified as eligible. Payments 
made to health facilities will serve as incentives to facilities managers who will have 
autonomy to decide how to use these funds. These arrangements are important for the 
Project to operate as a quasi-insurance scheme and continue to represent a break from the 
traditional supply-driven model of health care provision to target populations.  
 
The health services included in the health benefits plan will be provided according to 
Authorized Provider Agreements and contractual or quasi-contractual agreements, as 
appropriate, signed between MSPs and authorized provincial health care providers 
(public and private).  The Agreement will guide the provision of the package of health 
services and their pricing; quality standards and control measures; payment mechanisms; 
expected results; reporting and document support requirements; and modalities for 
supervision and inspection by the independent technical auditors and the Project 
supervision and monitoring units.  
 
The Project will promote institutional improvements in information systems, 
accountability and transparency, as well as focus on results. Independent technical 
auditors provide detailed reports to the MSN every two months.  The feedback from these 
audits and management reports should help to reduce bottlenecks and improve the way 
the insurance program functions.  
 
Component 2: Institutional and Management Strengthening of the National and 
Provincial Ministries of Health (US$59 million). This component will provide the health 
ministries at the national and provincial levels with the tools and information they need to 
improve governance and their organizational/stewardship capacity. It will comprise the 
following two subcomponents: (a) improving the management capacity of national and 
provincial ministries of health, and (b) supporting management, monitoring and 
evaluation practices.  
 
Sub-component 2.1:  Improving the management capacity of National and Provincial 
Ministries of Health (US$5 million). This sub-component will finance the following:  
 
(a) developing information systems, instruments, and capacity to manage the PHIP, 
including the preparation and execution of annual performance agreements between MSN 
and MSPs, and between MSPs and Authorized Providers, new contracts and payment 
systems, outreach and service delivery strategies for rural and indigenous peoples and 
other excluded populations (including the promotion of communities# participation, user 
rights, and culturally appropriate services for the inclusion of indigenous populations);  
 
(b) strengthening the health workforce skills of health staff in rural areas;  
 
(c) improving epidemiological information, financial monitoring and evaluation, and 
human resource management systems;  
Page  4
(d) streamlining regulatory and planning capacities within MSN health program units 
and PHIUs;  
 
(e) carrying out of studies on health system financing and related mechanisms, all aimed 
at facilitating policy-making decisions of MSN and MSPs;  
 
(f) improving communication strategies for disseminating information about health 
plans, change behavior among health sector staff, and promote social participation; and  
 
(g) supporting the design and establishment of an observatory of the Borrower#s health 
system, and monitoring of policies producing data on health and health care of users 
(including the promotion of sector knowledge and the fostering of transparency for 
improved sector governance and accountability).  
 
Sub-Component 2.2: Supporting management, monitoring and evaluation practices of 
the PCU, UFI-S and PHIUs (US$54 million). This sub-component will finance the 
strengthening of the PCU, UFI-S and PHIUs, through the provision of technical 
assistance (including the financing of Operating Costs), monitoring and evaluation and 
financial and independent technical audits under the Project.  
 
Component 3:  Building capacity of the National Ministry of Health and Provincial 
Ministries of Health to deliver services (US$50 million).  
 
This component will strengthen the supply capacity of the MSN and the MSPs through: 
(a) the provision of equipment (medical, transportation, information technology and 
communications); and (b) maintenance services needed to upgrade and expand MSN and 
MSPs# information and communication systems (excluding civil works).  The PCU has 
carried out a needs assessment for the proposed purchases of equipment considering 
obsolescence and Project goals.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide; there are no mayor physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Ms Isabel Tomadin (LCSEN) 
Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The PHIP will have a positive social impact, as it supports Argentina#s health strategy 
for 2010-2016, which aims to provide adequate health protection to uninsured groups. 
For the proposed Project, the focus will be on children, women, and population groups at 
risk, seeking to improve the effectiveness of provincial health insurance programs and 
expand the supply, monitoring and evaluation capacity of the health ministries. The 
OP/BP 4.10 for indigenous peoples is triggered as described under item 4.  
 
Some of the main activities carried out under the Strategic Communication Plan for 
2010 are: (i) Graphic Material graphic on Universal Child Allocation and health 
conditions, (ii) Audiovisual and graphic material and audiovisual on the coverage of 
integral attention for congenital heart disease, (iii) Call free communication with 
beneficiaries, (iv) Systematization of information for institutional public (authorities and 
the media), (v) Design of a new brand for the extension of the Plan. 
 
Some activities under the Strategic Communication Plan for 2010 are pending or had to 
be rescheduled for 2011: (i) Radio Guidelines , pending authorization from the ministry's 
press area and the Media Secretary for its implementation, (ii) diptych rights, this version 
includes the right to health and new benefits of the Plan Nacer, pending bid for printing 
of material, (iii) re-edition of the rights agenda, due to the expansion of the Plan the 
material will be rewritten and its release will be reschedule , (iv) web page, has been 
completed but it should solve some incompatibilities with the website programming of 
Plan Nacer and the current Ministry server, (v) e-newsletter's first edition was in 
November 2010 and is currently in it  the  fifth edition. 
 
In terms of Environmental Assessment, the proposed project is rated as Category C 
based on the limited scope and severity of potential impacts. Adverse environmental 
impacts are not expected. 
 
Page  6
Would any need for EA application occur, the project will benefit from full safeguard 
support by the Environmental Unit of the Second Essential Public Health Functions and 
Programs (FESP II) project expected to reach effectiveness in early 2011. It has a proven 
Environmental Management Framework built upon the work and experience of the FESP 
I
including a special focus on health care waste (RES) management nationwide.  
 
The PHIP will complement a FESP II aim, which is to build and promote RES 
regulations at primary health care centers. This will be done through (a) a study using a 
sample of primary health care centers that focuses on current RES management in both 
urban and provincial settings to define gaps and capacity-building needs, and (b) 
distributing a new best practices manual for RES management, including aspects of 
training and capacity building as considered feasible by the Environmental Unit of the 
FESP II. Overall, the project will serve as an additional communications channel for 
FESP II environmental management efforts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Despite of being a Category C project in terms of Environmental Assessment, the PHIP 
will contribute to on-going nationwide efforts to improve environmental management of 
the health care sector. In particular, the PHIP will serve as an additional support and 
communication channel of the environmental management work carried out by the 
Second Essential Public Health Functions and Programs (FESP II) project expected to 
reach effectiveness in early 2011. Therefore, the project is expected to provide positive 
environmental impacts at the sectoral level beyond the project implementation period.   
 
The project benefits from Argentina's broad experience in the management of 
safeguards, particularly considering Phases I and II of the Essential Public Health 
Functions project (FESP) and Plan Nacer. Under these programs the Government has 
developed indigenous peoples' plans, which have been found to be well elaborated by 
different Bank evaluations, and are considered good practice in the region.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project builds on the experience of the Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) implemented 
by 15 provinces where indigenous peoples live (Catamarca, Chaco, Chubut, Formosa, 
Jujuy, La Pampa, Mendoza, Misiones, Neuquén, Río Negro, Salta, San Juan, Santiago del 
Estero, Tierra del Fuego, and Tucumán). These Plans were prepared under the FESP and 
the Plan Nacer projects. As agreed by the Borrower, an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) has been developed for the PHIP by the National Ministry of Health 
and was published in December 2010.  
 
Page  7
Main Actions carried out to tackle difficulties found and to reach the new beneficiary 
groups identified at this stage: (1) External communication: Actions to promote 
communication with Health Care Providers and Community. At Facility Level: (i) a 
Quality Care Guide (pocket Nomenclador); (ii) a Training Video for the use of the Guide; 
(iii) Boards (in hospitals and CAPs); (iv) reissuing of the Providers' Manual; and (v) on-
line training. At Beneficiary / Facility Level: (i) radio advertisement; (ii) reissuing of 
rights agenda; (iii) web page; and (iv) reissuing of rights leaflet, (2) Internal 
communication: Actions to improve and enhance communication between areas. At 
Institutional level: (i) web page; and (ii) newsletters, and (3) a budget of 
US$200,000/year.  
 
The existing IPPs will be adapted to account for the inclusion of the new stage.  
 
It has a proven Environmental Management Framework built upon the work and 
experience of the FESP I with a special focus on health care waste (RES) management. In 
turn, the PHIP will serve as an additional support and communication channel of the 
environmental management work carried out by the FESP II.  
 
Sound practices of environmental management in terms of health care waste 
management and potential remediation activities will be addressed in the Operational 
Manual following the procedures articulated in the EMF of the FESP II to make sure 
proper processes are in place for safe disposal of old equipment and handling of any 
hazardous materials such as mercury, sharps, or pathological or potentially infectious 
waste. Worker health and safety standards will be consistent with applicable laws and 
regulations. All environmental aspects of the project will be addressed through the 
Environmental Unit of the FESP II.   
 
The PHIU#s Training Unit, created for Plan Nacer APL II under the MSN  acquired 
experience in social management issues and implementing Indigenous Peoples#  Plans. 
However, the Training Unit#s human resources have limited capacity to deal with the 
increasing number of projects being prepared and supervised. This risk will be partially 
mitigated by hiring key social consultants in the two participating levels (national and 
provincial) together with clear safeguards implementation and supervision arrangements. 
The project implementation team is expected to agree upon a work plan together with the 
FESP team and specialized institutions of national and provincial governments as well as 
NGOs to ensure a successful monitoring of social action plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultation and participatory evaluation: A User Satisfaction Survey was carried out in 
2009, as well as a Qualitative Study which was based on the incentives for and 
accountability of health providers. The latter showed that the use of resources promoted 
autonomy in primary care centers and was a key factor in improving the integration 
between Plan Nacer and Provincial Health Ministries, strengthening the provision of 
technical assistance regarding management issues at the health care provider level. 
 
Page  8
In terms of the OP 4.10, the PHIP has benefitted from on-going consultations carried out 
as part of the implementation of the IPPs at the provincial level, and related lessons 
learned and recommendations have been considered. The IPPF of the PHIP was 
consulted jointly with the FESP project two times during July 2nd and 22nd 2010, 
providing multiple lessons and recommendations for improvement in this new operation.  
 
In terms of environmental safeguards, the main counterpart of the project related with 
ensuring proper healthcare waste management are the national and provincial level 
authorities working on and cooperating with the FESP and this project. In practice, key 
stakeholders are the overall staff of the participating health care units, as well as 
provincial authorities responsible for waste management. Mechanisms for consultation 
with these stakeholders will be identified and applied through the FESP II project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/04/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/29/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
E.A not applicable for this project, see section II. A. 1   
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Rafael A. Cortez 
02/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini 
02/22/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Isabel Tomadin 
02/22/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maria Eugenia Bonilla-Chacin 
02/22/2011 
Comments:  Signed by Maria Eugenia Bonilla, Acting Sector Manager 
