Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/09/2011 
Report No.:  59684
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P115183 
Original Project Name: Argentina Basic 
Protection Project 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P120622 
Project Name:  Basic Protection Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Rafael P. Rofman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 1, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 10, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Public administration- Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
480.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Additional Financing would support the same PDOs in the original loan.  
The project development objective is to increase the effectiveness of Argentina#s income 
transfer programs for the unemployed and families with children, by expanding the 
number of participants and improving design features, transparency and accountability in 
two core social protection programs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed AF project is a US$ 480 million, to support implementation of the 
Government program during approximately 2 years period.  The proposed Additional 
Financing will continue to support the original PDOs, through the three components 
described in the original PAD, and will use a similar disbursement mechanism.  The 
supported activities will include:  
 
(i) 
Component I: Provision of Seguro Grants: This component will finance grants to 
beneficiaries of the #Seguro de Capacitacion y Empleo#, a training and job market 
Page  2
intermediation program run by the Ministry of Labor. No changes regarding program 
rules or eligibility will be applied to this component. Following the scheme designed 
under Loan 7703, the Bank will provide financial support for the operation and scaling up 
of Seguro during 2010, 2011 and 2012. The component will finance Grants to eligible 
participants, including: (i) the basic income transfer (AR$225 per month); (ii) per-diems 
paid to eligible participants participating in Seguro activities; and (iii) incentives linked to 
participation in the program#s activities. As defined in Loan 7703, participant 
beneficiaries qualify to receive the Grants by complying with eligibility requirements.  
As a consequence, authorities expect to cover approximately 160,000 participants by the 
end of 2012.  
 
(ii) 
Component II: Provision of Family Allowances Grants: As Authorities expanded 
coverage of the Family Allowances system in late 2009 by enacting Decree 1602/09, 
creating a new benefit within the system called "Universal Child Allowance" (AUH), 
approximately 3.5 million children of unemployed and informal workers have been 
included in the system, bringing the total number of children covered by family 
allowances to approximately 8 million by December 2010. As implementation of the new 
benefit continues, it is expected that this figure will further grow.  Loan 7703 financed 
child allowances under the traditional scheme, and the AF operation will focus its support 
on the AUH beneficiaries. The component will finance Grants to eligible participants 
(AR$220 per child), paid directly through transfers to beneficiaries# bank accounts. 
Disbursement mechanisms and eligibility rules would be similar to those of Loan 7703.  
 
(iii) 
Component III: Technical Assistance for the Social Protection System: The 
technical assistance component will support capacity building within the implementing 
agencies (MTESS and ANSES), particularly in relation to the implementation and 
monitoring of the supported programs.  The component will include six activities:  
 
a. 
Design, application and analysis of the Second National Social Security and 
Social Protection Survey, to be carried out by the Undersecretariat of Labor Studies and 
Technical Planning of MTESS.  
 
b.
Implementation of an alternative data center for MTESS, to ensure an efficient 
and safe management of the beneficiaries# registries at the Ministry, to be carried out by 
the Secretariat of Employment of MTESS.  
 
c. 
Design and implementation of a process to enroll eligible beneficiaries into the 
AUH program.  
 
These components and the activities to be supported are expected to have significant 
impacts on children and unemployed welfare in the short term, and to create conditions 
for further improvements in the future.  Components I and II will provide financial 
support to two of the social protection programs in Argentina with the highest current and 
potential impact on living conditions and human capital accumulation among two 
particularly vulnerable populations. The programs (Seguro and Family Allowances) 
offer, through a simple and efficient design, basic protection to these populations.  
Improvements currently under way should increase their effectiveness in the short term, 
Page  3
thus justifying the Bank# support, and create conditions to further expand their coverage 
in the future.  
 
The third component will provide technical assistance to improve monitoring capacity at 
the National Social Security Administration (ANSES) and the Ministry of Labor, 
Employment and Social Security.  For years, social policy designers and officials in 
Argentina have had serious limitations due to the lack of complete, reliable data on some 
basic indicators.  The component will support the second round of the Social Protection 
survey.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project activities have national coverage.  For the first Project component  
 
(Seguro de Capacitación y Empleo) municipal employment offices offering Seguro exist 
in 296 locations with a targeted expansion to 350.  Family Allowances (Component 2) 
are fully managed from the National Social Security Administration, with no local 
services linked to them.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Isabel Tomadin (LCSTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As was the case with the original project, the proposed AF project triggers the safeguard 
policy relating to indigenous peoples. No large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
impacts are anticipated, taking into account that the implementation of IPP of the original 
Project was satisfactory.  The OP 4.10 will trigger in the same 14 provinces listed in the 
original IPPF.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative indirect or long term impacts are expected from the activities in the project 
areas. Based on the implementation of Seguro de Capacitación y Empleo, some 
interventions were re-designed to better address the needs of beneficiaries (including 
those who are indigenous) and to promote a stable and sustainable integration of these 
workers in formal jobs. These changes are expected to enhance the effectiveness of social 
protection policies and to contribute to an improvement in the standard of living of the 
poor. In the case of Family Allowances, the expected outcome would be better 
developmental outcomes of young children, particularly those from poor families, 
thereby helping to improve the equality of opportunity in the country.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the nature of the basic protection project, no adverse impacts are expected.  
Moreover, the government is making efforts to ensure that the Indigenous Peoples 
receive benefits from the services delivered.  The Project will continue supporting 
technical assistance for indigenous communities to assure a culturally appropriate 
approach initiated by Seguro.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Argentina has a broad experience in the management of indigenous safeguard.  Under the 
original project, a detailed Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and 
provincials IPPs were developed and are currently under implementation.  The team in 
charge of implementing safeguards has demonstrated very good capacity. 
 
It is highlighted that Provinces and Municipalities were required to sign an agreement 
with the Ministry of Labor to participate in the Seguro.  These agreements, where 
relevant, include a clause regarding the need to design and implement an IPP, to ensure 
those indigenous communities# needs and interests are addressed.  
 
In keeping with the provisions of the IPPF, 12 provincial indigenous peoples plans 
(IPPs) have been prepared with a high indigenous presence and participation of men and 
women.  These plans have incorporated specific strategies of promotion and 
communication in order to foster an adequate understanding of the project among the 
indigenous communities involved. The two remaining IPPs, for Santiago del Estero and 
Tierra del Fuego, have been prepared, and are expected to be submitted to the Bank for 
their review by the end of February 2011.  
 
In particular, the following activities were done: (a) the use of existing material in the 
original language; (b) training of local agents to register participants in these 
communities; (c) promotion and communication campaigns; (d) mechanisms to provide 
information and respond to complaints, at the national as well as the provincial level; (e) 
training for tutors to work with the participants from these communities; and (f) a specific 
modality, taking into account their own point of view, has been used to offer the services 
in each indigenous community.  
Page  5
Extra financial resources, when necessary, were provided by the MTESS.  The 
preparation and implementation of the IPPs by the Government (including the necessary 
inter institutional agreements), satisfactory to the Bank, were considered an eligibility 
criteria to finance Seguro grants to residents of those provinces or municipalities.  
 
The Ministry of Labor has hired specialists to advice on the preparation of the social 
assessments and the IPPs when necessary. These mechanisms have ensured the 
implementation of an appropriate intercultural approach for Indigenous populations.  In 
addition, the technical project coordination unit in the Ministry of Labor, as well as Bank 
staff, has been monitoring the implementation of the requirements of the IPPF during 
Project implementation through the regular missions.  
 
For the ABP AF the implementing agency, ANSES, already has a program to work with 
the indigenous population with a very competent team and a specific program, called 
Indigenous Communities Inclusion in Social Security.  
 
This program has already held consultations with several communities. Starting soon 
after AUH was created in late 2009, ANSES began discussing its design and 
implementation with indigenous communities. In 2009, the program was discussed with 
members of the Consejo de Participacion Indigena (CPI) in several regional meetings and 
a
collaboration agreement was signed with INAI and, in 2010, the program was consulted 
at the National Meeting of Integration and Articulation of INAI, where 400 indigenous 
peoples representatives participated. Furthermore, a series of specific consultations were 
held with individual communities, including:  
 
-
the Diaguita-Calchaqui community in Salta;  
 
-
the Wichi community in Salta and Chaco;  
 
-
the Diaguita-Calchaqui communities in Catamarca, and  
 
-
the Mbya-Guarany community in Misiones.  
 
Special arrangements have been made to facilitate the access of the indigenous peoples 
to all applicable social security benefits (alternative channels for attention, intercultural 
and appropriate support with trained people, approaching with mobile services units to 
the communities).  The social security topic has been included in the permanent agenda 
of the CPI and there are activities planned to assure the access of the populations to the 
Universal Child Allowance, which will be included in the IPPs:  
 
-
Special field arrangements and management of benefits and services in 
indigenous communities' areas.  
 
-
Training workshops on social security for indigenous leaders designated by the 
community.  
 
-
Training on use of the ANSES website to allow them make consultations and 
transactions on line with no need to go to ANSES offices.  
 
-
Diffusion of  social security beneficiary rights in indigenous languages (oral, 
digital or any other appropriate format).  
Page  6
-
Inclusion of the Social Security matters and news in indigenous radios programs 
(in indigenous languages) and non indigenous, which reach indigenous community areas, 
as well as other type of media outreach which they consider suitable.  
 
-
Agreements and execution of joint operations with Public Organizations, ONGs, 
Universities, Unions, Schools and other related organizations, that can contribute to the 
project.  
 
Finally, given the nature of the Project, it is possible that some groups or communities 
may have concerns about the implementation process, particularly regarding difficulties 
with access to services. In order to prevent and solve possible conflicts appropriately, the 
standard complaints resolution channels of the Ministry of Labor and ANSES would be 
used. These channels operate through the provincial offices of both implementing 
agencies. Toll-free calling numbers (0800) and email addresses for information and 
complaints are also available.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders for the AF IPPs are the Indigenous Participation Council (IPC) of INAI 
(National Institute of Indigenous Affairs) the Indigenous Provincial Institutes and 
indigenous communities across the country.  
 
During the original project, the borrower has carried out a Social Assessment based on 
the Bank screening; as well as a process of free, prior, and informed consultation.  The 
Bank reviewed the process and the outcome of the consultation and found that they were 
carried out in accordance with the requirements of the OP 4.10.  Among other findings, 
the Bank confirmed that: (i) The Indigenous Peoples communities provided their broad 
support to the project, as registered in Acts signed by communities (and filed in IRIS); 
(ii) The consultations were carried out paying special attention to the participation of 
indigenous women, youth, and children fostering to their access to development 
opportunities and benefits; and (iii) Appropriate disclosure procedures were applied; as 
the borrower made the SA reports and IPPs/IPPF available to the affected indigenous 
peoples communities in an appropriate form, manner and languages.  For example, 
brochures were prepared in native languages including: Toba-
Qom, Wichi and Mbyá 
Guaraní; and radios spots and videos were bilingual.  
 
Valuable feedback was received from Indigenous peoples.  The main decisions taken as 
a
result of the consultations were: a) In the provincial IPPs, the suggestion of indigenous 
communities were included, brochures about the project were placed in sites of the easy 
accessibility such as schools, municipalities, employment offices, indigenous 
organizations, etc. (More details in provincials IPPs); b) Brochures were translated to 
original languages; c) Bilingual Video for Guarany communities were prepared; d) The 
Beneficiary Register System was modified to allow indigenous people to self identify, by 
requiring that participants born in Argentina reply to the question Do you belong to an 
Indigenous People?.  This question has been operative since September 23, 2009.  By 
December 2010, 472.180 people who have passed for the Employment Offices have 
responded, 4.609 of them affirmatively (51% are women and 1874 are Seguro 
Page  7
Beneficiaries); and e) a large set of training courses was approved and is under 
implementation, in accordance with the interests expressed by the communities.  
 
The Family Allowances program has already carried out consultations with indigenous 
communities and obtained their broad support. With the goal to ensure a prior, free and 
informed consultation, the program was presented to the Consejo de Participacion 
Indigena (CPI # Indigenous Participation Council) in 2009 and the following additional 
activities and consultations have been carried out:  
 
-
A
Collaboration Agreement Signed with INAI (Indigenous National Institute -2009), 
and CPI members. D.E 055/09.  
 
-
Diaguita Calchaqui community (Salta, 2009). Consultation and activities.  
 
-
Consultation to 400 indigenous leaders from the whole country (Encuentro Nacional 
de Integración y Articulación - INAI) February, 2010.  
 
-
Relationship Strengthening with Wichí community -Salta-. Dto San Martín. May2010.  
 
-
Social Security Workshop aimed at Wichí Community, Salta, June 2010.  
 
-
Presentation to Mapuche and Tehuelches Peoples from Neuquén, Río Negro, La 
Pampa, Mendoza provinces. July 2010.  
 
-
Diaguita-Calchaquí Communities. Calchaquíes Valley# Salta.  Social Security 
Training.  Opening of a special pay office.  August, 2010.  
 
-
Diaguita- Calchaquí Communities. Catamarca. September, 2010.  
 
-
Mbya- Guaraní Communities.  Misiones. September, 2010.  
 
Indigenous participation in the different project stages was guaranteed during the ABP 
and the activities were registered and filed as well as activities and consultations carried 
out at the early stages of preparing the AF.  No problems for the continuity of this aspect 
during the AF implementation are foreseen.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/21/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/15/2010 
 
Page  8
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/30/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Rafael P. Rofman 
01/25/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/07/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
01/26/2011 
Comments:   
