Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5918 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/07/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P125151 
Project Name: Second Norte Grande Water Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader: Patricia Lopez Martinez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 14, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2011 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (50%);Pollution management and 
environmental health (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to increase sustainable access to sanitation and water 
supply services in the Norte Grande region of Argentina, by providing investments in 
infrastructure and supporting institutional development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation Infrastructure (US$176 million, with US$143 
million of Bank funding ): Carrying out of Subprojects consisting of the rehabilitation, upgrading 
and/or reconstruction of Participating Provinces': (i) wastewater collection,  conveyance,  
treatment and disposal systems (such as wastewater treatment plants, pumping stations, main 
collectors and secondary sewerage networks);  and (ii) water supply systems: including, inter 
alia, production and distribution systems (such as water treatment plants, pumping stations, main 
conveyance pipelines and distribution networks, and household connections); and the 
implementation of non-revenue water reduction programs including supply and installation of 
domestic and bulk water meters.   
 
Page  2
Component 2: Institutional Development and Technical Assistance (US$15 million, all 
financed by the Bank): This component will finance a range of activities expected to improve 
institutional performance and the capacity of participating water supply and sanitation utilities to 
increase their efficiency and improve service provision. It will fund:  
 
(i)   
Carrying out of tailored institutional and/or operational strengthening programs and 
technical assistance for participating WSS Service Providers to improve their institutional 
organization, investment planning, management capabilities and technical, operational, 
commercial and financial efficiency including, inter alia: (a) the development of WSS-related 
management and information systems; (b) the development of WSS customer databases and 
cadastres; (c) technical assistance related to strategic planning, energy efficiency and non-
revenue water reduction programs; (d) analysis of cost-recovery options and optimization of 
rates and subsidy structures; (e) technical assistance for institutional reorganization; and carrying 
out of technical studies and consulting services as required to support the implementation of the 
project#s infrastructure works (feasibility studies, designs, water resources availability studies, 
others), and (f) training programs for operation and maintenance of systems and installations 
with emphasis on wastewater treatment plants, water treatment plants and pumping stations, all 
under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank ; and  
 
(ii)  
Strengthening of the operational, social, environmental, fiduciary and supervision 
management capacity of UCPyPFE and Participating Provinces through, inter alia: (a) the 
provision of technical assistance in subproject screening, risk and impact assessments and 
preparation of management plans, (including environmental impact assessments, environmental 
and social monitoring, socio-economic surveys and impacts, preparation of safeguard 
instruments and other studies under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank);  and (b) training 
for UCPyPFE's and participating provinces' permanent staff.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Supervision (US$15 million, all financed by the Bank): 
This component will finance: (i) carrying out of specialized independent technical, 
environmental and social supervision, as required; (ii) carrying out of Project audits and 
monitoring and evaluation activities under the Project; and (iii) provision of administrative and 
operational support (including the provision of Operating Costs) to UCPyPFE in the 
administration, monitoring, coordination and supervision of Project implementation .   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project spans a wide geographic area in Argentina, potentially involving nine provinces and 
a
diverse variety of environmental situations. Given the vast extension of the territory targeted by 
future sub-projects, the baseline is presented based from an eco-regional perspective. This serves 
to demonstrate that the Norte Grande region has received sufficient attention from different 
stakeholders and organizations which have helped to develop nature conservation planning 
visions (Examples of these developments i
nclude the "Upper Paraná Atlantic Forest Biodiversity 
Vision" funded by WWF or the "Great Chaco Ecoregional Assessment" sponsored by The 
Nature Conservancy. In addition to this, local NGOs as Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentina, 
Fundación ProYungas, or Aves Argentinas/BLI has provided support or participated in technical 
process identify areas for biodiversity conservation and sustainable use of resources), which in 
some cases has been adopted by provincial and local governments. Therefore, the planning of 
future works will count with a base of already existing environmental information in order to 
make the necessary adjustments in future designs. The National Strategic Plan for Territorial 
Page  3
Development (Plan Estratégico Territorial), prepared by the Ministry of Federal Planning, Public 
Investment and Services (Ministerio de Planificación Federal, Inversión Pública y Servicios - 
MPF), and launched during September 2010 recovers part of this conservationist experience.  
 
The Norte Grande region involves three trans-boundary eco-regions which have been part of 
comprehensive eco-regional planning exercises: (i) the Great American Chaco; (ii) the Upper 
Paraná Atlantic Forest; and (iii) the Yungas. In addition to this, the Norte Grande encompasses 
other eco-regions such as the Puna and Altos Andes. In most of the eco-regions mentioned 
above, there is baseline information available in terms of biodiversity conservation and 
sustainable development which has been agreed upon on a consensual basis by different 
stakeholders within the last ten years. This implies that all the infrastructure developments will at 
least have to consider environmental priorities in each eco-region. In some provinces, these 
priorities have gained a legal status, while in others it remains as a basis of information. This 
provides the project with a framework to design proper environmental management measures in 
a
well-defined ecological framework.  
 
The Project is regional demand-based, consisting on several subprojects which will be selected 
during the implementation stage pursuant: (i) consistency with Project objectives; (ii) 
compliance with subprojects' eligibility criteria; and (iii) level of subprojects' ownership and 
results of stakeholder consultation at the local level.  
 
At this stage, no subprojects have been approved for financing under the Project, and the 
process of review, screening, decisions over their eligibility and final design (including specific 
safeguard studies) will be carried out during implementation.  
 
The subprojects would be developed in interior cities which have high levels of water pollution 
given the lack of sanitation solutions and poor health indicators as a result of waterborne diseases 
as well as common social issues related to urban informality and high levels of poverty. 
Specifically, urban areas suffer from the following environmental problems: (i) wastewater 
discharge in the ground and its subsequent infiltration into the groundwater and pollution of 
surface water bodies connected to the local aquifers; (ii) significant levels of water pollution 
because of the lack of wastewater treatment; (iii) environmental degradation given the presence 
of urban lagoons and the consequent health problems and risks; (iv) environmental degradation 
and deterioration of surface water bodies and shallow aquifers due to the presence of poorly built 
and maintained septic tanks and wastewater spillage on public roads and storm water pipes; and 
(v) risk of transmission of waterborne diseases. If this is left unchanged it is very probable that 
the environmental situation will deteriorate even further, with higher levels of pollution in the 
water bodies and related damage to the riparian ecosystem, increased levels of pollution and 
incidence of disease and higher costs associated with these health consequences and the 
maintenance costs of the septic tanks.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
An assessment of the current institutional capacity was conducted during Project preparation. 
Aspects to be strengthened during implementation include: (i) the generation of baseline and 
environmental monitoring studies, (ii) establishing environmental management processes, (iii) 
the design and implementation of mitigation measures; (iv) the capacity to incorporate social 
Page  4
dimensions in EIA processes, including consultation and social participation and indigenous 
peoples planning in all stages of subprojects' cycle; (v) the dissemination, consultation and 
claims and redress mechanisms; (vi) involuntary resettlement practices; (vii) the integration of 
communication plans into the institutional system both at the federal and provincial level; and 
(viii) capacity for monitoring activity outcomes. A specific assessment of the environmental and 
social instruments will be undertaken within the mid-term evaluation and at Project completion 
stage.  
 
Borrower's capacity and sub-national roles. The UCPyPFE (through a dedicated unit) within the 
MFP at the federal government level will be responsible for supervision of environmental and 
social management issues during the construction phase of subprojects. The UCPyPFE will 
assign qualified staff dedicated to the management and supervision of the EMPs during 
subproject implementation and ensure periodic audits, and supervision of environmental and 
social performance. The UCPyPFE will also provide support in coordinating information 
disclosure and consultations.  
 
Human resources for safeguards management. In terms of human resources, the UCPyPFE 
includes an Environmental and Social Specialist with ample experience in safeguards 
management who will guide the preparation process. Participating provinces involved with sub-
projects will also have to include relevant expertise both on environmental and social issues.  
 
Institutional Coordination. A coordination strategy will be included in the Operational Manual 
to ensure that all participating provincial water and sanitation providers understand and follow 
the environmental and social measures under the project. The ESMF will describe opportunities 
for improving and strengthening of the social and environmental management capacity, 
including flows of communication between provinces and the national government. The 
institutional capacity-building will plan proposes specific actions of management, training, and 
equipment. A specific budget will be allocated and will be executed during Project 
implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Graciela Sanchez Martinez (LCSSO) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The team proposes that this Project be classified as Category A given: (i) the social and 
environmental sensitivities of the project area; (ii) the types of proposed investments; (iii) the 
limited provincial and municipal capacities; (iv) the unknown nature of future investments; and 
(v) the large scale nature and potential impacts of the subprojects identified during preparation.  
 
During construction the main environmental impacts will relate to those temporary ones 
primarily associated with the construction of the large-scale civil works such as the expansion of 
sanitation systems. Possible impacts and risks include the following: (i) temporary disruption to 
local traffic flows; (ii) temporary loss of access to recreational, residential and commercial areas; 
(iii) dust and noise control; (iv) handling and management of hazardous construction materials; 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
(v) occupational emergency response planning; (vi) erosion and sediment control; (vii) disposal 
of construction debris; and (viii) chance archeological finds. Impacts during construction stem 
from activities such as excavation for the new plants/lagoons, transportation of sand, concrete 
and construction materials, earth compacting, concrete pouring and operation of heavy 
construction equipment. With appropriate mitigation and supervision measures, the majority of 
the impacts are considered moderate and temporary and they should be manageable. The 
management of construction impacts will be the responsibility of contractors and specific 
environmental measures will be specified within the construction contract based on the agreed 
measures included in the EMPs, the ESMF and the Environmental Technical Specifications 
(ETS).  
 
During the operational phase, the principal environmental impacts and risks relate to: (i) the 
potential environmental and human health effects of long-term wastewater discharges; (ii) the 
potential environmental and human health risks associated with the management and disposal of 
continuously generated bio-solids and sludges treatment plants; and (iii) localized nuisance 
issues relating to operations such as odor and noise.  
 
Scope of Impacts. A number of civil works will produce short- and long-term impacts 
which trigger OP 4.01. The civil works in the example subprojects would include the 
construction of wastewater treatment plants, pumping stations, pipelines and the closure of 
existing treatment systems. The main direct impacts are expected to occur during the 
construction phase and they could cause localized negative environmental impacts. Such impacts 
are expected to consist essentially of noise, vibration, dust and in some cases traffic disruption. 
Additional negative impacts during construction will occur due to the haulage and final disposal 
of materials. Most of these impacts can be mitigated by proper designs and environmental and 
social management plans that will have to be followed. Managing these impacts will require the 
preparation of a technical manual, which will be developed to guide construction, including the 
management of construction camps, disposal of construction waste, management of borrow pits, 
quarries etc.  
 
The Project's civil works will follow the alignments of existing roads and right-of-ways (for 
pipeline installation) as well the occupation of state-owned properties in urbanized areas.  
Alternatives will be sought to prevent potential negative impacts, and especially to avoid 
resettlement. During the operation phase, subprojects will have positive impacts due to the 
reduction of pollution in associated rivers and the improvements in sanitary and environmental 
health in the involved cities. However, impacts and mitigation measures during system operation 
need to be better analyzed during preparation to clearly identify the roles and responsibilities in 
terms of environmental management during construction, operation and maintenance.  
 
EA tools during preparation and supervision. Given the nature and scope of the example 
subprojects, which combine previously designed subprojects with subprojects yet to be designed, 
the proposed Project will adopt the guiding principles of the ESMF. A general ESMF was 
developed during the preparation of the Norte Grande Water Infrastructure Project. This 
Framework will be reviewed by the team's environmental and social specialists to ensure that it 
foresees procedures and measures of risk and manages their impacts in compl
iance with Bank 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
safeguard requirements. The ESMF will aim to define, inter alia, procedures and content to 
prepare/complete the final environmental and social assessments as well as environmental and 
social plans (involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples) to adequately manage 
environmental and social screening, assess these risks and impacts adequately during project 
implementation, and implementing an adequate system to manage claims and disputes.  
 
Geographical scope. Given the geographical scope of the Project, and the fact that 
investments will occur in disconnected areas, an EA for the Project as a whole to examine the 
potential combined environmental and social impacts is not needed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The screening process and specific EA undertaken for the example subproject in Resistencia 
confirmed that discharges from the new sewerage system (which currently discharges with a 
significant organic charge) could occur in the Ramsar Site 'Humedales Chaco'. In Santiago del 
Estero the proximity of a wastewater treatment plant to the coast of the Sali river involves an 
important risk if the current design is not improved in terms of contingency management and 
distance to the river. Therefore, the EA update process, as well as the EMPs, will include specific 
measures to measure the impact on wetlands, which should receive a less polluted charge after 
the completion of the wastewater treatment plant, and the EAs and EMPs will include actions to 
minimize and mitigate such damage. At the same time, the project team will look for potential 
opportunities to generate positive impacts on urban natural habitats through project activities, 
especially those related to urban planning. In general, works in densely populated urban areas 
could finance activities (not yet identified) which would have the potential to adversely affect 
critical and other natural habitats in rural areas as defined under the policy.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The Project is not expected to affect forests as defined under the policy nor promote forest 
management of any type. However, given the unknown location of investments, guidelines to 
assess impacts on forests and appropriate management will be developed and included in the 
ESMF.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
During the implementation phase, some pesticides could be used during the closure of old 
infrastructure or during the maintenance of new infrastructure. The ESMF will include specific 
requirements to ensure that all EMPs and construction contracts will include measures to manage 
pesticides following the Bank's policy. Products to be procured could include defoliadores, soil 
sterilizers, herbicides, pesticides, disinfectants, polymers, or reactive pesticides (chlorine 
herbicides).   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
It is possible that the civil works may directly and/or indirectly affect physical cultural 
property in cities.  These could include known local structures or sites of historic or cultural 
importance. The project screening and EA process will ensure that such sites will be identified 
and appropriate actions will be taken if necessary. In addition, the ESMF will include specific 
requirements to ensure that all construction contracts will include chance find procedures that 
define specific measures to be taken in the event that physical cultural resources as defined under 
the policy are found during construction. All possible impacts on buildings or other sites of 
historical or archaeological significance will be mitigated as necessary according to guidance 
outlined in the ESMF and documented in the subproject EMPs.   
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The region of Norte Grande includes approximately 50,000 people who define themselves as 
Indigenous Peoples (IP), or around 8 percent of total number of IPs in Argentina 
(Complementary Survey of Indigenous Peoples INDEC 2004/2005). Therefore, and given that 
the location of works is unknown, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) is under 
preparation, a draft version was already diclosed in country and on the Infoshop and an updated 
version will be disclosed by appraisal.  
 
A
Rapid Social Assessment has been carried out to evaluate both the impacts of the 
example subprojects as well as the broader social opportunities and risks in the region for IP. 
This SA includes analytical work that reviews institutional and political aspects of supply and 
demand issues related to health and water and sanitation systems, which will be fed by desk 
review and interviews with the National Coordinator and members of the Council of Indigenous 
Participation (Consejo de Participación Indígena) of the involved provinces and the National 
Institute for Indigenous Affairs (Instituto Nacional de Asuntos Indígenas). In addition, the SA 
includes consultations with Indigenous leaders and communities and related civil society 
organizations to identify their views and ascertain the level of community support for the Project. 
The preparation of any required Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) under the Project will follow 
the procedures described in the IPPF based on the Bank's OP/BP 4.10, and takes into account 
some key aspects, which include (i) social assessment and previous, free and informed 
consultations for affected IP; (ii) action plan duly budgeted with measures to ensure that IP 
obtain adequate social and economic benefits generated by the project as appropriated or to 
prevent, reduce, mitigate or compensate negative effects; and (iii) a monitoring and grievance 
mechanism.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The ongoing SA will evaluate both the resettlement impacts of the example subprojects as 
well as the broader social risks for people in the region. In terms of resettlement, this SA will 
include analytical work that will review involuntary land acquisition resulting in: (i)  relocation 
or loss of shelter; (ii) loss of assets or access to assets; or (iii) loss of income sources or means of 
livelihood, whether or not the affected persons must move to another location; and (iv) the 
involuntary restriction of access to legally designated parks and protected areas resulting in 
adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced persons.  In addition, consultations with 
relevant agencies and affected parties to inform the design of the Project's Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF).  
 
A
draft version of the RPF was already diclosed in country and on the Infoshop and an 
updated version will be disclosed by appraisal.  
 
All land acquisition or compensation required for the Project will take place according to 
the procedures described in the RPF based on the Bank OP/BP 4.12. The RPF was prepared to 
guide the preparation of resettlement or land acquisition plans including inter alia (i) freedom of 
choice of the compensatory measure; and (ii) compensation at cost reposition when appropriate 
and finalized before starting of civil works.   
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
It has not yet been defined if dams will be constructed under the Project. If this is the case, 
the Project would finance the construction of small dams or the rehabilitation of others for water 
supply purposes. The ESMF will include the appropriate guidance to identify and manage 
impacts when supporting small dams. The activation of this policy will be confirmed at QER 
stage.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
This policy is triggered. One of the candidate subprojects involves a tributary (riacho 
Barranqueras) to Río Paraná, which falls under the category of an international waterways it is 
linked to the Rio de La Plata, an international waterway delineating Argentina and Uruguay. 
Notification procedures will be followed as per the policy procedure.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
No subproject within disputed areas as defined under the policy will be financed.   
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/17/2010 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
February 9, 2011   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Patricia Lopez Martinez 
01/30/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/04/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
02/07/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
