Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/23/2011 
Report No.:  AC5835
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P114294 
Project Name:  Rural Corridors and Biodiversity 
Task Team Leader:  Robert Ragland Davis 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (67%);Other environment and natural resources management (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.28 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
2.30
15.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Global Environmental Objective of the project is to increase protection of vulnerable 
natural areas and conserve biological diversity through the establishment, strengthening 
and operational startup of protected areas, strengthening of the SIFAP and provincial- 
and private- sector conservation capacities, as well as through interventions to initiate 
model corridors in the Argentine Chaco and Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine 
ecosystems.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 will finance the establishment, strengthening and operational startup of six 
new protected areas within the priority areas and conduct sustainable use subprojects with 
producers. Component 2 will develop and implement a multi-stakeholder process for 
corridors conservation in two high-priority ecosystems. Component 3 will strengthen the 
Federal System of Protected Areas (SIFAP) to coordinate multi-stakeholder participation 
for biodiversity conservation, particularly with provinces. Component 4 provides the 
Page  2
technical and fiduciary support elements to ensure efficient execution of the project 
through administration, monitoring and evaluation, planning and coordination.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Primarily in the Patagonian Steppe and Atlantic Coastal-Marine areas of the provinces of  
Santa Cruz and Chubut, and in the Grand Chaco Forest ecosystem of the provinces of 
Chaco and Santiago del Estero.  
 
Patagonian Steppe and Atlantic Coastal-Marine Ecosystem. The Patagonian Steppe is an 
extensive ecoregion of grasslands and shrub range that crosses from the Atlantic Ocean to 
the foothills of the Andes in Southern Argentina and Chile.  Although the steppe is 
characterized by windy conditions and low rainfall (under 200 mm per annum), a narrow 
band of steppe adjacent to the Valdivian forest ecosystem (near the Andes) has higher 
rainfall, around 300 mm per annum. The Patagonian coastal-marine ecosystem runs 
north-south along the Argentine coastline from Tierra del Fuego to the province of Rio 
Negro, south of Buenos Aires Province.  Both the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems 
provide important habitats for many species of global and national significance including 
the guanaco (Lama gu
anicoe), Darwin´s rhea (Pterocnemia pennata), pichi (Zaedyus 
pichiy), zorrino patagónico (Conepatus humboldtii), red fox (Pseudalopex culpaeus), 
puma (Puma concolor), the hoarfrosted Hill´s Lizard (Liolaemus escarchadosi), 
Magellanic penguin (Spheniscus magellanicus), three species of shags, including imperial 
shag (Phalacrocórax atriceps), little grison (Galictis cuja) gaviotín sudamericano (Sterna 
hirundinacea), coscoroba swan (Coscoroba coscoroba), black necked swan (Cygnus 
melanocorypha), lobo marino de un pelo (Otaria flavescens), peales dolphin 
(Lagenorhynchus australis), Commerson´s Dolphin (Cephabrhynchus commersonii), 
coirón (Festuca pallescens), Junellia (Junellia tridens) and green shrub (Lepidophyllum 
cupressiforme), one of which is threatened.  
 
Parque Chaqueño Forest Ecosystem. Over 76% of native forests are located in the 
#Bosque Chaqueño# (or #Chaco#) ecoregion . This area in northwest Argentina spans 
twelve provinces and is the most threatened eco-region in the country, primarily as a 
result of the massive industrial-scale clearing for soybean cultivation.  The most current 
deforestation estimates show a loss of 317,000 ha of forest in Santiago del Estero, Chaco 
and Formosa provinces alone for the year 2007. While the new Forestry Law (No. 26.331 
of 2007) passed in December 2007 may have slowed the rate of conversion momentarily, 
forest fires reportedly have increased, which contributes to forest degradation.  
 
Biodiversity of global and national importance in the Chaco includes quebracho 
colorado (Schinopsis lorentzii y balansae), quebracho blanco (Aspidosperma quebracho-
blanco), mistol (Ziziphus mistol), vinal  (Prosopis ruscifolia), tatú carreta (Priodontes 
maximus), three species of peccary (Catagonus wagneri, Pecari tajacu, Tayassu pecari), 
giant anteater (Mirmecophaga tridactyla), boa (Boa constrictor), yaguareté (Panthera 
onca), Darwin´s rhea (Rhea pennata), crowned eagle (Harpyhaliaetus coronatus), and a 
tortoise (Chelonoidis chilensis) -- 6 of which are threatened.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Francis V. Fragano (LCSDE) 
Ms Mi Hyun Bae Mbayo (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large-scale impacts are expected given the focus on biodiversity conservation with 
important investments in capacity and institution building.  However, an EA was 
prepared as part of project preparation to identify the project#s potential impacts, to 
develop appropriate mitigation measures for the possible limited negative impacts, 
mainly due to construction of new park infrastructure. Construction will be located to 
minimize impacts to key parts of protected areas and incorporate appropriate measures to 
minimize landscape visual impacts and integrate local designs and materials.  Measures 
included in the EMP include environmental screening of works, mitigation of dust and 
noise, proper disposal of construction waste, worker health and safety standards, and 
wastewater management. Based on recent project activities (P039787 and P040808/LN 
4085 AR) APN has shown excellent compliance with Bank standards, and has a set of 
protocols for works in parks which are comparable. Small-scale sustainable-land use 
projects with communities and small-producers in buffer zones are expected to have 
positive or negligible impacts on the environment. A screening process is included in the 
EMP for their selection, as are protocols for their implementation to ensure conformity 
with Bank standards and best practices.  
 
APN has a policy of no involuntary resettlement, and the project does not support or 
include it. Inhabitants living inside the proposed protected area sites would therefore be 
able to chose to (i) relocate to an area outside of the protected area with an agreed 
compensation package or (ii) remain in the protected area under restrictions and land-use 
regimes that would ensure their livelihood but still be compatible with conservation 
objectives. In both cases, APN would provide training and investments to support the 
adjustment of the inhabitants to their new situation. APN has a demonstrated good history 
and success in working with these situations through the recently closed Biodiversity 
Page  4
Conservation Project. To cover the possibilities above and in compliance with OP 4.12, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Process Framework (PF) have been 
prepared, approved and disclosed by APN.  
 
APN conducted a social assessment as part of project preparation. The Social 
Assessment indicates that Indigenous Peoples# communities do not exist in the proposed 
protected area sites. However, they customarily use the Chaco forest for natural resources 
(hunting and collecting non-timber forest products such as medicinal plants, and 
materials for construction). An IPPF has been developed by APN and disclosed to ensure 
that the needs and perspectives of the Indigenous People are included should the 
establishment of the new protected areas in the Chaco encompass forest or other areas 
traditionally used by them.  
 
With respect to the corridor, Indigenous Peoples have been informed of the project and 
will be consulted in order to acquire their consent prior to their inclusion in corridors that 
may include their traditional territories. APN has a good history of working with 
Indigenous People in co-management within its existing protected areas.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Impacts should be positive, and result in the conservation of native forests, grasslands 
and coastal-marine resources over the long term.  The Project is expected to generate 
positive long-term impacts, through improved management of conservation areas and the 
surrounding landscape, with particular focus on training in new techniques, and inclusion 
of local communities in decision making and support for sustainable alternative economic 
opportunities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Given the client's focus on conservation, APN has a solid policy in place for ensuring that 
construction within protected areas includes an EA and mitigation measures for any 
potential impacts identified.  Safeguards oversight is managed through APN regional 
offices to apply specific policies and procedures that include: measures to evaluate and 
protect physical cultural resources, construction best-practices, soil removal and debris 
management, and other human activities within protected areas. Construction is also 
designed in such a way as to consider landscape aspects and culturally appropriate 
architectural designs.  Sustainable production activities would be of small-scale and 
would be approved based on a participatory approach through local committees and 
evaluated through criteria that ensure no harm to natural habitats and are supportive of 
conservation goals. A negative list is included to ensure no projects procure or utilize 
pesticides, no endangered species are impacted or utilized and no exotic species are 
introduced.  Some small-scale forest resource and non-timber forest product use are 
Page  5
considered in the framework through a process consistent with OP 4.36 in regard to 
community-based approaches to forestry management as well as Provincial forest and 
wildlife laws.  
 
APN also has a policy of "no involuntary resettlement" and for social participation in 
protected area buffer zones. The client has managed two IBRD projects and one GEF 
projects with similar characteristics and has a good track record for compliance, and high 
capacity for social and environmental management.  
 
APN has prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) to guide the 
required culturally appropriate consultations and to address any potential impacts to 
Indigenous Peoples.  The Framework outlines the requirement for consent by Indigenous 
Peoples prior to including their territories within the framework of a Conservation 
Corridor. These requirements are included in the operational manual. In the event that 
Indigenous Peoples are affected by the project, this framework will guide the preparation 
of site-specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs).  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Process Framework (PF) have been 
prepared by APN. The RPF will guide the preparation of an Abbreviated Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP), if necessary, for addressing any relocation of human settlements 
located inside any of the conservation sites during planning and implementation of the 
project.  The abbreviated RAP has been reviewed and approved by the Bank and 
disclosed in country and in the InfoShop.  The PF addresses possible restrictions of 
access of local communities to natural resources in the protected area sites. It establishes 
the process for involving potentially affected communities in planning and 
implementation of the project, while identifying how affected communities will be 
assisted in restoring their livelihood, as a consequence of loss of access to traditional 
natural resources.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main project beneficiaries will be (i) local communities and rural poor whose 
livelihoods depend on the natural resource base, particularly in the Argentine Steppe and 
Chaco; (ii) the total supply-chain involved in Argentina's nature-based tourism; and (iii) 
civil society as beneficiaries of the project. (In the event the IPPF is activated to include 
Indigenous Peoples, they would also be considered as beneficiaries.) Each of the six 
protected areas will have consultative committees at the protected area and corridor levels 
to inform local beneficiaries about the project and involve them in protected area 
management and sustainable alternative livelihoods activities. Also, the corridors 
component will form participative committees to identify needs and ways of approaching 
conservation issues.  
 
The EA and framework for environmental management has been disclosed both locally 
on the APN website, as well as the Bank InfoShop in a timely manner prior to Appraisal. 
In addition, APN has held consultation meetings in the regions where the project will 
focus its activities and has also consulted national NGOs and Provincial and Municipal 
Page  6
authorities.  In addition to the management committees that participate in the planning 
and monitoring of investment activities within protected areas and development of the 
sustainable development projects, the project integrates a Social Participation Plan, which 
integrates all relevant stakeholders in the full cycle of project implementation. APN has 5 
different levels of social participation within its ongoing management system including: 
Local Advisory Committees (Comisión Asesora Local), Co-management Committees 
(Comité de Co-Manejo), Biosphere Reserve Management Committees (Comité de 
Gestión de las Reservas de la Biosfera), Operational and Strategic Planning and 
Evaluation (Evaluación y Planificación Estratégica y Operativa) and Public Meetings 
(Audiencias Públicas).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/09/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/17/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/09/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/18/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/19/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/09/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/18/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  8
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Ragland Davis 
02/18/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Francis V. Fragano 
02/22/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mi Hyun Bae Mbayo 
02/18/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
02/22/2011 
Comments:   
