Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/26/2011 
Report No.:  59283
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P120028 
Project Name:  Community Agricultural Resource Management and Competitiveness 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Doina Petrescu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 29, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (50%) 
Theme:  Rural non-farm income generation (40%);Rural markets (20%);Other 
environment and natural resources management (20%);Rural services and infrastructure 
(20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.50
5.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective is to improve productivity and sustainability 
of pasture/livestock livelihood systems in selected communities. This would be 
evidenced by: (i) increased livestock productivity as measured by milk productivity and 
increase in daily animal weight gain; (ii) increased efficiency of communal pasture 
management, as measured by increased communal budgetary revenues from lease of 
pastures; (iii) increased farm sales from livestock; and (iv) increased Pasture 
Management Effectiveness.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of four components: (1) Community Pasture/Livestock Management 
System; (2) Strengthening Support Services; (3) Competitive Grants Program; and (4) 
Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Community Pasture/Livestock Management System - will develop and 
implement an efficient and sustainable community managed pasture/fodder based 
livestock production system in the selected mountainous communities, where livestock is 
the main source for livelihood and where communities have a strong interest to improve 
their pasture production. This objective would be achieved by reversing the trend of 
destructive grazing, using pastures more efficiently, improving fodder production and 
animal feeding systems and raising the efficiency of animal production. This component 
will provide financing for: (a) Development of Pasture/Livestock management plans; and 
(b) a Community Fund for implementation of Pasture/Livestock management plans.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Institutions and Support Services -  
 
will improve the institutional system and support services for farmers involved in 
livestock production through: (a) improved advisory services in livestock-related topics; 
and (b) improved animal health services.  
 
Component 3: Competitive Grants Program (CGP) - will support village level agri-
business and farmer groups through targeted public investments to develop new business 
opportunities, improve marketing, promote introduction of food safety practices, and 
introduce and demonstrate new technologies.  
 
Component 4: Project Management - will provide financing for: (a) project management 
and training, including annual operational reviews and audits; and (b) monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Majority of the project activities will be implemented in the selected mountainous 
communities of Armenia, for which livestock is the main source of livelihood, and which 
are dependent on grassland and pasture ecosystems. The project will also support 
interventions at the national level.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSS3) 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSS4) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will support elaboration of sustainable pasture resource management plans 
and livestock development plans to define options for increasing quantity and quality of 
overall fodder production, while reducing the pressure on overgrazed degraded areas and 
regenerating their productive capacity.  However, organized management of pastures 
would imply shifting pressure from nearby grazing lands to more remote areas, as well as 
intensified production of animal fodder, which carry certain environmental threats and 
require a cautious approach. Improving veterinary services and delivery of competitive 
grants to animal farming communities will sensitize beneficiary institutions and 
communities to the negative impacts of improper disposal of the organic animal waste as 
well as biological and hazardous waste from veterinary laboratories and service centers, 
and will support adoption of the improved waste management practices currently 
applicable in Armenia.  
 
Short term modest negative environmental impacts of the project interventions are 
mostly limited to small construction and rehabilitation works to improve access roads and 
other infrastructure of pastures and premises of veterinary service delivery centers.  
Grant-financed small agricultural and agro-processing subprojects in rural areas may also 
have potential adverse impacts on the natural resources and environment due to generally 
low awareness of rural communities of the risks associated with waste disposal, pesticide 
use and other farming practices. The project is designed not only to mitigate these risks, 
but also to disseminate knowledge about good agricultural practices for the use beyond 
its scope and lifetime.  
 
Environmental screening of the proposed project revealed prevalence of the expected 
positive long term impacts on the biodiversity and landscapes of the alpine meadows of 
the country and possible modest short term negative environmental impacts confined to 
the activity areas.  Medium risks of improper disposal of various types of organic waste 
from the beneficiary animal farms, processing entities, and veterinary service centers 
Page  4
were also noted.  Based on the above, OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment was 
triggered and the project was classified as environmental category B.  
 
The Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is not triggered for this 
project as the project will not involve land acquisition, and any restriction of access to 
natural resources will result from community decision-making processes, deemed 
satisfactory to the Bank, which provides for identification of appropriate measures to 
mitigate any adverse effects on vulnerable members of the community.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to have long term positive environmental impact as a result of the 
intended shift to more sustainable pasture management and better organized management 
of waste from animal farms and veterinary service delivery entities, and through 
dissemination of good farming practices to rural communities.  
 
The project is also expected to generate positive social benefits. The project supports 
improving the productivity of livelihood resources (communal pastures and livestock) 
which are critical to poor households in Armenia, and for which livestock represents an 
important source of both food and cash income. Additionally, through the competitive 
grants program, the project supports diversifying the income base of livestock dependent 
communities and their constituent households.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment and is classified as 
environmental Category B.  In accordance with the safeguard requirements, an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is developed, which describes potential 
environmental impacts of all components of the project and provides measures for 
mitigating these impacts.  EMP recommendations are built into the project, as provision 
are in place to reflect them in the designs of pasture infrastructure and other construction 
works, as well as into the guidelines for developing pasture management plans and 
operating of veterinary service centers.  EMP carries an Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) for the CGP.  The EMF outlines procedures of environmental review, 
approval and monitoring and subprojects to be financed from the CGP.  The main 
principles of this procedure are screening and categorization of subproject proposals, 
preparation of site-specific EMPs and Pest Management Plans (PMPs) if deemed 
necessary, and the oversight of adherence to the good environmental practice and 
recommendations of EMPs/PMPs throughout implementation of subprojects. It is agreed 
that subprojects of environmental Category A not be eligible for financing under the 
CGP.  Only Category B and C subprojects will be accepted for further review and 
approval.  
Page  5
OP 4.09 Pest Management is also triggered by the project.  Although its mainstream 
activities do not require procurement and use of agrochemicals, procurement of minor 
amounts of pesticides for fodder production and under the CGP financed subprojects is 
not excluded.  An indirect increase of pesticide use is possible as a result of some 
subprojects if they improve farmers access to other agricultural inputs and help to 
intensify ago production.   Also, triggering of OP 4.09 will ensure that any 
recommendations on the pest and pesticide management issued by the project-supported 
providers of advisory services are based on the basics of Integrated Pest Management and 
are least harmful for the environment.  EMF calls for the development of subproject 
specific PMPs as necessary depending on the nature of activities financed.  
 
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Armenia will be the implementing agency for 
the project, while its day-to-day management will be provided by PIU under this 
Ministry. The PIU has extensive experience gained through the implementation of the 
World Bank financed Rural Enterprise Support and Community Agriculture 
Development (RESCAD) project, including management of the environmental 
safeguards. Nonetheless, there is a need for enhancing environmental review and 
supervision capacity within PIU towards quality and effective performing the functions 
of: (i) reviewing pasture development plans to ensure that they are in line with EMP 
recommendations, (ii) assisting rural communities and designers with filling out 
environmental checklists for small construction and rehabilitation works under pasture 
development and/or upgrading of veterinary facilities, (iii) screening and classifying 
grant proposals under CGP and ensuring development of EMPs for category B 
subprojects, and (iv) producing regular records of environmental supervision of civil 
works and reports on environmental monitoring of subprojects implementation under 
CGP.  
 
As part of project preparation, a social-institutional-legal assessment was also 
conducted. Key findings of the assessment confirmed the need to pursue the proposed 
project design. A strong emphasis was placed by the report on raising pasture user 
awareness, organizing participatory pasture user associations as vehicles for 
implementation, and ensuring that the creation of new pasture management regimes is 
accompanied by investment measures that improve productivity. All these factors have 
been taken into account in the project design, along with the need to establish a robust 
grievance redress and monitoring mechanism. Furthermore, any sub-projects financed 
under the project will be implemented on community owned land not currently used by 
third parties, while the rights of those who already have privately developed physical 
objects on community pastures will be protected by the provisions of the pasture 
management plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the project are: the livestock farming communities of 
mountainous Armenia; providers of advisory and extension services for the livestock-
related activities, including the network of the regional-level Marz Agricultural Support 
Page  6
Centers (MASCs)and the national-level Republican Agricultural Support Center (RASC); 
village agri-business and farmer groups which will be awarded CGP grants; community 
veterinarians; the Food Safety and Veterinary Inspectorate and the Ministry of 
Agriculture.  
 
EMP prepared for the purposes of the project implementation was discussed with the 
stakeholders, environmental NGOs, representatives of academic circles and media at the 
stage of an early draft on July 30, 2010. A second public consultation took place on the 
final draft EMP on November 26, 2010, and comments received were incorporated on the 
final EMP which was received by the Bank on December 21, 2010.  
 
Extensive consultations with key stakeholders have already taken place in order to 
confirm that: (i) addressing the dual objective of natural resource conservation and 
economic development is relevant and important for village communities; and (ii) the 
community-driven development implementation mechanisms are relevant within the 
context of the project. These consultations resulted in community proposals for 
institutional arrangements which were incorporated in the project design, such as the 
creation of pasture/livestock associations, and their results strongly support the 
participatory approach of addressing dual objectives of natural resource management and 
economic development at the community level.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/12/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/12/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
Page  7
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
OP 4.09 Pest Management is triggered by the project, despite the fact that its mainstream 
activities do not require procurement and use of agrochemicals. The Policy is triggered 
because procurement of minor amounts of pesticides for fodder production and under the 
CGP financed subprojects cannot be excluded.  An indirect increase of pesticide use is 
possible as a result of improved access to other agricultural inputs and intensification of 
production due to the project interventions.  Also, the Policy is triggered to ensure that 
any recommendations on the pest and pesticide management, which may be issued by the 
project-supported providers of advisory services, are based on the basics of Integrated 
Pest Management and are least harmful for the environment.  No stand alone PMP is 
developed as a part of the project preparation, through the EMP explains in detail how a 
need for developing PMPs specific for individual project activities should be determined 
during the project implementation; and how these PMP should be developed, applied, and 
monitored.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  8
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Doina Petrescu 
11/12/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
11/12/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan 
11/12/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
11/12/2010 
Comments:   
