Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6029 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/20/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Armenia 
Project ID: P111942 
Project Name: Public Financial Management and Corporate Accounting and Auditing 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Jens Kromann Kristensen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 6, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.70
6.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall project development objectives are to strengthen efficiency, effectiveness, 
transparency and accountability in public financial management and revenue administration.  
 
In the area of public financial management the project development objective is aligned with 
the Governments Public Financial Management Reform Strategy adopted in October 2010. The 
objective is to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of public expenditure management and to 
improve the accountability and transparency in the use of public funds thereby contributing to 
improved quality of public services provided.  
 
In the area of revenue administration, the development objective is to modernize the State 
Revenue Committee to become more efficient and effective, and increase revenue collection, 
while reducing the compliance burden on the private sector, specifically to: (i) enhance the level 
of voluntary tax compliance; (ii) improve effectiveness in fighting tax evasion and reducing the 
size of the shadow economy; (iii) strengthen the institutional and human capacity  and reduce 
administrative cost of collection; (iv) modernize processes that would reduce the avenues for 
corruption.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project aims will be supported through two parts addressing revenue administration and 
public financial management reform respectively.  
 
The public financial management part of the project is proposed to have the following five 
components:  
 
Component 1 - Strengthening Policy Based Budgeting. The component will further deepen 
policy orientation of the budget formulation process thereby improving allocative efficiency and 
result orientation in the management of public expenditures. The component will be closely 
coordinated with on-going but limited support being provided by GTZ in this area.  
 
Component 2 -  Integrated Business Process Reengineering. This component will strengthen the 
government#s public financial management system to ensure better accountability, transparency 
and integrity of PFM processes. A key activity to be funded by the component is a new 
Government Financial Management Information System.  
 
Component 3 - Strengthening the system of Public Internal Financial Control. The component 
will strengthen the public sector internal control framework, thereby improving the management 
and internal control framework (control environment and procedures) for the delivery of public 
services. The component will be closely coordinated with SIGMA-OECD- EU efforts in this 
area.  
 
Component 4 - External Oversight and Scrutiny. The objective of this component is to 
strengthen the Control Chamber and the Parliamentary Budget Commission in providing 
independent oversight and assurance on the efficient and effective use of public funds.  The 
component will be closely coordinated with on-going but limited support being provided by 
other international partners in this area.  
 
Component 5 - Corporate Accounting for State Owned Enterprises. The objectives of this 
component are to: i) improve corporate governance arrangements of the state owned enterprises 
(SOEs) and business oriented non-commercial organizations in Armenia and oversight of their 
fiscal risk by the Ministry of Finance; and ii) improve quality of financial information by SOEs 
through enhancing corporate financial reporting regulation.  
 
Component 6. Project management  
 
Project management for the PFM part of the project is proposed to be anchored in the 
arrangements being established in the Ministry of Finance in support of the Governments PFM 
Reform Strategy. The component will provide supplemental funding to these arrangements 
including change management. In addition, separate project management support is proposed to 
be included in the Business Process Re-engineering component given the proposed substantial 
ICT element in this component.  
 
It is envisaged that the revenue part of the project would consist of the following four 
components:  
Page  3
Component 1- Institutional Development. This component would deal with strategic planning 
and organizational management capacity, consolidation of field organizations to increase 
efficiency, develop further the legislative and regulatory framework and analytical capacity, 
improve professionalism, HR management and training, and develop a strong focus on 
motivation, honesty, and integrity.  
 
Component 2- Process Modernization Development. This component would aim to implement 
the re-engineering of business processes in order to make the self assessment system work more 
effectively, introduce an automated risk management system,  improve analytical capacity for 
determining risks, augment skills in audit, especially of large taxpayers, enhance staff capacity 
for detection of tax frauds, improve taxpayer services, and develop an independent tax appeals 
structure.  
 
Component 3 - IT Infrastructure Development. This component would attempt to upgrade the 
ICT in the SRC in order to develop a comprehensive and integrated tax management system 
which will unify functions at the all levels, improve telecommunications and connectivity, 
strengthen information exchange with other agencies and augment other technological 
infrastructure necessary to create an efficient and effective environment for tax operations and 
management, making full use of data management tools (data mining, data warehousing and data 
exchange facilities).  
 
Component 4 - Project Management and Change Management. This component would help 
manage the reforms that would take place, ensuring its timely implementation. The project will 
require a structure to enable all activities to be carried out systematically according to a Project 
Implementation Plan and following procedures delineated in a Project Operational Manual 
(POM).  The structure would include a Project Steering Committee and a Project Implementation 
Unit (PIU).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Armenia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguards policies are triggered.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECSOQ) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/29/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jens Kromann Kristensen 
01/20/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/20/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr William Leslie Dorotinsky 
01/20/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
