Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5816 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/20/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P122944 
Project Name: Second Rural Investment Project 
Task Team Leader: Daniel P. Owen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 11, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: October 3, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (40%);Micro- and SME finance (15%);Water supply 
(15%);Roads and highways (15%);Power (15%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (33%);Participation and civic engagement 
(25%);Rural non-farm income generation (25%);Decentralization (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
3.00
3.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to and use of community-driven rural 
infrastructure and expand economic activities for rural households.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is proposed as a multi-sector investment loan and will scale up the current AzRIP 
both geographically into currently un-serviced Rayons and vertically through the inclusion of 
second generation institutional support in current AzRIP active project areas. On a pilot basis, 
the project will also support activities designed to strengthen the livelihoods of the rural poor. 
AzRIP 2 would be established on the basis of the key design principles pertaining in the current 
project. Activities to be financed include micro-projects for small scale rural infrastructure 
including the rehabalitation of rural roads bridges, tertiary irrigation schemes, eduation and 
health facilities, potable water systems, waste water/drainage/sewage systems, and power supply. 
The modalities for rural livelihoods support activities are to be identified through background 
diagnostic work.   
 
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
The coverage for the proposed Project would scale up the current Project to encompass the 11 
currently un-serviced rayons and include 56 rayons in total. With a project envelope of roughly 
US$ 30 million, the project could support approximately 650 sub-projects in 650 communities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Capacity had been developed on the Borrower side through implementation experience with 
AzRIP and AzRIP Additional Finance. AZRIP I supported environmental awareness raising and 
capacity building activities both among the Regional Offices and potential sub-project 
beneficiaries. AZRIP II will continue the same good practice. The project EMP and OM contain 
clear procedures to be implemented for each sub-project. The PMU Environmental Specialist 
who performed highly satisfactorily under AZRIP I will continue close environmental 
monitoring of sub-projects and will provide support and guidance to community beneficiaries.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSS3) 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSS4) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Due to the scale and nature of the eligible micro-projects, the project is not expected to result 
in significant environmental impacts. Instead, the experience with the activities under the 
original project indicates that many of the micro-projects produced environmental benefits (for 
example, reduction in erosion through proper road rehabilitation or small-scale wastewater 
treatment.) Since the micro-projects for AZRIP II are not pre-identified, specific environmental 
impacts will only be identified in the course of project implementation. Therefore, a framework 
mechanism for screening environmental impacts, developing mitigation plans and monitoring 
environmental progress is required. Examples of potential environmental impacts include 
excessive dust or noise during construction/rehabilitation, the removal or disturbance of natural 
vegetation, waste disposal and the aesthetic degradation of a landscape.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities which would involve conversion of natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities which would involve conversion or use of forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not provide financing for pesticides or for activities likely to lead to 
increased pesticide use.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities on cultural sensitive sites or sites of archeological 
importance. The Environmental Management Framework will contain provisions for chance 
finds.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities that will require land acquisition or the displacement of 
livelihoods or residences.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Since small scale irrigation schemes are eligible for financing under the project, the policy on 
international waters is triggered. Riparian states will be notified accordingly.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/30/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the original project needs to be 
updated to address potential impacts associated with livelihoods support activities which are 
being identified under the sustainable livelihoods AAA, and due to new project locations in 
11 additional Rayons. Updating and disclosure of the EMF will be completed prior to Quality 
Enhancement Review scheduled for the beginning of March, 2011, with disclosure taking 
place in new Rayons in January/February, 2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel P. Owen 
12/02/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
12/20/2010 
Comments:  Prepared to transfer the project once question regarding OP 4.09 is answered 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Caroline M. Kende-Robb 
12/20/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
