Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/08/2011 
Report No.:  AC5850
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P107617 
Project Name:  Water Users Association Development Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sari K. Soderstrom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (60%);Central government administration (30%);Sub-
national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (29%);Rural services and infrastructure 
(29%);Rural policies and institutions (14%);Decentralization (14%);Administrative and 
civil service reform (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
76.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
34.30
34.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to improve the effectiveness and financial viability 
of on-farm irrigation water distribution and management in the project areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project objective will be achieved through capacity building and support to water 
users associations (WUAs), WUA support units, and the Azerbaijan Irrigation 
Amelioration Open Joint Stock Company (AIOJSC), and through rehabilitation of on-
farm irrigation and drainage (I&D) infrastructure.  
 
The project has three components: (1) Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building 
including capacity building of WUAs ; provision of operations and maintenance 
equipment and management facilities to WUAs; establishment of a state supervisory 
body for monitoring and evaluation of WUA performance; and preparation of selected 
studies, research and demonstration pilots in irrigation and drainage and integrated water 
Page  2
resource management; and institutional and capacity building for AIOJSC; (2) On-farm 
Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation, which will finance rehabilitation of on-farm 
irrigation and drainage systems for about 34 WUAs in 15 core raions which have been 
selected based on irrigated area and agricultural production potential; and (3) Project 
Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation, which will finance project management 
and implementation activities, and monitoring and evaluation by AIOJSC.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
With a project envelope of about US$ 114.3 million, the project will support about 34 
WUAs on 85,000 ha with rehabilitation, and about 379 WUAs and 760,000 farmers in 27 
raions (districts) with targeted capacity building measures like equipment and training.  
 
Component 2 will target nine core raions which were also included in the previous Bank 
financed irrigation project (Irrigation Distribution System and Management Improvement 
Project (IDSMIP): Quba, Khachmaz, Sabirabad, Saatli, Imishli, Beylagan, Aghjabedi, 
Zardab, Goranboy, and six new core raions: Gusar, Ismaili, Gabala, Balakan, Zagatala, 
Gakh).  Component 1 will target core raions and twelve additional WUA focus raions: 
Samukh, Shamkir, Hadjigabul, Salyan, Neftchala, Goychay, Aghsu, Kurdamir, Ucar, 
Bilasuvar, Barda, Samaxi.  
 
The project sites are all irrigated agricultural lands with already existing irrigation 
infrastructure, much of which requires rehabilitation. The bulk of the project areas are 
located in the Kura-Araz basin; the remaining areas are in the mountainous northern 
raions.  The project sites draw irrigation water from international waterways under 
established international agreements and discharge into these waterways and eventually 
the Caspian Sea.  In some cases, project sites are near protected natural areas. These 
include protected wetlands in the Kura-Araz basin and national parks, forests and natural 
areas in the mountainous raions.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS) 
Mr Ximing Zhang (EASCS) 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment Safeguard Policy:  Component 2 (irrigation and drainage 
rehabilitation) will involve environmental and social impacts triggering OP4.01.  Because 
the anticipated adverse impacts are neither significant nor irreversible, and can be 
prevented or reduced through appropriate preventive actions or mitigation measures, the 
project has been classified as environmental Category B, requiring partial environmental 
assessment.  
 
The exact number and location of the specific rehabilitation sub-projects to be 
undertaken under the project have yet to be determined.  Therefore, the EA identifies 
generic impacts, both positive and negative, for infrastructure rehabilitation in the project 
areas and specifies generic prevention and mitigation measures for these impacts.  
Positive impacts include increased agricultural productivity, improved management of 
water resources, increased irrigation system efficiency, enhanced soil fertility, and 
reduced exposure to water-borne disease vectors.  Many of these are also adaptation 
measures for the impacts of climate change. Potential negative impacts are construction-
related, such as limited access, cutting of trees, improper waste management, and 
improper disposal of sediments excavated from canals and drains.  There are also 
potential impacts on water quality from drainage discharge, on the quantity and quality of 
downstream river flows, on biodiversity and natural habitats in the project areas, and 
increasing use of pesticides. These potential adverse impacts will require attention, 
preventive action, and appropriate mitigation measures in the planning, design, 
construction, operation, and maintenance phases of the on-farm infrastructure 
rehabilitation component of the project.  Specific impacts and preventive and mitigation 
measures will be identified during project implementation through environmental 
screening and review of sub-projects.  
 
Pest Management Safeguard Policy:  More generally, the recovery of the agricultural 
sector that is currently taking place in Azerbaijan is likely to increase pesticide use.  
Furthermore, with access to improved irrigation and drainage, it is likely that project 
beneficiaries will increase their use of pesticides.  The Bank#s Agricultural Development 
and Credit Project (ADCP), with its training courses and national information campaigns 
on pesticide application, provides awareness raising and training on pesticide 
management and integrated pest management (IPM) for water users.   In addition, the 
project will develop its own training program on pesticide management and IPM under 
Component 1.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement Safeguard Policy:  It is unlikely that the project (Component 
2) will involve land acquisition since all irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation is planned 
on Government owned lands. However, there could be some temporary or permanent 
impacts in the form of loss of economically viable trees along irrigation canals and 
drainage collectors, which may affect the income of people deriving benefit from the 
trees.  It is also proposed to construct four regional support centers and about 200 WUA 
Page  4
offices, which might require some land.  Therefore, OP 4.12 is triggered.  It is estimated 
that about 9,000 m2 (0.90 ha) of land will be needed for construction of four (4) regional 
support centers and about 200 WUA offices.  Most of these sites could be on Government 
lands.  
 
Safety of Dams Safeguard Policy:  The project triggers OP4.37 because the project will 
divert water from reservoirs formed by a number of existing upstream dams,  and project 
areas will depend on the storage and operation of these existing dams for their supply of 
water and could not function if the dam failed.  Furthermore, there are also a number of 
upstream dams which provide flood control protection to the project areas, and the Bank 
funded irrigation system will rely on the performance of these dams # failure of which 
could cause extensive damage to or failure of the irrigation systems.  A total of 5 dams 
trigger OP4.37, Ashig Bayramli and Yeka-khana Dams in Ismailli District, Nohurgishlag 
Dam in Gabala District, Safikurd Dam in Goranboy District and Mingechevir Dam in 
Yevlakh District.  Based on official documents provided by the Borrower, these 5 dams 
are deemed to be operationally safe.  
 
International Waterways Safeguard Policy:  The Samur, Kura, and Araz Rivers, which 
supply most of the water to the irrigation systems to be rehabilitated under the project, as 
well as the Caspian Sea into which these rivers flow, are all international waterways that 
trigger OP7.50.  By design, the proposed project, however, is not expected to have any 
significant impacts on the quantity or quality of water flowing through these rivers or into 
the Caspian Sea.  The project design is limited to the rehabilitation of existing irrigation 
schemes.  There is no construction of new irrigation schemes, nor any extension of 
existing schemes.  Moreover, the rehabilitation activities are expected to have minimal or 
no impact on the quantity or quality of water in (upstream or) downstream water bodies. 
The irrigation infrastructure improvements will not result in significant increases in either 
withdrawals from or discharges to the international waterways. Based on water quality 
monitoring conducted during the IDSMIP, which indicated no significant impacts from 
irrigation drainage in receiving water bodies, the project is not anticipated to result in 
significant impacts on the quality of water in these waterways. The project will  include 
water quality monitoring at sites in the new raions. As the project is not expected to have 
any adverse impacts on the rights of the other riparian states on the international 
waterways, the Bank has issued a waiver pursuant to paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50 for this 
safeguard policy.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The most significant potential long-term impacts in the project areas are likely to be from 
climate change. The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) identifies and discusses a 
number of potential climate change related impacts, borrowing from Azerbaijan's Initial 
(1998) and Second (2010) National Communications on Climate Change, which 
addresses potential impacts to water resources, agriculture, forests, and the Caspian Sea. 
By design, the project incorporates a range of #good practice# water management/ 
irrigation engineering measures that effectively serve as climate change adaptation 
measures as well. These include good practices for improved water resources 
Page  5
management, engineering features to increase irrigation system efficiency, rehabilitation 
of drainage systems to reduce water logging in irrigated areas, and melioration of 
salinized soils in order to restore soil fertility. The project will also finance a study on 
climate change adaptation in the water sector.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EA considered a range of technological alternatives (e.g. lined canals and piped 
irrigation systems) to the basic irrigation system design employed by the proposed 
project. The EA ended up rejecting these alternatives for the following reasons. First, the 
EA concluded that the gains in reducing water losses achieved by lining canals would be 
modest (because of the nature of the soils in the bulk of the project areas) in comparison 
with the gains achieved by the project in addressing existing operational inefficiencies. 
Second, the EA concluded that piped irrigation systems are already in place in project 
areas where the topography allows gravity systems (i.e. the mountainous raions), but the 
project sites in the flat Kura-Araz River basin, where the bulk of the project areas are 
located, would have to depend on pumping and power-driven systems, which remain 
inefficient and unreliable at this point in Azerbaijan. As far as possible, the Government 
lands will be identified for construction of Regional Support and WUA offices to avoid 
impacts to private lands. Only if suitable Government lands are not available, private 
lands will be acquired.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower, through AIOJSC has prepared an EIA and an Environmental Management 
and Monitoring Plan (EMMP) for the project in order to ensure: (i) that appropriate 
preventive actions and mitigation measures will be taken during project implementation; 
and (ii) that environmental monitoring will be performed during implementation in order 
to detect and address any adverse project impacts.  The EIA prescribes a range of 
measures to address the potential adverse impacts identified, including environmental 
management guidelines for project construction contractors, good practices to prevent 
water pollution, and awareness raising/training in integrated pest management to reduce 
risks from any increased use of pesticides.  The EIA also continues the ecological 
monitoring programme of IDSMIP, including ground and surface water quality 
monitoring at project sites, as well as sediment and soil sampling and analysis.  
 
The AIOJSC demonstrated its capacity to ensure compliance with the Bank 
environmental safeguard policies during implementation of IDSMIP. The project will 
continue to employ a full-time environmental specialist who will oversee and monitor 
implementation of the EMMP, including compliance with the pest management 
safeguard policy, during the life of the project. During implementation of the IDSMIP, 
the environmental specialist maintained careful records of the environmental activities 
that took place at each project site (e.g. specific preventive actions and/or mitigation 
measures recommended; site inspections performed before, during, and after 
construction, etc.) and reported on the results of the ecological monitoring performed at 
project rehabilitation sites and at the sensitive lakes and wetlands in the project area (e.g. 
Page  6
water quantity and quality, plant and wildlife surveys, etc.).  These site records and 
monitoring reports, which were examined during preparation of this project, will be 
incorporated into the project's overall monitoring and evaluation programme.  It is the 
Task Team#s assessment that AIOJSC is able to continue ensuring compliance with the 
Bank's environmental safeguard policies, as well as handle any questions or grievances 
that arise during implementation of the EMMP.  
 
In terms of possible land acquisition - since the location of any potential new 
construction of WUA offices are not known, the Borrower has prepared a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) which describes the principles and mitigation measures for 
potential land acquisition related issues. The RPF describes the process for identification 
of impacts and describes the entitlements for different types of anticipated impacts and 
grievance redress mechanisms. Based on the RPF, social screening will be undertaken 
and appropriate mitigation measures will be proposed if required in the abbrevieated 
Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs)prior to invitation of bids for the corresponding civil 
works and the ARAPs will be implemented to ensure that any affected people receive 
required compensation and assistance prior to commencement of the corresponding civil 
works.  
 
During the preparation of the project, it was agreed that the borrower will hire one or 
more independent Dam Safety Experts to: (i) inspect and evaluate the safety status of the 
existing dams, their appurtenances and performance history; (ii) review and evaluate the 
owner's operation and maintenance procedures; and (iii) provide written reports of 
findings and recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures 
necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an acceptable standard of safety. During 
project implementation, the Task Team will, together with the independent Dam Safety 
Experts, monitor the safety status, operation and maintenance procedures and emergency 
preparedness of these dams, and supervise the remedial works if any, to ensure the 
project implementation is in line with the Bank's Safeguard Policy on Safety of Dams 
(OP4.37).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders at the local level include the farmers in the project areas, the 
members of the participating WUAs, and the water and irrigation management officials 
in the local offices of AIOJSC.  At the national level beneficiaries consist of the water 
and irrigation officials at AIOJSC, relevant officials at the Ministry of Agriculture 
(MOA), Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MENR), and Ministry of 
Health (MOF).   The Borrower disclosed the draft EIA and EMMP in early August 2010 
and held public consultations in Baku and Zardab on August 20 and 23, 2010, 
respectively.  The consultations were widely attended by WUA members from a large 
number of project raions, representatives from NGO, and government officials including 
representatives from the AIOJSC, MOA, MENR, and MOH.  As part of social screening 
and preparation for any land acquisition, necessary consultations will be held with 
concerned stakeholders.   
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/16/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/20/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/24/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/26/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
N/A 
Page  8
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sari K. Soderstrom 
02/08/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva 
01/28/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
01/28/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
02/08/2011 
Comments:   
