Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/23/2011 
Report No.:  AC6157
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P099201 
Original Project Name: Judicial 
Modernization Project 
Country:  Azerbaijan 
Project ID:  P125741 
Project Name:  Judicial Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Klaus Decker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Law and justice (100%) 
Theme:  Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (50%);Access to law and 
justice (25%);Legal services (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
24.20 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.60 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to develop capacity of Azerbaijan's judicial system to 
achieve incremental improvements in efficiency, citizen information and its ability to 
handle future demand.   
 
3. Project Description 
The structure of the original Project approved in 2006 fundamentally remains the same. It 
consists of four components: (1) strengthening the management capacity of judicial 
institutions,(2) upgrading of court facilities and technologies, (3) improving quality of 
operations of judges, staff and other legal professionals, and (4) improving citizen 
information and access to justice. The objectives of the Project will not be changed and 
the focus of the components of the parent project will substantially remain the same.  
 
Under component 1, ICT and other technical equipment will be provided to the Judicial-
Legal Council, pilot courts and other justice institutions. It will also be provided for the 
additional courts built under the Project. Judges and staff will receive training in ICT. 
Page  2
Office equipment and furniture will be purchased for selected courts. A Court 
Performance Measurement Framework will also be developed.  
 
Component 2 includes the construction of selected courts (Sabunchu Court, Sheki Court 
Complex
,
Narimanov District Court) and additional financing for the façade of the Baku 
City Yasamal District Court. It will also provide for author supervision for courts under 
renovation and construction.  
 
Under component 3, the additional financing will allow for a case-file analysis and a bar 
association professionalization assessment to be carried out. This component will also 
comprise capacity building measures and the development of courses for the Justice 
Academy.  
 
Component 4 will include activities focusing on access to justice, such as a legal aid 
system and needs analysis, an analysis of the market for legal services, the development 
of phase 2 of the e-notary system, an empirical analysis of court dispute resolution and 
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, an enforcement analysis, and the 
establishment of legal and judicial information centers as well as support to outreach 
activities such as the holding of courthouse open days and the production of material for 
public information campaigns.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
In addition to construction under the parent project approved in 2006, this additional 
financing will allow for construction of the Sabunchu Court, the Sheki Court Complex, 
the Narimanov District Court and for financing for the façade of the Baku City Yasamal 
District Court.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS) 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In terms of social safeguards, there is only a minor and isolated case of land acquisition 
of 690 square meters of private land belonging to restaurant owners for Yasamal court 
buildings in the parent project. For this impact, an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan 
was prepared and the compensation has been paid to the affected land owners. Follow-up 
consultations were held with the restaurant owners to explain the compensation details. 
The restaurant owners will continue to run the restaurant in the remaining land and their 
revenue is expected to increase once the new court opens. In view of this minor and 
isolated case, the OP on involuntary resettlement is not triggered. In case of additional 
financing, the assessment of land required for the additional activities confirmed that all 
land belongs to the Ministry of Justice and these sites are free from encumbrances. Thus, 
there is no private land acquisition and displacement due to the proposed civil works 
under additional financing.  
 
In terms of environmental safeguards, since the proposed new activities that are relevant 
for safeguards are similar to those of the original project (construction, rehabilitation 
and/or renovation of court house facilities), it is anticipated that the environmental 
impacts will also be similar. They are already considered in the existing Environmental 
Management Plan of the original project and addressed in the course of project 
implementation. No other environmental concerns are expected, and no change in 
environmental category is required.  
 
The short-term negative environmental impacts which inevitably occur during 
construction works will be minimized by proper planning and application of preventive 
measures, and will be mitigated by restorative actions after the civil works are completed. 
Use of construction materials, which are hazardous to human health will not be 
permitted. These preventive and mitigation measures are envisaged in the project EMP 
and will be detailed for each site in site-specific EMPs. The PIU will ensure that firms 
contracted to carry out works obtain permits and clearances as required by Azerbaijan 
national regulations and project EMP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The land to be used for the construction activities under the project is vacant and free 
from any encumbrances. It is expected that the surrounding area will benefit from the 
development of these sites.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project sites have been chosen based on need for judicial services. Alternatives 
would have been envisaged if safeguard issues had been triggered for certain sites. This 
was not the case. Alternatives have therefore not been considered. Detailed assessment of 
each site will be undertaken at design stage as part of site-specific EMPs.   
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Under the parent project, an Environmental Management Plan has been put in place. This 
EMP remains valid for the activities to be supported by additional financing. The 
borrower has demonstrated its capacity to deal effectively with environmental aspects 
under the original project. In the PIU there is designated staff responsible for regular 
environmental monitoring and coordination for environmental matters with designers, 
technical experts and contractors.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Discussions with judges, support staff and bailiffs have been held in Baku and other 
regional locations during project preparation and implementation. The project has also 
benefited from consultations with community associations and NGOs. Consultations will 
continue throughout the life of the project to review activities and enhance impacts, the 
Environmental Management Plan has been duly disclosed and consulted in country and 
published in Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/13/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/13/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/23/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Klaus Decker 
03/16/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva 
03/16/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
03/17/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/22/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr William Leslie Dorotinsky 
03/22/2011 
Comments:   
