Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5956 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/03/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P122943 
Project Name: IDP Living Standards and Livelihoods PRJ 
Task Team Leader: Joanna Peace De Berry 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 27, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: October 3, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (25%);Public administration- Other social services 
(25%);General education sector (25%);General transportation sector (25%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (50%);Rural non-farm 
income generation (20%);Access to urban services and housing (20%);Participation and 
civic engagement (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve living conditions for internally 
displaced persons (IDPs) and increase their economic self-reliance. The PDO would be achieved 
through: (i) funding infrastructure and services micro-projects, which are identified by IDP 
community members as their development priorities; (ii) rehabilitation of collective housing 
stock; (iii) investing in skills, community mobilization and financing that enhance IDP abilities 
to achieve self-reliant livelihoods; (iv) supporting counterpart project management capacity to 
coordinate, plan, monitor, program and supervise a wide range of community driven activities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is proposed as a multi sector loan. It will build upon the current IDP Economic 
Development Support Project (IDP-EDS) Additional Financing with further resources for 
demand-driven community based micro-projects. It will also have two new directions one 
Page  2
focused on the rehabilitation of collective accommodation for IDP and the other on creating 
opportunities for IDP to achieve greater economic self reliance.  
 
Component One - Demand-driven micro-projects ($X million): the project will fund small scale 
community based projects, which have been identified by IDP communities as their greatest 
priority to improve their living conditions. Micro-projects may include (a) repair, rehabilitation, 
or construction of basic infrastructure (e.g. water supply, power supply, access roads, drainage 
systems); and (b) repair, rehabilitation or construction of social infrastructure such as schools and 
community centres. The average size and ceiling for micro-projects amounts, and the total target 
number of micro-projects will be agreed during project preparation. Continued communication 
campaigns will ensure that IDP across Azerbaijan are aware of the opportunity to submit micro-
project proposals and the selection criteria. The component will include ongoing support for the 
design, appraisal and implementation of the micro-projects. The project will enhance the current 
implementing arrangements and community-based decision making mechanisms to ensure even 
higher levels of community involvement in the micro-project cycle resulting in improved levels 
of community mobilization, empowerment and ownership of micro-projects.  
 
Component Two - Rehabilitation of IDP Collective Centres ($X million): It is envisaged that 
this component will fund renovation of IDP collective centres; a high demand from IDP 
communities that were precluded by the micro-project orientation of the previous project. Many 
of these facilities providing accommodation for IDP are in major disrepair and require 
substantial physical refurbishment. Though often the most salient community demand, the level 
of funds available for micro-projects under IDP-EDS was not sufficient to ensure an adequate 
standard of rehabilitation works for collective living centres. This component will support the 
full scale repair of collective accommodation. It is proposed that further careful assessment work 
is required to contribute to the targeting for this component to mitigate several challenges: some 
of the collective centres in use as IDP accommodation are not structurally sound, are over-
crowded, are located in isolated locations that lead to the social marginalization of IDP and have 
unclear ownership status preventing clarification of maintenance responsibilities. The risk is that 
rehabilitation work serves to entrench the provision of unsuitable housing accommodation for 
IDP. Therefore during project preparation Government counterparts and the World Bank will 
work on a strategic approach to collective centre rehabilitation and will agree a list of specific 
criteria by which collective centres will be selected for rehabilitation. The subsequent selection 
of the targeted collective centres will be made according to the inventory generated by the set 
criteria. IDP from the target centres will be fully engaged on rehabilitation design options and 
there will be emphasis on supporting local community based structures that can take monitoring 
and maintenance responsibility for the works.  
 
Component Three - IDP Self-Reliance and Livelihoods ($X million): This component could 
address the constraints faced by IDPs to achieving economic self-reliance and establish 
sustainable livelihoods, and help build their access to financial, social, physical, natural and 
human assets. As this will represent a new undertaking for the Bank's engagement with IDP in 
Azerbaijan, substantial technical work is already underway to determine the most effective 
platforms through which IDP livelihoods can be supported. Based on findings and 
recommendations from an ESW on IDP Livelihoods completed in December 2010 and a 
Livelihood Assessment conducted in November 2010 it looks well founded that investments 
Page  3
could include all or any of the following: (i) mobilisation of community and/or women's self help 
groups and provision of capacity building support to encourage regular savings practices and 
development of micro-enterprises, (ii) provision of micro-finance resources and business 
development skills for IDP individuals and self-help groups, (iii) vocational training and skills 
development and support for young people. The later activity will build upon the successful pilot 
IDP Youth Support Project, implemented from 2008 # 2012 with US$1.9million funding from 
the Japanese Social Development Fund.  
 
Component Four - Operational Support ($X million):: The component will finance (a) the 
operating costs of SFDI (including staff salaries, office consumables, utilities, in-country travel, 
office and vehicle maintenance, insurance, etc. as well as renewal of office equipment and 
vehicles); (b) SFDI staff training (technical and fiduciary); (c) community mobilization and 
technical appraisals; (d) annual audits; and (e) monitoring and evaluation surveys and studies.  
 
The project will operate in all regions of Azerbaijan where IDP are located. The project will not 
target IDP who have not been the subject of Government funded relocation programs into new 
settlements but will particularly prioritize IDP communities that are the most vulnerable and 
demonstrate the highest poverty levels, for example those IDP living in the worse conditions in 
small towns and rural areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will operate in all regions of Azerbaijan where IDP are located. The project will not 
target IDP who have not been the subject of Government funded relocation programs into new 
settlements but will particularly prioritize IDP communities that are the most vulnerable and 
demonstrate the highest poverty levels, for example those IDP living in the worse conditions in 
small towns and rural areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Over the last twelve years of implementing Bank funded projects SFDI staff have demonstrated 
satisfactory safeguard performance and developed strong capacity in Bank safeguard policies 
and procedures. The Project will build upon this existing implementation experience and 
sufficient project resources will be allocated for SFDI staff to maintain and enhance skills in 
safeguard actions. SFDI will continue to use the existing safeguard guidelines and manuals 
including the Environmental Management Plan Framework (EMPF) and relevant sections of the 
Operational Manual (OM), which were developed under IDP-EDS. These will be updated as 
necessary during project preparation. SFDI does not have a dedicated environmental specialist as 
EMPF compliance tasks are integrated into the TOR of SFDI engineering and technical staff. 
During project preparation there will be a review of whether this approach is still effective or 
should be revised. Micro-projects that include land or building expropriation are not eligible 
through the project, and a screening mechanisms is included in the EMPF to control for this.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSS3) 
Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim (YPP) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Due to the scale and nature of the eligible micro-projects, the project is not expected to result 
in significant environmental impacts. Instead, the experience with the activities under the 
original project indicates that many of the micro-projects produced environmental benefits 
(improved water supply, improved sewage collection system etc.) Since the micro-projects for 
the second project are not pre-identified, specific environmental impacts will only be identified 
on the course of project implementation. Therefore, a framework mechanism for screening 
environmental impacts, developing mitigation plans and monitoring environmental progress is 
required. The screening process will also ensure exclusion of any sub-projects where land 
acquisition or unclear ownership could be involved. The Environmental Management Plan 
Framework used under the current project will be revised by the Borrower. Examples of 
potential environmental impacts include excessive dust or noise during 
construction/rehabilitation, waste disposal, aesthetic degradation of a landscape. Compliance 
with the EMPF will be ensured during World Bank supervision, where a random and 
representative sample of sub-projects will be visited.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities which would involve conversion of natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities which would involve conversion or use of forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not provide financing for pesticides or for activities lilely to lead to 
increased use of pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities on cultural sensitive sites or sites of archeological 
importance. The Environmental Management Framework will contain provisions for chance 
find.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities that will require land acquisition or the displacement of 
livelihoods or residents   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The original projects acquired an exemption to the policy. This exemption will be again 
sought for the new project on the basis that the project may only fund the rehabilitation of 
existing water supply schemes, rather than construction of new schemes.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/29/2011 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Existing EMPF and Operational Manual will be updated to reflect the new components. 
Consultations on the updated EMPF will be conducted by the Borrower prior to project 
appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Joanna Peace De Berry 
01/27/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/01/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Carolyn Turk 
02/03/2011 
Comments:  Acting Sector Manager. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
