Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5439 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/08/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P107617 
Project Name: Water User's Association Development Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Sari K. Soderstrom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 22, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%);Central government administration (30%);Sub-
national government administration (10%) 
Theme: Water resource management (29%);Rural services and infrastructure 
(29%);Rural policies and institutions (14%);Decentralization (14%);Administrative and 
civil service reform (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
55.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
70.00
70.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Water Users Association Development 
Support Project (WUAP) is to improve the effectiveness and financial viability of on-farm 
irrigation water distribution and management in the project areas.  The PDO will be achieved 
through capacity building and support to WUAs, WUA support units, and the AIOJSC, and 
through rehabilitation of on-farm I&D infrastructure.  The target group will be irrigating farmers 
and WUAs in selected project areas as well as AIOJSC staff.  With a project envelope of about 
US$ 114.3 million, the project will support about 34 WUAs on 85,000 ha with rehabilitation, and 
about 379 WUAs and 760,000 farmers in 27 raions (districts) with targeted capacity building 
measures like equipment and training.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would have three components targeting an expanded area: (i) Component 1: 
Institutional and WUA Capacity Strengthening financing a training and capacity support 
Page  2
program to WUAs and regional support units (RSU) in 27 raions, and institutional strengthening 
of AIOJSC; (ii) Component 2: On-farm Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation financing 
rehabilitation of on-farm I&D systems for about 34 WUAs in 15 core raions which have been 
selected based on irrigated area and agricultural production potential; and (iii) Component 3: 
Project Management would finance project management and implementation activities, and 
monitoring and evaluation by the Project Implementation Unit.  
 
Component 1:  Institutional and WUA Capacity Strengthening (~22% of project costs) to 
support expansion of a focused capacity building program to about 27 raions, covering the 
majority of irrigated areas in the country (949,000 ha, 419 WUAs).  The component would 
finance:  
 
-
Capacity building of AIOJSC A Central, Regional and Raion WUA Support Units:RSUs 
would be provided training and operational support to deliver the capacity building program to 
419 WUAs in 27 raions.  In order to coordinate this extensive program, regional support centres 
for the RSUs and the WUAs would be established.  
 
-
Targeted training to and capacity building of WUAs:  A concentrated training program, 
complemented by on-the-job support would be delivered by RSUs to WUAs for effective O&M 
of on-farm irrigation systems.  During the project, the training program would be revised and 
targeted to meet the changing training requirements as WUAs mature.  
 
-
Provision of O&M equipment management facilities to WUAs:  WUAs that meet pre-
determined performance criteria, would be able to apply, based on a business plan, to a WUA 
Support Fund (WSF) for a small excavator or other equipment, like concrete mixers or 
communication and transportation equipment, possibly subject to repayment of part of the funds 
to AIOJSC.  WSF funds would also finance establishment of simple WUA offices.  WSF funds 
would be disbursed in phases, since not all WUAs are expected to meet the eligibility criteria 
simultaneously, and for every phase, the procedures will be amended to incorporate lessons 
learned from the previous phase.  
 
-
WUA Supervision and Regulation:  The Law on Amelioration and Irrigation (LAI) has a 
provision to establish a State Supervisory Body (SSB)for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of 
WUA performance, and of water delivery and usufruct agreements.  The project would provide 
support to the establishment and operationalization of the SSB.  
 
-
Institutional capacity building studies, and pilots:  Under the 2008-15 State Program on 
Sustainable Development of Amelioration and Water Management, AIOJSC aims to strengthen 
its' capacity for integrated water resource management.  Based on the Program (supported by 
upcoming World Bank Azerbaijan Agriculture and Irrigation Strategy) the project would identify 
pilot programs, study tours, technology demonstrations, and studies on a range of topics from 
pumped irrigation to climate adaptation, with the objective to strengthen AIOJSC's capacity 
accordingly.  
 
Component 2:  On-farm irrigation and drainage rehabilitation (~70% of project costs). To 
finance rehabilitation and modernization of on-farm I&D systems on about 100,000 ha managed 
by about 34 WUAs located in 15 core project raions with a total irrigated area of about 600,00 
ha.  Since the start of IDSMIP (2005), the base cost for rendering a WUA managed system 
operational has increased from US$300 per ha to US$900 per ha due to increased unit prices 
(cement, steel, labor).WUAs eligible for rehabilitation will need to meet a set of eligibility 
performance and economic criteria that benchmark them against other WUAs in the raion and 
would have to commit to repaying a certain percentage of the investments through the irrigation 
fees.  The concept is to strengthen WUAs to a point where they would become sufficiently 
Page  3
mature to be responsible for rehabilitation of their systems.  Prior to rehabilitation, WUAs would 
sign an interim transfer agreement, and after rehabilitation an agreement transferring 
responsibility for management, operation, and maintenance to the WUA.  Design and 
construction supervision will be done through consultants engaged by the proposed project, with 
oversight from project engineers and WUAs.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation (~8% of project costs).  
IDSMIP Project Implementation Unit would be strengthened with staff, training and equipment 
and part of the operational costs for the daily management, administration, coordination, and 
monitoring and evaluation of the proposed project.  A PIU in Baku would manage all project 
activities.  Project engineers and WUA support staff would operate from the regional support 
centres.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component 2 will target nine core raions which were also included in IDSMIP(Quba, 
Khachmaz, Sabirabad, Saatli, Imishli, Beylagan, Aghjabedi, Zardab, Goranboy) and six new core 
raions (Gusar, Ismaili, Gabala, Balakan, Zagatala, Gakh). Component 1 would target core raions 
and twelve additional WUA focus raions (Samukh, Shamkir, Hadjigabul, Salyan, Neftchala, 
Goychay, Aghsu, Kurdamir, Ucar, Bilasuvar Barda, Shamaxi).   
 
E. 
 Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has demonstrated capacity to manage safeguard policies of concern to the 
proposed project. At the national level, the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources includes a 
Department of Ecological Expertise, which is charged with overseeing the environmental impact 
assessment (EIA) process in Azerbaijan and approving EIAs performed for development projects 
that are likely to have environmental impacts. At the project level, experience in implementation 
of a recently closed Bank financed irrigation project has demonstrated the capacity of the PIU in 
Baku to ensure effective execution of environmental and social mitigation measures and to 
perform the monitoring of environmental indicators and conditions required to evaluate the 
project's impacts. Under the previous project, the PIU in Baku employed an environmental 
specialist to oversee implementation of the project's environmental management and monitoring 
plan; the proposed project would continue to employ an environmental specialist to carry out the 
same functions.  During implementation of the previous project, the environmental specialist 
maintained careful records of the environmental activities that took place at each project site (e.g. 
specific preventive actions and/or mitigation measures recommended; site inspections performed 
before, during, and after construction, etc.) and reported on the results of the ecological 
monitoring performed at rehabilitation sites and at the sensitive lakes and wetlands in the project 
area (e.g. water quality, plant and wildlife surveys, etc.). These site records and monitoring 
reports, which were examined during the preparation mission in May 2010, confirm the PIU's 
capacity to perform these functions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr David M. Colbert (LCSSD) 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (ECSS4) 
Mr Ximing Zhang (EASCS) 
Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSS3) 
Ms Sabina Rustamova (ECSS1) 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Just as with its predecessor project the IDSMIP, the irrigation and drainage rehabilitation 
component of the proposed project will involve environmental and social impacts that trigger 
this safeguard policy. Because the anticipated adverse impacts will not be significant or 
irreversible, and can be prevented or reduced through appropriate preventive actions or 
mitigation measures, the proposed project is classified as environmental Category B, requiring 
partial environmental assessment. To ensure that appropriate preventive actions and mitigation 
measures will be taken during project implementation, the Borrower is preparing an 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) and an environmental management and monitoring plan 
(EMMP), building on the comprehensive EIA and EMMP previously prepared for the IDSMIP.  
 
As with the IDSMIP, the exact number and location of the specific rehabilitation sub-
projects to be undertaken under the proposed project have yet to be determined. Therefore, the 
EIA will identify generic impacts for infrastructure rehabilitation in the project areas and specify 
generic prevention and mitigation measures for these impacts.  The EMMP will include 
environmental screening and review procedures similar to those required for the IDSMIP to 
ensure that appropriate preventive actions and mitigation measures are applied, by means of site-
specific environmental management plans, to sub-project sites on a case-by-case basis. In 
addition, the EIA will address the potential impacts of climate change on project interventions, 
particularly on water resources, agriculture, forests, and the Caspian Sea. It will identify a 
number of climate change adaptation measures that should be incorporated into the project 
design. Finally, the EIA will explain why the proposed project will not introduce better 
technological alternatives (e.g. lined canals, piped systems) to the various irrigation systems to 
be rehabilitated at project sites. In the end, the EIA indicates that any gains in reducing water 
losses achieved by lining canals, for example, would be modest (because of the nature of the 
soils in the bulk of the project areas) compared to the gains expected to be achieved by the 
project in correcting existing operational inefficiencies (e.g. improved water measurement/ 
control structures, enhanced water management capacity).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The proposed project includes a number of raions in the northern region of Azerbaijan where 
there are national parks, protected forests and natural reserves that may be impacted by project 
interventions. The EA will determine whether any potential adverse impacts on these areas 
trigger this safeguard policy.  The rehabilitation of irrigation schemes that may result in a 
potential adverse impact will be not eligible for rehabilitation under the project. The EA will also 
determine whether project sites in the new raions in the northern region will have potential 
impacts on rivers and their tributaries important for migratory fish populations (particularly 
Caspian sturgeon) and their spawning areas. As indicated above, the project will conduct water 
quality monitoring at sites in the new raions in the northern region. It will also assess potential 
impacts on the fish populations in the receiving waters.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Although the IDSMIP did not trigger this safeguard policy, the EA prepared for the IDSMIP 
recognized that the recovery of the agricultural sector in Azerbaijan was likely to increase 
pesticide use in the longer term. Because the agricultural recovery that will likely take place 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
during the proposed project may induce an increase in the use of pesticides, the project triggers 
this safeguard policy. The IDSMIP relied on the Bank#s Agricultural Development and Credit 
Project (ADCP), with its one-day training courses and national information campaigns on 
pesticide application,  to provide awareness raising and training on pesticide management and 
integrated pest management (IPM) for water users. The proposed project will continue to take 
advantage of the ADCP#s extension program until its closure in May 2011. But, more 
importantly, the project will develop its own training program on pesticide management and IPM 
under the capacity building component.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The rehabilitation component may not involve land acquisition since all irrigation 
infrastructure is planned in the Government owned lands. However, there could be some 
temporary or permanent impacts in the form of loss of economically viable tress, which may 
affect the income loss to some of the tree owners. In addition, it is also proposed to construct five 
Regional support centers and about 200 WUA offices, which will require land. Therefore, OP 
4.12 is triggered. Since the location of the new constructions are not known, it is planned that 
PIU will prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to describe the principles and 
mitigation measure for potential land acquisition related issues. This RPF will be available prior 
to appraisal.  Based on this RPF, social screening will be undertaken and appropriate mitigation 
measures will be proposed prior to invitation of bids for the corresponding civil works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The Project triggers the Bank's Safeguard Policy on Safety of Dams -OP4.37, because the 
project will divert water from reservoirs formed by a number of existing upstream dams, the 
project areas will depend on the storage and operation of these existing dams for their supply of 
water and could not function if the dam failed; furthermore, there are also a number of upstream 
dams which provide flood control protection to the project areas, the Bank funded irrigation 
system will rely on the performance of these dams, failure of the these dams could cause 
extensive damage to or failure of the irrigation systems. Totally 5 dams may trigger the OP4.37, 
namely Ashig Bayramli and Yeka-khana Dams in Ismailli District, Nohurgishlag Dam in Gabala 
District, Safikurd Dam in Goranboy District and Mingechevir Dam in Yevlakh District. Based 
on the official documents provided by the Borrower, these 5 dams are operational safe.  
 
The borrower will hire one or more independent Dam Safety Experts to (i) inspect and 
evaluate the safety status of the existing dams, their appurtenances and performance history; (ii) 
review and evaluate the owner#s operation and maintenance procedures; and (iii) provide written 
reports of findings and recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures 
necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an acceptable standard of safety. During project 
implementation, the Task Team will, together with the independent Dam Safety Experts, monitor 
the safety status, operation and maintenance procedures and emergency preparedness of these 
dams, and supervise the remedial works if any, to ensure the project implementation is in line 
with the Bank's Safeguard Policy on Safety of Dams (OP4.37).   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The Samur, Kura, and Araz Rivers (other rivers to be determined during project preparation), 
which supply most of the water to the
irrigation systems to be rehabilitated in the proposed 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
project, are international waterways that trigger this safeguard policy. However, the proposed 
project is not expected to have any significant impacts on the quantity or quality of water flowing 
through these rivers or into the Caspian Sea for two reasons. First, the project design is limited to 
the rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes; no new irrigation schemes or extensions of 
schemes will be constructed. Second, the rehabilitation activities are expected to have minimal or 
no impact on the quantity or quality of water in (upstream or) downstream water bodies. The 
irrigation infrastructure improvements will not result in significant increases in either 
withdrawals from or discharges to the international waterways. And, based on water quality 
monitoring conducted during the IDSMIP, which indicated no significant impacts from irrigation 
drainage in receiving water bodies, the project is not expected to result in significant impacts on 
the quality of water in these waterways. (The proposed project will discontinue the water quality 
monitoring performed at sites under the IDSMIP but will include similar water quality 
monitoring at sites in the new raions in the northern region.)  Therefore, the project is not 
expected to have any adverse effects on the rights of the other riparian states on the international 
waterways, so the Bank will seek a waiver, as it did with the IDSMIP, pursuant to paragraph 7(a) 
of OP 7.50 for this safeguard policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/15/2010 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan 
prepared in September 2010. The draft Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared in 
October 2010. The Dam Safety Report to be prepared by an independent Dam Safety expert 
during project implementation   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sari K. Soderstrom 
11/12/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
11/23/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
12/07/2010 
Comments:   
