                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/11/2011                                    Report No.: AC6199
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P113435
Project Name: Primary Education Development Program III
Task Team Leader: Susan Opper
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2011 Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2011
Managing Unit: SASED                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Primary education (100%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            300.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                       5,604.60
         Asian Development Bank                                     300.00
         Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                          295.40
                                                                  6,200.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objectives of the proposed program are to (i) increase the number of
children enrolled and completing primary education; (ii) reduce social disparities in terms
of access to education; and (iii) improve the measurement of student learning.

3. Project Description
The proposed operation uses a Sector Wide approach (SWAp) to support implementation
of the primary education program (PEDPIII) of the GOB. The operation finances both
recurrent and development expenditures covering the entire primary education sub-sector.
The GOB and the Development Partners used a strategic planning process to identify key
expected results and the operational framework through which these would be achieved.
The Government has a results framework with expected results in the areas of access,
equity, quality, and effectiveness. The scope of interventions and resource requirements
vary across Districts and sub-Districts, and also from year to year, so the operation is
unlike a traditional investment credit with predefined components. The operation places
greater incentives in the system to facilitate achievement, while affording the
Government greater flexibility in the choice of inputs to reach the agreed results. The
IDA support finances selected program budget heads (PBH) for the primary education
sub-sector up to capped amounts. Disbursement is conditioned on the achievement of
indicators, i.e. "Disbursement Linked Indicators" (DLIs), which are a subset of the
Government’s results framework and agreed between the GOB and Development
Partners. The DLIs build incrementally. They include institutional changes,
implementation steps, and output/outcome indicators which are critical for demonstrable
progress of the sub-sector toward its overall development outcomes.

 The program interventions and corresponding DLIs are grouped in three categories: (i)
improving access and reducing social and regional disparities, (ii) improving
measurement of student learning and quality of the teaching environment, and (iii)
improving program planning and management, and strengthening institutions.

 -     Improving access and reducing social and regional disparities: PEDPIII would
support the following, with a particular emphasis on measures to increase participation of
the poorest and disadvantaged children in primary school: (i) a revamped stipend
program with improvements in administration and pro-poor targeting, to compensate
families for the opportunity costs of primary school and encourage the poorest families to
enroll and keep their children in school; (ii) extended provision of free pre-primary
education (PPE) for five-year-olds through a new school-based approach that
progressively will cover all Government Primary Schools (GPS) in the country; (iii) a
needs-based approach to supply of physical infrastructure for primary schools in order to
reduce disparities in geographic access and also reduce classroom overcrowding. A five-
year action plan for infrastructure development is being prepared, with targets, taking
account of disparities within and between Upazilas, as well as needs for safe drinking
water, toilets and school furniture to conform to standards set by the Directorate for
Primary Education (DPE).

  -     Improving measurement of student learning and quality of the teaching
environment: To continue systemic reforms introduced under PEDPII in favor of
enabling learning conditions and the regular measurement of student learning, PEDPIII
will support actions to: (i) improve the timely delivery of free textbooks to all schools
and the quality of textbook content, (ii) improve the effectiveness of teacher training, and
(iii) improve the quality, transparency and effectiveness of the primary completion exam
(Grade 5 terminal exam) for measuring student learning. PEDPIII will support the phased
implementation of the GOB’s National Education Policy to revise student learning
competencies (discouraging rote learning), which will guide quality improvements in
textbook content and the Grade 5 exam, as well as teacher education and performance
standards. The improvement process includes training teachers through constant linkage
of theory and practice and introduction of a new Diploma in Education (Dip-in-Ed) to
raise the bar for teachers’ pre-service qualifications.

  -     Improving program planning and management, and strengthening institutions: To
improve efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery at central and decentralized
levels and guided by performance objectives of improved learning outcomes, higher
completion rates etc., PEDPIII supports:
 (i) decentralized planning at District, Upazila and school levels with a view to
implementing a needs-based Annual Operational Plan (AOP). School Management
Committees (SMCs) are a cornerstone in this process. During PEDPII, DPE piloted
School Level Improvement Plans (SLIP) - prepared by SMCs - and Upazila Primary
Education Plans (UPEP). Under PEDPIII, consolidated grants are to be provided directly
to schools, based on their SLIPs, and the capacity of Upazila offices will be strengthened
to support decentralized planning and management.

  (ii) for systemwide staffing, the major shift under PEDPIII which is to a demand or
needs-based deployment of resources so that the project supports a deployment of new
teachers and head teachers against clear criteria which are merit-based, and which
verifies the yearly needs for new teachers and head teachers based on current teaching
force as well as the above-mentioned infrastructure development plan.

 (iii) improving fiscal sustainability and effectiveness of public expenditures for
education through education budget preparation that will have stronger links between the
budgetary process and medium-term education sector strategy, and consistency between
annually approved primary education budgets and the PEDPIII results framework and
MTBF).

 (iv) strengthening monitoring and evaluation systems to improve data use for
performance and planning based on evidence and specifically improving the timeliness,
quality and coverage of the Annual School Census (ASC) - the main source of
information on inputs, process, outputs and outcomes at school level.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
PEDPIII will be implemented throughout Bangladesh. In the infrastructure program,
particular attention will be placed on construction of school buildings in vulnerable
geographic locations (e.g. coastal areas, hilly areas, floodplain, etc.). Many of the schools
are likely to be built in the disaster-prone coastal regions where they will also serve as
shelters during cyclone and natural calamities. The new schools in the Chittagong Hill
Tracts (CHT), which have the largest concentration of the country’s indigenous
population, will have dormitories to cope with the travel difficulties and risks faced by
the children from highly dispersed settlements in the hills and valleys. More broadly, due
consideration will be given to the use of environment friendly construction materials and
recyclable education materials; and to arsenic-free tube-wells in interventions for water
supply.

 The actual locations of the new schools and those to be expanded or renovated are being
identified during the project preparation process which is developing a five-year action
plan, with targets, taking account of disparities within and across Upazillas The schools
are being selected and prioritized based on certain parameters derived from field surveys
and broad consultations including with local communities. The following are the agreed
parameters of priority:
 (i)    Classroom gap (required rooms for Day Shift/(2 x existing rooms) x 100
 (ii) Teacher gap (required teachers for Day Shift/(2 x existing teachers) x 100
 (iii) Condition index of the existing classrooms (what percentage of buildings are in
bad condition)
 (iv) Percentage of kacha rooms
 (v) Enrolment gap: Out of school children
 (vi) Trend of students’ population in the school in the last three years
 (vii) Special/underprivileged areas: Char, Haor, Coastal areas, Hilly area, in each
Upazilla schools in remote and un-served areas should be given priority
 (viii) Toilet gap (required/existing x 100)
 (ix) Drinking water gap (required/existing x 100)

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
   Ms Nadia Sharmin (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Safeguards: The project does not envisage any large scale, significant or
irreversible environmental impact due to the small scale of the interventions foreseen.
The project was reviewed during preparation and designated as environmental Category
B which is appropriate and consistent with the provisions of OP /BP 4.01. The project
requires partial environmental assessment of "subprojects" before implementation.

  PEDPIII will support mainly four types of "subprojects": (i) new building construction,
(ii) expansion or major renovation of existing buildings; (iii) regular operation and
maintenance and minor renovation of buildings and (iv) water supply and sanitation
provision. The new building construction may include a new school building or
dormitory in new locations. The nature of civil works proposed to be financed under the
program is not likely to cause significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental
impacts with application of standard construction management practices. Nonetheless,
actual impacts will depend on the sub-project activities and each of these will be subject
to the environmental screening process reflected in the progam’s Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) which allows for the application of appropriate
mitigating measures to eliminate adverse environmental impacts, or to reduce them to
acceptable limits, as required.

 Social Safeguards: Wherever required, expansion and renovation of the existing schools
will involve construction of additional classrooms, provision of separate toilets for girls
and boys, safe drinking water supply, and repair/renovation of the buildings for overall
improvement of the learning environment. Construction of additional classrooms and
toilets will be carried out in the existing premises -- either adjacent to or on top of the
existing buildings. Most of these schools are likely to be located in the relatively densely
populated areas. New schools with dormitories in the CHT and those with cyclone
shelters in the coastal regions are most likely to be built in khaas lands (administered by
the Ministry of Land) or those owned by other government agencies, including MOPME.
Where public lands are unavailable, GOB plans to obtain land on private donations by
local individuals and communities.

  With its program in the CHT, PEDPII triggered OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, and
this will remain applicable under PEDPIII. PEDPII did not trigger OP 4.12 because land,
wherever needed, was provided by the beneficiary communities. The same is expected in
PEDPIII. Nevertheless, given the urgency of the PEDPIII objectives - especially
expansion and creation of physical facilities required for full enrolment of all school-age
children - DPE has decided that involuntary resettlement due to land acquisition should
not be ruled out and wishes to take the necessary precautions in PEDPIII preparation.
Hence OP 4.12 has been triggered. The SMF has been prepared keeping the option of
land acquisition as a last resort for procuring required lands.

 No large scale or irreversible negative social impacts are anticipated given the nature
and scale of expected civil works. The program will make use of public and khaas lands
as far as possible; new schools in the sparsely populated CHT and cyclone-prone coastal
regions are highly unlikely to have squatters who might be displaced by construction of
new schools. Land needs will be determined on a case-by-case basis according to school
location and the land presently available. A check list will be utilized to determine
whether land is procured through voluntary donation, direct purchase, or acquisition.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Most of the project impacts would be localized due to the relatively small-scale activities.
However, there are some issues of concern which cut across the range of proposed
interventions. Field studies and lessons from similar programs show that issues such as
selection of appropriate sites, and preference of students and teachers are some of the key
concerns that influence project success and sustainability. The typical environmental
impacts related to the school construction and water supply and sanitation issues are (i)
losses of agricultural lands; (ii) drainage congestion/water logging ; (iii) surface water
pollution; (iv) dust and noise pollution; (v) lack of safe distance between tube-wells and
sanitary latrines; (vi) occupational health hazards and safety practices; (vii) improper
maintenance of water supply and sanitation facilities; (viii) lack of maintenance of air and
water quality, (x) improper and insufficient management of surrounding ecosystem and
biodiversity (if any).

 PEDPIII intends to ensure that every school has at least one safe drinking water source,
which is either a tube-well or a piped water supply. The source will be arsenic-free.
Otherwise, arsenic poses the major environmental concern and health risk with the
installation of new tube-wells. In the absence of proper testing facilities and alternative
options, students could continue to consume arsenic contaminated water in arsenic-
affected areas of the project. Long-term exposure to arsenic in drinking water may affect
vegetation and human health.

 As noted above, no long term or irreversible negative social impacts are anticipated
given the nature and small scale of expected civil works. The program will use khaas and
other public lands as far as possible. Land needs will be determined on a case-by-case
basis according to school location and the land presently available under schools’
ownership. Land acquisition has been retained by DPE as a last resort option. A check list
will be utilized to determine whether land is procured through voluntary donation, direct
purchase or acquisition.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
A wide ranging consultation was carried out in regard to the existing PEDPII project sites
by a consultant on behalf of DPE. The consultant reviewed the existing documents,
school conditions, and water supply and sanitation facilities; and discussed with all
relevant stakeholders and took their opinion on how to improve environmental practices
and integrate environmental concerns into the primary education program in order to
improve the sustainability of its interventions. After several multi-level consultations, the
following standards have been proposed for PEDPIII: (i) Teacher toilets -at least one
(two if there are over 30 teachers); (ii) Girls’ toilet - 1:50 (between the national standard
of 35-75); (iii) Boys’ WCs - 1:75; and (iv) Boys’ urinals - 1:60 (double the number in
nation al and international standards). To ensure safe drinking water for students and
teachers, a survey was conducted to choose the single source of water. Hand tube -well or
piped water supply was preferred. Alternative solutions and final designs should be
subject to public and community consultation with special emphasis on students and
teachers. Students’ and teachers’ preferences will be given priority in designing the
infrastructure.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
DPE is the implementing agency for the overall implementation of PEDPIII. DPE has
limited experience in infrastructural activities or incorporating environmental assessment
and management into those activities. However, the Local Government Engineering
Department (LGED) reconstituted its Environ mental Unit with an Additional Engineer
as head of the unit and prepared the ’Environmental Assessment Guidelines’. Considering
LGED’s prior experience in implementing several IDA funded projects and familiarity
with Bank safeguard policies, LGED will be responsible for the infrastructure activities
under PEDPIII.

 DPE, in consultation with LGED and other relevant stakeholders, has prepared the
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Social Management Framework to
support the implementing agents in the program so they respond adequately to potential
environmental issues which may arise during implementation of the various civil
works/"subprojects".

 LGED will have a full time Environmental Specialist at its Education Unit to look after
the proper implementation of EMF activities for PEDPIII. The Specialist will be
responsible for implementation of the EMF and its provisions, including compliance
checking, facilitation, coordination and ensuring dissemination, orientation and capacity
building activities. Additional human resources or agencies will be hired, if necessary, to
execute the EMF effectively.

 In addition, DPE will set up an Engineering Unit during the implementation of PEDPIII.
This unit will hire the consultant services to monitor at least 10% of the infrastructure
implemented by the LGED. The monitoring will include environmental performance of
the "subprojects".

 PEDPIII will support environmental monitoring to ensure that the envisaged purpose of
the program is achieved and that it results in the desired benefits without adversely
affecting environmental resources. The monitoring activities of PEDP III will include
assessment of the degree of compliance with the environmental management plan during
program implementation.

  In addition, DPE will sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the
Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) for annual water quality monitoring to
ensure arsenic-free safe drinking water. DPHE/LGED will ensure that schools have
provision of septic tanks and infiltration gallery (soak pit), and that program activities do
not infringe upon natural ecosystems during t he design stage. DPE will provide all the
tube-well in formation and field test kits to the DPHE Research and Development (R&D)
Division. DPHE will coordinate and implement the testing through its field office and
prepare the analytical report. DPHE will also carry out a 5% quality check in their zonal
laboratories.

  PEDPII had developed a plan for Expanding Education of Tribal Children (EETC) for
extension and rehabilitation of the existing government schools for out-of-school
children; capacity building of tribal institutions; social mobilization to motivate tribal
parents to send children to school; supplementary reading materials development in tribal
language; and recruitment and training of teachers in tribal areas. In order to improve
access, especially in hilly areas with poor physical facilities and difficult terrain, GOB
intends to build new schools with dormitories to cope with the prevailing travel
difficulties and risks. Preparation of PEDPIII will examine the extent to which EETC
activities have been implemented and incorporate any necessary modifications in view of
the lessons learned under PEDPII.

  As noted above, classrooms for improved enrolment capacity, separate toilets for girls
and boys and other physical renovations for the existing schools are all expected to be
carried out within the existing sites. The new schools will be built on khaas and other
public lands which are free of private users like squatters, where lands will be transferred
from one government agency to another. Lands will be sought on voluntary private
donation for new schools where public lands are unavailable. Beyond these possible
options, it is nevertheless decided t hat the project would keep the option of acquisition.
Hence the client has prepared a Social Management Framework (SMF) consistent with
OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples and OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, with separate
guidelines for obtaining and using private and public lands and preparing -if required- an
Indigenous Peoples Plan or upgrading the EETC adopted under PEDPII. The SMF
includes, among other issues, the principles, policies, guidelines and procedures for
obtaining and using private and public lands and adverse impact identification and
mitigation; mitigation measures; and implementation and monitoring arrangements for
mitigation plans where they are needed to deal with the unavoidable adverse impacts.
With respect to OP 4.10, the SMF outlines the principles, guidelines and procedures t o
identify and respond adequately to any adverse impacts on indigenous peoples, and
contains a consultation framework for adoption of mitigation measures, where project
activities might adversely affect them.

 As executing agency, DPE will be responsible for supervision, monitoring and
evaluation of SMF implementation. A Social specialist with expertise in resettlement, IP
and gender issues will be appointed by DPE.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
DPE will be implementing the infrastructure activities in close collaboration with LGED.
DPE has prepared the EMF and SMF jointly with LGED in consultation with the relevant
stakeholders, including government agencies, local government bodies, local
communities, School Management Committees (SM C), NGOs and other development
partners. On behalf of DPE, a consultant carried out the field visit of the existing PEDPII
project sites. The recommendations from these local level consultations and field visit
observations have been considered in order to incorporate the environmental concerns
into the project. DPE arranged a consultation workshop on the EMF and SMF on
January 17, 2011. Representatives from NGOs, Development Partners and field level
stakeholders attended the meeting. DPE will incorporate the feedback from the
stakeholders to finalize the EMF and SMF.

 Both English and Bangla versions of the EMF and SMF have been disclosed to the
public. DPE and LGED have made the documents available in their district and Upazila
offices and respective websites. The EMF and SMF are [being] disclosed in World Bank
Infoshop.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/27/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/27/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/16/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/27/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/27/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/27/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/27/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/27/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/13/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  N/A
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              N/A
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Susan Opper                               03/18/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Nadia Sharmin                             03/18/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Sabah Moyeen                              03/18/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                         04/05/2011
  Comments: Cleared.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Amit Dar                                  03/18/2011
  Comments:
