Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5868 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/22/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P123457 
Project Name: Bangladesh Integrated Agricultural Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Animesh Shrivastava 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 8, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: October 26, 2010 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (30%);Irrigation and drainage (25%);Crops 
(20%);Animal production (15%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%) 
Theme: Other rural development (50%);Rural policies and institutions (15%);Rural 
services and infrastructure (15%);Nutrition and food security (10%);Global food crisis 
response (10%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
17.50 
 
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 
50.00
67.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Integrated Agricultural Development 
Project is to enhance the productivity of agriculture (crops, livestock and fisheries) in selected 
agro-ecologically constrained and economically depressed areas. These areas lie in Rangpur, 
Kurigram, Nilfamari and Lalmonirhat districts in the North and Barisal, Patuakhali, Barguna and 
Jhalokathi districts in the South.  
 
This project is related to an application made by the Government of Bangladesh (GOB) to the 
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) for grant funding in June 2010.  That 
proposal was approved by the GAFSP Steering Committee, which awarded a grant amount of 
$50 million for this project, to be supplemented by US$ 17.5 million by GOB. In making this 
grant, the Steering Committee noted Bangladesh's wish to have a separate Technical Assistance 
component. The Committee allocated $3.69 million for this purpose, to be channeled through 
FAO as the Supervising Entity. The balance of GAFSP grant of $46.31 million was allocated to 
the remaining components of the proposed June project, for which the World Bank was 
Page  2
designated the Supervising Entity. The proposed project pertains to this part of the GAFSP grant 
plus the co-financing from GOB.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will consist of four inter-related components: (i) technology generation; (ii) 
technology adoption; (iii) water management; and (iv) project management.  
 
Component 1:  Technology Generation: The purpose of this component is to undertake adaptive 
research to meet farmers# needs in the selected project locations. The component will cover 
crops (rice, maize, wheat and oil seeds) and fisheries. The focus will be on adapting/developing 
and releasing to the farmers promising new crop varieties/hybrids, fish breeds and 
complementary production technologies that increase yield and provide technological solutions 
to production constraints under the agro-ecological conditions of project areas. It is expected that 
the varieties/technologies included will be at an advanced stage of evaluation so that these are 
passed on to the farmers in the first 1-2 years of the project, and are adapted by large number of 
farmers during project life. Specifically, the component will include:  (i) evaluation and release 
of new varieties/hybrids of rice (higher yield, submergence, salt and heat tolerance, and short 
duration), maize (higher yield), wheat (short duration) and oil-seeds (higher yield, short 
duration); (ii) development/refinement of crop husbandry practices that are location-/ problem-
specific; (iii) identification of yield gaps (between farmer level and research station yields) and 
strategies for bridging these gaps; and (iv) breed development for pond fish # mono sex Tilapia, 
Pangas, Koi and other promising fish breed.  
 
The adaptive research will be undertaken by the Bangladesh Rice Research Institute (BRRI), 
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute (BARI) and Bangladesh Fisheries Research Institute 
(BFRI). Trials will be conducted on research farms as well as farmers# fields as appropriate. 
Line departments (for extension) and farmers will be consulted in determining the choice of 
technologies to be developed and released under this component.  Steps will be also taken to 
reduce the time lag in the adoption of improved technologies by the farmers by strengthening 
research-extension-farmer linkages. The activities to be financed include incremental contractual 
staff, need-based equipment, incremental operating costs, staff mobility, validation and 
adaptation trial costs, collection of fish fries and fingerlings for genetic stock upgrading of pond 
fish, short term training for researchers, workshops and exposure visits.  Results indicators for 
this component include number of new crop varieties released, number of new agronomic 
packages developed for dissemination, and increase in productivity of the targeted fish breed.  
 
Component 2: Technology Adoption: The purpose of this component is to enable project area 
farmers to adopt improved varieties of seeds/hybrids and/or seeds/breeds and improved 
management practices for crops, livestock and fisheries so as to enhance their agricultural 
productivity. The emphasis will be on ensuring that farmers in a #demonstration neighbourhood# 
sustainably adopt the demonstrated technologies rather than on merely organizing successful 
demonstrations (as is the case in many extension programs). There will be four sub-components: 
(i) technology demonstration and dissemination (undertaken primarily by line 
departments),covering crop, fisheries and livestock; (ii) enhancing availability of good quality 
seed and related inputs at the farmer level and/or enhancing breed of livestock (undertaken 
through involvement of BADC, DAE, community-level seed production, and private sector 
Page  3
involvement where appropriate); (iii) provision of appropriate support to farmers for absorbing 
the demonstrated technologies (undertaken primarily through farmers# groups, back-stopped by 
line departments and CSOs or service providers where possible); and (iv) capacity building and 
training of farmers and their groups as well as for field level implementation staff (undertaken 
through a mix of relevant service providers and line departments).  
 
To enable the implementation of this component, Common Interest Groups (CIGs) of farmers 
will be used. Transparent and verifiable eligibility criteria for group membership will be clearly 
defined. (Pre-existing groups could function as CIGs under the project if they collectively satisfy 
the eligibility criteria.) The primary objective of the CIGs would be observe and then absorb the 
technologies/practices demonstrated in their neighbourhoods. The groups will be provided 
various kinds of adoption support as appropriate from the project (seed-kits, seed drills, storage 
bins, other productive infrastructure, selected animals, and so on). Adoption of the improved 
technologies by the farmers (number, area, breeds and productivity outcomes) will be carefully 
monitored. Seed production will be promoted through specialized seed villages with support 
from BADC and DAE. In order to increase milk and goat meat production, the focus will be on 
breed upgradation, health improvement and feed/fodder management. In the case of fisheries, the 
focus will be on breed upgradation, health improvement, feed management, rehabilitation and 
stocking of community fish ponds.  
 
The expected results from this component are increase in number of farmers using improved 
technologies and practices, increase in replacement rate of good quality seed by farmers, and 
increase in milk and goat meat productivity.  
 
Component 3: Water Management: The purpose of this component is to increase agricultural 
productivity and reduce yield variability by increasing both the availability and efficiency of 
water use by farmers in the project area. A particular focus will be promoting interventions that 
reduce the heavy reliance on ground water reserves for boro rice production in the northern 
districts, and supporting interventions that mitigate the impacts from saline water intrusion along 
with providing supplementary irrigation water for Aman rice production in southern districts. 
There will be four sub-components: (i) small-scale #system#type# improvements for 
conservation and utilization of surface water (undertaken through BADC); (ii) community-level 
improvements in surface water utilization and rain water harvesting - e.g., de-silting of 
community ponds (undertaken by WUGs); (iii) enhancing pump efficiency of Low Lift pumping 
and Shallow Tube Well pumping (undertaken through WUGs); and (iv) training and capacity 
building of WUGs and implementing agencies as appropriate (undertaken through appropriate 
service providers, CSOs).  
 
Sub-component (ii) will be financed by a criteria-based matching grant to interested and 
eligible WUGs. Sub-component (iii) will involve a strategic, customized training program to 
improve pump use efficiency by identifying the most practical and cost-effective source of 
efficiency gains in specific contexts. A particular focus will be on identifying and reducing input 
use inefficiencies. Component (iv) will involve providing to eligible Water User Groups 
(WUGs) guidance on governance, operation and maintenance, collection of water user fees and 
best-practice irrigation agronomy. Institutional capacity building support will be provided to 
Page  4
relevant government agencies to improve the integration and delivery of water services to 
farmers.  
 
Expected results from this component include the expansion in the area under supplementary 
irrigation, increased availability of surface water for crop and livestock production, reduction in 
water conveyance and distribution losses, and energy saving from more efficient pumping and 
irrigation systems. These are expected to yield benefits in the form of increased (average) crop 
yields, especially in the drought prone areas; reduced variability of output in case of rain-fed 
crops like transplanted Aman rice; and greater availability of water for animal consumption and 
production in the dry seasons.  
 
Component 4: Project Management: This component would finance all aspects of project 
management at the national and regional levels, including M&E. It is proposed there will be a 
central Project Management Unit (PMU) and two Regional PMUs, one in the North and one in 
the South. The PMU and RPMUs will coordinate, at their respective levels, the activities of 
various implementing agencies, including the research institutions, the line departments for 
extension, BADC (seeds and inputs supply), community level service providers and any 
CSO/NGO. Activities to be financed under this component include: (i) establishing and 
supporting project units at the overall and regional levels; (ii) specialized support services 
relating to key activities such as independent external M&E, external audit, financial accounting 
and procurement; and (iii) training of staff involved in project implementation.  
 
Key Social issue is the risk of #exclusion# of the poorest from the participatory processes 
envisaged by the project. It is important to ensure that the beneficiary identification process 
coves the small and marginal farmers.. There is also the risk of beneficiary identification process 
getting influenced by the village elite and of local indifference and possible resistance to i) 
interventions which are proactively and explicitly pro-poor and positively discriminating for the 
vulnerable; ii) exclusively targeting, educating, mobilizing and empowering women; iii) 
empowerment of the small and marginal farmers to demand entitlements and assert themselves 
in local governance processes. The social inclusion mechanism, and gender action plan will 
involve specific interventions responding to these risks.  The adverse social impact due to 
possible involuntary land taking, especially in component 3 will be addressed through 
Environment and Social Management Framework which will include screening format, 
resettlement policy and consultation framework; and gender action framework. In case screening 
results show any adverse social impact, RAP will be prepared and cleared by the Bank before the 
mobilization of contractor.  In case social assessment establishes presence of tribal families in 
the project area, Indigenous Peoples Development Plan will be prepared in line with OP 4.10.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located in Rangpur, Kurigram, Nilfamari and Lalmonirhat districts in the 
North and Barisal, Patuakhali, Barguna and Jhalokathi districts in the South. The northern 
locations cover drought prone areas and the flash flood prone areas and the Southern location the 
tidal surge affected areas   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  5
Subprojects will not be identified during preparation and so the project will prepare a Social and 
Environmental Assessment and Management framework which will ascertain potential impacts 
and potential mitigation measures as well as develop a mechanism (procedures and institutional 
responsibilities) for ensuring sustainable environmental and social management of the project.  
 
The Borrower, Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock, 
Government of Bangladesh is currently implementing World Bank financed NATP and this has 
resulted some capacity building within the Ministries. The Ministry of Agriculture has its 
presence at the village level through department of extension staff. However, the client has little 
capacity to design and implement environmental and social safeguards. The line departments 
involved in the project also do not have any capacity to implement environmental and social 
safeguards.  
 
There will be a strong need to orient and build capacities in MoA and MoFL on environmental 
and social aspects for the implementation of the overall project. In this regard, capacities for 
environment and social management will be created at the MOA, Project Management Unit 
(PMU). The PMU will recruit environmental and social specialists responsible for overall 
safeguards compliance as well as of other social development issues of the subprojects. Suitable 
orientation and training programs will be conducted for the specialist on safeguard policies of the 
World Bank. Similar staffing is envisaged for other implementing agencies. Apart from 
safeguard issues, the PMU and other line department specialist staff will also be responsible for 
stakeholder consultations and preparation and implementation of communication plan.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yuka Makino (SASDI) 
Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project proposes activities with potential environmental impacts including crop, 
livestock and fisheries production as well as water management activities such as irrigation 
infrastructure, de-siltation and conservation of existing canals and ponds; therefore, it triggers the 
EA Policy. These impacts are not expected to be significantly negative or irreversible. 
Subprojects will not be identified during preparation and so the EA/EMP to be prepared will take 
a
framework approach identifying potential impacts and potential mitigation measures as well as 
a
strong mechanism (procedures and institutional responsibilities) for ensuring sustainable 
environmental management of the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project will finance fishery activities that may impact natural habitats such as natural 
ponds and, therefore the Natural Habitats Policy is triggered. It is important to note that the 
project will not cause any significant loss or degradation of natural habitats. The EA will analyze 
the implications of the project activities for natural habitats and identify a management approach 
to minimize potential harms to natural systems while maximizing benefits.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project proposes activities comprised of crop (includes seed storage and distribution), 
livestock and fisheries production which will involve the use of pesticides; therefore the Pest 
Management Policy is triggered. The project EA/EMP will contain an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan to minimize the use of chemical pesticides where possible (banning restricted 
pesticides) and minimize harm to workers applying pesticides. The project will promote training 
and other capacity building where necessary to promote safe use of pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Though there are indigenous people in Bangladesh, majority of them are located in the 
Chittagong Hill Tracts.  In case presence of IPs is established through social assessment, OP 4.10 
will be triggered.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Since the availability of water for irrigation will be improved by rehabilitating existing 
surface water and rain water structures, rehabilitating and de-silting community ponds, chances 
of involuntary land taking does not exist. However, project will undertake social assessment and 
will prepare an Environment and Social Management Framework consistent with the Bank#s OP 
4.12 which will include screening format, resettlement policy and consultation framework; tribal 
development and gender action framework. Social screening will be carried out before 
undertaking any civil work and in case screening results show any adverse social impact, RAP 
will be prepared and cleared by the Bank before the mobilization of contractor.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/23/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Subprojects will not be identified during preparation and so the project will prepare an 
Environmental Assessment (EA)/Environmental Management Plan (EMP) framework which 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
will ascertain potential impacts and potential mitigation measures as well as develop a 
mechanism (procedures and institutional responsibilities) for ensuring sustainable 
environmental management of the project.  
 
As part of project preparation, project will conduct social assessment in eight project 
districts. The social assessment will involve (i) identification of the social perspectives, 
impacts, benefits and issues relevant to the objectives and interventions of the project; (ii) 
holding informed consultations with the primary and secondary stakeholders of the project, 
particularly the small and marginal farmers; (iii) identifying mechanisms and processes to 
promote the participation and inclusion small and marginal farmers and the women in the 
project districts; and (iv) identifying any positive or negative impacts that project 
interventions may have on the community. The SA methodology will include sample 
household survey, public consultations and focus group discussions in villages especially 
with the vulnerable community, village profiling and mapping, and interviews and 
consultations with government, NGO and academia.  In addition, a detailed communications 
strategy will also be developed during project preparation for implementation in the project.  
 
The Social and Environmental Assessments will be initiated by January 15, 2010. The client 
is yet to initiate the process of recruiting consultants for carrying out the detailed field work 
for the assessments. The draft SA framework is expected to be available for review by the 
Bank by end-March 2011. The draft EA/EMP framework should be available for Bank 
review by end-April 2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Animesh Shrivastava 
12/21/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
12/21/2010 
Comments:  cleared on understanding that application of OP4.12 and OP4.10 shall be evaluated during 
ESA. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
12/22/2010 
Comments:  Cleared 
