Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/25/2011 
Report No.:  AC5915
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P121528 
Project Name:  BD Identification System for Enhancing Access to Services (IDEA) 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Junghun Cho 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 27, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASGP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (60%);Information technology (40%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (70%);Technology diffusion (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
194.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
24.00
24.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project intends to support the second phase of Bangladesh#s long-term drive for 
building a National ID scheme, building on successful outputs of the first phase project, 
Preparation of Electoral Roll Project . Therefore, the Project will attempt to address 
urgent deficiencies of current systems and to lay a foundation for following phases, by 
issuance of ID cards with robust security features, developing capacity to provide identity 
verification services, and developing capacity to use the ID system by other service 
providers to improve efficiency and transparency. The project will begin to facilitate the 
last goal, but does not anticipate full usage of the ID system by public service providers 
by completion.  
 
With this in mind, the Project Development Objective (PDO) is to establish an efficient, 
secure and reliable national ID system in Bangladesh that serves as the basis for more 
efficient, fair and transparent service delivery and further e-governance reform.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Regulatory, Policy Framework for the National Identification System and 
Integration into Service Delivery (US$ 4.59)  
 
This component will support the regulatory framework governing the issuance and 
updating of identification numbers and the compilation, maintenance, and utilization of 
the data associated with the identification system.  It would involve two sets of activities: 
strengthening the legal and policy framework for the NID system housed in the NIDW, 
and providing an operational framework for the use of the NID system by other entities.  
 
#
Legal and Policy Framework  for National ID System  
 
The 2010 National ID and Registration Act provides a high-level framework for the 
BEC, through the establishment of an independent National ID Wing, to maintain a 
national identification system. While this provides a sound foundation, the operation of 
the NID system requires far more detailed regulations which would regulate issues of 
privacy, access to the information in the NID system by different categories of potential 
users (including the full range of government agencies), and overall security of the 
system. The Act does not establish rules for how the NID system should be used which 
may lead to inconsistencies as various public agencies seek to mandate use of the existing 
NID system and cards as part of their own service delivery.  
 
The Project will provide technical assistance to BEC and other relevant agencies in 
drafting NID regulations to address these issues.  NID regulations will cover operation of 
the NID system and its use for verification of identity.  This scope reflects the BEC#s 
mandate, which is limited to handling the issuance of NID cards and maintaining the NID 
database and verification services. At the same time the BEC expects to have privacy and 
security issues involving the NID addressed in a manner consistent with its own 
regulations in legislation applicable to the entire Government.  It will ensure this 
harmonization through continuing cooperation with other entities involved with e-
governance and the inter-ministerial committee on information policy.  
 
#
Integration of the National ID system into management of service delivery in 
select agencies  
 
This subcomponent will provide technical assistance, advisory services, capacity 
building, and limited equipment to agencies outside the BEC in order to identify and 
prepare business processes and supporting software systems to utilize the NID system. 
Such assistance would focus primarily on having a streamlined system for incorporating 
verification of identity as is needed for the purposes of the selected agencies.  It also will 
assist in the development or upgrading of database systems in these service providers 
based on integrating the unique ID numbers for greater reliability, consistency, and 
comprehensiveness.  
 
The BEC will oversee a #NID Service Fund# to deploy packages of assistance as per 
agreed-upon action plans for integrating usage of the NID system.  The allocation of the 
Page  3
proposed NID Service Fund will be determined by the Project Steering Committee and 
administered by the NIDW on the basis of agreed-upon action plans.  Assistance will be 
limited to the setting up of systems and not ongoing maintenance.  
 
This component will also ensure linkage of the NID system with the digital birth and 
death registration systems being operated by the Local Government Division and the 
national population registry in the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics.  The BEC and the 
Local Government Division are expected to develop protocols whereby data from birth 
and death registration system is shared with the National ID system.  At the same time, 
the National ID system would assign a unique national ID number at the time of 
registration of birth which would be reflected in the birth registry and on certificates..  
Numbers will be generated automatically through the NID system and transmitted to 
local government registrars of births in the field.  All three agencies have agreed on 
modalities for sharing of information and ensuring the sharing of data.  
 
Component 2: Operation and Management of the National Identification System 
(US$140.54)  
 
This component will design and implement the operational facilities to implement the 
NID system. This will include procurement of hardware, software, design consultancies 
and management services for all the IT facilities of the NIDW.  
 
#
National ID Database, Datacenter & Disaster Recovery Center (DRS)  
 
The maintenance of an accurate, comprehensive citizens# identity database and 
operation of a reliable and secure data center and disaster recovery center are the 
backbone of the NID system. The project will build on the work conducted to create the 
current electoral voter database of 87 million and subsequent de-duplication and 
cleansing efforts.  It will address two major issues in the database through a process of 
confirmation of data among citizens.  First, the confirmation of data will include better 
quality of photographs and fingerprints in order to allow for better ID verification both 
on-site and off-site. Second, it will introduce birth registration numbers into the 
categories of information maintained in the database to allow for data linkage between 
the two systems.  The confirmation process may also add other data fields as part of a 
consolidated effort to gather data regarding citizens relevant for databases outside of the 
biographical information requirements of the NID system (e.g. data relevant for social 
protection programs).  Such additional data would not be maintained by the NID system.  
 
The project will also support the secure physical housing of the NID system data.  The 
NID database will be housed in and managed at the data center of the Bangladesh 
Computer Council (BCC), the only tier-three data center in country, while the disaster 
recovery center will be located in the NIDW office. This will ensure the highest level of 
security and functionality available in country.  In addition, the Project will finance 
installation of a stand-alone tier three data center to which the data recovery center will 
be transferred, when the Government completes its planned Election Center.  All works 
are expected to be completed by 2015.  
Page  4
#
ID Card Production and Distribution to Citizens  
 
The Project will finance replacing the current laminated voter ID card with a card with 
more robust security features. This replacement is required in order to counter the current 
widespread practice of using fake and forged ID cards.  With verification often occurring 
by simple physical examination of cards, the need for a more secure card is significant.  
The ID card design will affect many aspects of NID system, including total project costs 
and utility of national ID card in society.  The project will follow the recommendations  
of the government-wide national ID Card Design Committee consisting of representatives 
of BEC, LGD, BBS officials and other local experts.  
 
The project will distribute ID cards in two phases.   All citizens  will be called to BEC 
upazila offices twice: once to confirm information and provide biometric data 
(fingerprints) and in many cases to provide a new photograph (Phase 1), and a second 
time to collect the NID card (Phase 2).  The final distribution strategy will be subject to a 
number of factors which need to be assessed conclusively through pilot tests, as they 
could make a crucial difference in the risk level, cost and success of the entire NID 
program.  These are primarily (i) rate of required modifications to demographic data for 
NID purposes; (ii) rate of mismatches between live fingerprints and voter list data base; 
(iii) rate of new photographs required, and (iv) decentralized rate of demographic data 
updates requiring offline adjudication.  
 
#
Data communications network  
 
A
reliable data communications network linking the NID data center at the BCC, NIDW 
Office with databases of all line ministries and those of private service providers as well 
as with all upazila server stations is critical for successful operation of the NID system.  
In particular, the decentralized enrollment or updating of citizens# information in the 
NID system, replacement and distribution of new ID cards, verification for service 
agencies and gateway to other agencies all require a functional, real-time data 
communications network.  
 
The Project will support the preparation of a detailed network design taking into 
consideration the standard operating procedures of NID. The detailed network plan will 
determine how best to integrate exclusive government cable lines, internet service, and 
the virtual private network which will be used for connecting the NID database with 
various points around the country.  
 
#
Business Process Management  
 
This project subcomponent will review and, if necessary, revise the specific NID 
operating procedures to develop an integrated business process management software and 
system. The operating procedures to be developed will encompass all key functions, 
including:  
 
#
registering and updating data for the NID system at upazila-level election offices,  
Page  5
#
NID card production and distribution at the ID Card production site,  
 
#
monitoring and regulating e-ID verification services at the data center, and  
 
#
administering financial flows from service fees from users at the NIDW Office.  
 
Component 3: Capacity Building, Communication Program, and Overall Project 
Management (US$ 36.42)  
 
This component will develop the capacity of the newly established National 
Identification Wing (NIDW) of the BEC to develop and manage the human and financial 
resources necessary for the sustainable operation of the NID system. This will also 
provide a comprehensive communication program and overall project management 
support.  
 
#
Comprehensive capacity building program for the newly established NIDW  
 
The Project will finance a comprehensive Implementation Support Consultancy which 
will bring a number of experts on various aspects of the NID System on a long-term 
residency basis. They would be paired with government officials who would be newly 
recruited into the NIDW. This long-term pairing arrangement is considered as one of the 
most effective capacity building arrangements. Key personnel to be included in the ISC 
are a principal advisor to the General Director of NIDW, a chief operation officer in 
charge of ID card production and distribution, a chief technology officer in charge of 
database and other IT issues, a chief administration/finance office, chief communication 
officer and chief procurement officer.  In addition to pairing advisors with these key 
personnel, the consultancy will provide overall management support and capacity 
building to the NIDW  
 
At the upazila level, the Project will finance local project consultants in each upazila 
office to complement BEC officers to handle ID data update, ID card replacement, and 
other routine NID tasks. The project, on average, will finance three project staff (two 
work station operators and one IT manager) while a number of large size upazilas will 
have more project staff proportionally. Recruitment of project staff for each upaliza will 
be delegated to the district election office as they are well positioned to understand the 
market for necessary skill sets and recruit and deploy project staff to upazila under its 
jurisdiction.  
 
A
major component of capacity building will be technical assistance to plan for the 
long-term financial and institutional sustainability of the NID system.  This assistance 
would focus on legal arrangements to retain key staff, sustain service orientation, and 
implement more complex financial management systems involving substantial revenue 
flows from services.  While there will be no changes in the institutional arrangements for 
at least the life of the project, options for continuation as is or other arrangements such as 
spinning off of the ID function from the BEC will be examined. The Government is 
committed to provide the NIRW a necessary management flexibility to sustain the 
complex nature of NID office.  
Page  6
In addition, there would be a number of training and twinning arrangements during the 
project to bring first-hand experience from practitioners of NID systems in other 
developing and developed countries.  
 
#
Change management and communications  
 
An effective change management and communication program is of critical importance 
in managing citizens# expectations on NID and in mitigating uncertainty of  NID card 
replacement schedule during the Project.  Citizens should be sufficiently informed and 
convinced of the value of having new ID cards and the NID office should be able to 
communicate with citizens in a comprehensive and timely manner. The Project will 
finance a comprehensive communication program by hiring a consortium of professional 
communication firms . The NIDW would have a Communication Officer in its structure 
and the Project will finance a long-term advisor to implement communication activities 
including the mass communication campaign.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented throughout country. The NID data center and Card 
Production Site would be in Dhaka while ID registration and update and e-ID verification 
service will take place at the local (upazila) level.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is assessed not to create any potential, large scale, significant impact.   
 
Page  7
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is utilizing existing government offices to provide NID service and NID card 
production. No addition physical infrastructure is anticipated from the Project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N.A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N.A.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  8
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Junghun Cho 
12/20/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi 
12/21/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Sabah Moyeen 
12/22/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
01/18/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joel Hellman 
01/18/2011 
Comments:   
