Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6183 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/24/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P123828 
Project Name: Second Rural Transport Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Noel Guillossou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 29, 2012 
Estimated Board Date: July 9, 2012 
Managing Unit: SASDT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);Agricultural marketing and trade (5%);Ports, 
waterways and shipping (5%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Rural policies and institutions 
(40%);Rural markets (10%);Climate change (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
75.00
75.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Improved rural accessibility and enhanced sustainability of rural transport and market services 
through effective rural infrastructure investment and asset management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will include two components:  
 
(a) Rural Roads and Trade Infrastructure Component: The component will include three sub-
components:  
 
i. Rural Roads:  
 
a. Improvement of about 1,100 km of Upazila Roads (UZR) and 550 km of Union Roads (UR) 
including bridges and cross drainage;  
 
b.
Construction of Flood Proof Upazila Roads and flood refuge: one per district in the project 
area;  
 
c. Rehabilitation/Maintenance of about 1,500 km of UZR including bridges/culverts;  
 
d.
Construction of about 15,000 drainage structures on UR and Village Roads;  
 
e. Road safety;  
Page  2
ii. Growth Centre Markets: Improvement of 140 growth centre markets including construction 
of women#s corners.  
 
iii. Rural Waterways:  
 
a. Improvement of three rural water routes: This sub-component will pilot cleaning and 
dredging of 150 km of rural waterways feeding major river routes being improved under a 
dredging program financed by the Government.  
 
b.
Construction of 30 landing stations with goods/passenger handling facilities: This sub-
component will improve the connectivity between rural waterways and markets to facilitate 
access to markets for populations which use river transport.  
 
(b) Capacity Building/Institutional Strengthening: The component will include two sub-
components:  
 
i. Project Implementation and Management: The component will provide technical advisory 
services to support project implementation and management. This will include services of 
Project Management Consultant, two packages for design and supervision consultants, financial 
and technical audit, third party monitoring, independent monitoring of resettlement and land 
acquisition, monitoring and evaluation of socio-economic impact of the project.  
 
ii. Enhanced LGED performance, governance and accountability: The content of the component 
is being defined. It will build on the results and lessons of the first RTIP and will be guided by 
the ORA #road map#. Support will focus on maintenance policy and operations, methods and 
options to address the rural transport infrastructure gap, quality assurance, financial management, 
information technology and management information systems, and performance 
management/monitoring and evaluation. Project-supported enhancements in these fields with a 
strong sustainability focus will cumulatively strengthen LGED effectiveness, governance and 
accountability in the discharge of its functions, consistent with the thrust of the ORA 
recommendations.  
 
The component will include a Local Government capacity building sub-component expected to 
have broad similarities to the capacity building component of the Local Government 
Improvement Plan (LGIP) nearing completion under the first RTIP as well as to the GOB-funded 
Local Governance Support Project (LGSP). It should take up various refinements aimed at 
stronger outcomes in the fields of LGI #participation#, #gender# and capacity for self-
management, particularly in respect of local resource mobilization and infrastructure 
management.  
 
This component will also support the strengthening of the central Environmental Management 
Unit (EMU) in LGED and the updating of the environmental documents prepared under the 
RTIP. The project will support the capacity building of LGED staff on environmental 
management and climate resilient engineering design.  
 
Given the major road safety problems and challenges in the rural transport environment in 
Bangladesh, RTIP-2 presents an opportunity for scaling up the RTIP-1 supported Rural 
Transport Safety #pilot# by: (a) enabling LGED to establish sustainable Rural Road Safety 
(RRS) functions and capacity; (b) strengthening the sector capacity for RRS education, 
information and/or research, and (c) building the capacity of local government institutions (LGI) 
in RTIP-2 districts for local road safety mitigation.   
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in 26 districts out of 64 districts in Bangladesh.  24 districts are 
on the east of the Jamuna/Padma rivers but the project area excludes the Chittagong Hill Tracts, 
which are heavily populated by indigenous peoples. The two remaining districts are on the west 
of the Jamuna river. The choice of the districts has been made in coordination with other 
development partners to avoid geographical overlap of projects. As seen under the on-going 
RTIP, improvement and construction of rural infrastructure require private land acquisition and 
displacement of people who may have been using public lands, including parts of the roads that 
would be improved. Land acquisition needs and the impacts thereof will be assessed after rural 
infrastructure to be improved under the project has been selected and engineering designs 
prepared.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
LGED has been implementing a number of World Bank projects including the on-going RTIP 
and it does have a number of staff knowledgeable about the implications of applying Bank 
environmental safeguard policies. LGED prepared its own #Environmental Assessment 
Guidelines for LGED Projects# with the support of the RTIP in late 2008. The guidelines aimed 
to provide the framework for planning, implementation and subsequent operation of projects 
undertaken by LGED in different sectors. The guidelines constitute simple procedures and 
formats to undertake Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of proposed projects and 
subprojects, to identify potential negative impacts and draw up an Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) where necessary.  LGED has an Environmental Unit but further capacity 
development of the Unit is required to fully integrate environmental issues in LGED#s projects# 
and programs# design and implementation.  
 
Having acquired the experience of dealing with social safeguard issues under the on-going 
RTIP, LGED is familiar with the Bank policies on involuntary resettlement and indigenous 
peoples. The existing Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will continue to be responsible for land 
acquisition and preparation and implementation of the impact mitigation plans under RTIP-II 
with the support of a Project Management Consultant.  Apart from the designated PIU staff, 
LGED has social scientists (District Sociologists) at the district level and Community Organizers 
at the upazila level. Under the supervision of LGED Executive Engineers in the districts they 
will be directly involved in land acquisition and impact mitigation activities. Under the on-going 
RTIP, an independent review of the resettlement program noted that while LGED adhered to the 
guidelines and procedures, it was however unable to assess the actual compensation as stipulated 
in the Resettlement Framework, likely because of misleading declaration by sellers to avoid land 
taxes. The preparation of RTIP-II will carefully take into account the findings of this review as 
well as other lessons learned during implementation of the on-going RTIP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
All improvement works under the project are being identified but detailed studies will be 
carried out for the first-year program of works only during project preparation. Because the exact 
locations, size and extent of improvements during subsequent years will not be precisely known 
during project appraisal and considering the resulting uncertainty on most of the improvements 
and the environmental complexity related to the large number of improvements to be 
implemented in widespread areas especially in some environmentally sensitive areas, the project 
is classified as an Environmental Category #A# project. The EA will be carried out based on the 
experience of the on-going Rural Transport Improvement Project (RTIP). Since all the details of 
improvement works are not available at this stage, a framework approach will be followed for 
the proposed operation. A typical environmental management plan and a code of practices will 
be provided in the environmental management framework. Specific environmental assessments 
of improvement works will be required during the design before clearance.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project activities may have temporary and in few cases permanent impacts on fisheries 
and aquatic life. Construction of approach roads on flood plain may restrict free movement of 
fishes. In addition, dredging works will create noise and disturbances that may affect breeding 
and migration of aquatic life. Site developments may require cutting and/or trimming of tress. 
The impact on the natural habitats will be studied as part of the environmental assessment.  
Appropriate measures will be recommended to reduce the disturbance to the natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
It is highly unlikely that any designated physical cultural resources will be affected by the 
subprojects. In the unlikely scenario of any such impacts, the impacts will be examined as part of 
the EA. #Chance find# procedures conforming with local legislation on heritage would also be 
evaluated and made a part of the EMP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Although the project does not include the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT), given the presence 
of indigenous peoples (IPs) in some of the project districts, RTIP-II will trigger OP 4.10 on 
Indigenous Peoples. The on-going RTIP, which also excluded CHT, prepared and implemented 
an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (based on OD 4.20) for the first-phase works. 
Indigenous peoples# issues under RTIP-II will be incorporated into a Social Impact Management 
Framework (SIMF) which will also address the issues related to involuntary resettlement. The 
SIMF will provide the principles, guidelines and procedures to prepare and implement 
Indigenous Peoples Plans wherever project improvements would be found to affect IPs.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As seen under the on-going RTIP, works on the Upazila and Union roads under RTIP-II will 
require private land acquisition and displacement of people who may have been using parts of 
the roads for livelihood purposes. Isolated acquisition may also be required under other 
components and sub-components. The Resettlement Framework adopted for the on-going RTIP 
will be updated into a SIMF for RTIP-II, and will include issues related to both Involuntary 
Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples. Among other issues, the SIMF will include (a) a legal 
framework outlining the principles and guidelines which will be used to acquire lands and 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
mitigate the adverse impacts, including those on indigenous peoples; (b) facility for screening of 
social safeguard issues related to involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples; (c) mitigation 
principles, guidelines, and a policy matrix in terms of different impact categories; (d) a grievance 
redress procedure for the project affected persons; (e) stakeholder consultation framework; and 
(f) arrangement for monitoring progress in the implementation of impact mitigation plans. The 
SIMF will provide the bases to prepare separate Resettlement Plans and Indigenous Peoples 
Plans for each yearly civil work program.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/31/2012 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Consultants were selected in August 2010 for the feasibility and engineering design study 
including the preparation of the Social Impact Management Framework and Resettlement 
Action Plans and Environmental Impact Assessment and Environmental Management 
Framework. The final reports are expected to be disclosed in September 2011. The 
Environmental Management Framework will be reviewed by an independent consultant.  
 
LGED through Feasibility and Design Consultant is now preparing the Environmental 
assessment (EA) and Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the new operation. 
The following issues will be addressed in conducting EA and preparing EMF: (a) update the 
baseline information; (b) explore the technical options to improve the energy efficiency small 
inland boat; (c) address the climate change impact on the project activities and the climate 
change impacts by the project interventions; (d) review and revise the specifications and unit 
rates used in LGED bidding documents for environmental mitigation works; (e) assess 
LGED#s institutional capacity to implement the EMP taking into consideration the newly 
established 10 laboratories and 21 mobile laboratories; and (f) design a regular environmental 
monitoring program linking with the project activities. The environmental document will be 
further reviewed by Independent Consultant to be hired by LGED.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Noel Guillossou 
03/08/2011 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
03/09/2011 
Comments:  cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Benedictus Eijbergen 
03/11/2011 
Comments:  cleared 
