Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/20/2011 
Report No.:  AC6010
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P095965 
Original Project Name: Siddhirganj 
Peaking Power Project 
Country:  Bangladesh 
Project ID:  P124724 
Project Name:  Siddhirganj Power Project AF 
Task Team Leader:  Md. Iqbal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 6, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: February 22, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%);Other public sector 
governance (40%);Trade facilitation and market access (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
230.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
80.00
80.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Restructuring and Additional Finance to Siddhirganj Power Project will make a 
major contribution to increase the supply of electricity in Bangladesh and strengthen the 
institutional capacity of the implementing agencies.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Restructuring and Additional Finance would help cover the costs 
associated with expansion of the Siddhirganj Peaking Power Project from the earlier-
proposed 300 MW peaking (open cycle) to 335 MW gas fired combined cycle unit for 
base load operation. The other components of the original project, pertaining to the gas 
transmission line, the power evacuation line and capacity building of executing agencies 
will not be modified.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed combined cycle power plant will be constructed in the same location 
identified for the open cycle power plant. However, the combined cycle power plant will 
require additional space and approximately total 9.24 acres will be required. The earlier 
open cycle plant required about 6 acres. The proposed site is located within Siddhirganj 
power generation complex on the western bank of Sitalakhya river in Siddhirganj 
Pourashava, under Narayanganj district. It is approximately 20 km North-East of Dhaka 
and is easily accessible from Dhaka-Chittagong Highway. There are 5 gas fired power 
plants (under operation and construction) within the Siddhirganj Power Generation 
Complex. These are: (i) BPDB#s 210 MW steam plant in operation, (ii) ADB funded 
two120 MW capacity peaking power plants- one in operation, (iii) one 50 MW rental 
power plant under construction and (iv) the proposed 300-450 MW combined cycle 
power plant expected to be covered by World Bank#s additional financing. In addition, 
within 2-3 km radius, there are 3 other gas fired power plants. These are: (i) the AES 
Haripur 360 MW power plant , located about 1km downstream of the Siddhirganj site; 
(ii) the BPDB 99 MW gas turbine power plant, which will soon be upgraded to around 
400 MW combined cycle power plant with funding from JICA; and (iii) the NEPC barge 
mounted 1#110 MW power plant.  The site of the recently closed-down Adamjee Jute 
Mill is located immediately along the southern boundary of the Siddhirganj plant 
complex, which is now being converted into an Export Processing Zone (Special 
Economic Zone). On the northern side, there is a steel re-rolling mill, and also a couple of 
brick kilns. There are numerous other small and medium industries within and around the 
Siddhirganj area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI) 
Ms Nina Masako Eejima (LEGEN) 
Ms Sabah Moyeen (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The original project has been classified as Category #A# and only Environmental 
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered on environmental aspects. The three different 
entities prepared separated Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the project.  The 
additional financing will bring changes only to the power generation component, which 
will not trigger any new environmental safeguard policies. The potential impacts of the 
proposed project will be related to water extraction from Sitalakhya  river, emission of 
gases, noise and effluent discharges to the surrounding environment during construction 
and operation phases of the project. It is estimated that proposed Siddhirganj 300-450 
MW CCPP will consume approximately 12.5 m3/sec of water which is about 9.84% of 
the total flow of water in the extreme lean period. The total consumption of water of the 
surrounding industries at Siddhirganj Power plant complex area will be net 23.5 % of the 
total flow whereas rest 76.5% of water will be available for sustainable growth of natural 
environment. There will be noise, vibration and other disturbances around the plant 
location during construction and commissioning of the power plant. The project will not 
impact on forest and physical cultural resources. The recent and proposed developments 
in the project sites have been primarily focused on power generation activities. Within the 
immediate vicinity of the project site, there are several existing power plants that have the 
potential to interact in a cumulative manner with the project impacts. EGCB (the 
implementing agency) will carry out an environmental assessment on the cumulative 
impacts in three years of plant operation.  
 
No land acquisition will be required and no resettlement issues will arise due to the 
project activities.  An old and unused store house will be demolished during site 
preparation. It is not occupied by any resident therefore no relocation or resettlement is 
required. Mitigation measures for management of temporary labour camps and 
recommendations to ensure compliance with health and safety measures during 
construction and operation phases will be carried out including the operation of the WTP 
which will be constructed behind the school building. There are no indigenous people 
residing in the vicinity of the project area. An environmental and social impact 
assessment has been commissioned by EGCB. These reports have been publicly 
disclosed in EGCB website and World Bank#s Infoshop.  
 
International Waterways: The new combined cycle configuration will draw about 12.5 
cubic meters per second of water from the nearby Sitalakhya river.  The Sitalkhya drains 
into the Meghna and Padma rivers and ultimately the Bay of Bengal, which is defined as 
an International Waterway under OP 7.50.  The littoral states have been notified and 
asked to respond by January 20, if any [to be updated once response period is closed].   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
It is possible that additional power generation capacity will be added at Siddhirganj at a 
later date. The project site is a dense industrial area and the project is likely to induce 
Page  4
further industrial developments in the area, which may lead to long term adverse impacts. 
Though the project cannot do anything about it, an area based development approach is 
recommended to prevent worsening of cumulative environmental impacts in the area. The 
current project is not expected to lead to any long term or indirect social impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternative analysis between combined cycle power plant and open cycle power plant 
has been carried out. In terms of resource utilization, the combined cycle power plant is 
more efficient and does not discharge high temperature steam in the air. However, the 
combined cycle power plant will have to address the issue of cooling water requirement 
and its discharge.  In addition, an alternative analysis from environmental perspective 
was carried out on the two proposed locations with the Siddhirganj power generation 
complex and the best option is selected for the project. The project footprint was 
analyzed several times from a social impacts perspective and has been re-designed to 
yield the minimum social cost option (present design).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
EGCB has updated the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and conducted a Social 
Impact Assessment (SIA) considering the new technology option and larger area 
requirement. The majority of the environmental impacts associated with the development 
of power plant will be minimized/avoided/compensated with a careful design and 
implementation of the project. The best available and safest technologies will be 
promoted. The EGCB has used certification of ISO 14001-2004 (Environmental 
Management Standard) and OHSAS 18001: 1999 (Occupational Health and Safety 
Management Systems) as the eligibility criteria for selection of the contractor. The 
contractor will also have to prepare the environmental action plan based on their 
equipment specification, Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared by EGCB 
and additional studies (air quality modeling). As part of the institutional development, 
EGCB will set-up an Environmental Monitoring Unit and recruit qualified professionals 
for proper implementation and monitoring of the EMP.  
 
No significant social impacts are anticipated. EGCB has adequate knowledge of WB 
safeguards requirements and has carried out the SIA in compliance with Bank guidelines, 
which also includes a social management plan. EGCB will engage social specialists to 
ensure implementation of the mitigation and safety measures incorporated in the SIA.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EIA and SIA updating included consultation with the people living close to the 
Siddhirganj power generation complex and also with staff living within the complex. 
Their comments and suggestions have been reflected in EIA and SIA.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/28/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/28/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/10/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/20/2011  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
Page  6
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Md. Iqbal 
01/12/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi 
01/12/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Sabah Moyeen 
01/12/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
01/13/2011 
Comments:  Cleared on understanding that client will be encouraged to undertake a Cumulative 
Impact Assessment to assess impact of other anticipated developments in the neighborhood. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
01/18/2011 
Comments:   
