Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/01/2011 
Report No.:  AC6175
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Benin 
Project ID:  P113145 
Project Name:  Benin Emergency Urban Env. Project 
Task Team Leader:  Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 10, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (60%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (20%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (33%);Other urban 
development (30%);Municipal governance and institution building (26%);Pollution 
management and environmental health (11%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To improve infrastructure and mitigate the negative environmental impact of floods in 
Greater Cotonou and to increase Benin#s level of preparedness to future flooding.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is defined by the following five components:  
 
Component 1: Drainage improvement and rehabilitation (US$ 23.56 million equivalent). 
Lead Agency: Ministry of Urban Development, Housing, Land Reform, and Coastal 
Erosion Protection (with the participation of the municipalities). The objective of this 
component is to rehabilitate and improve drainage networks in key areas of the greater 
Cotonou area affected by the 2010 flooding. This will be achieved by calibrating, 
grading, cleaning, scouring and expanding drains and channels. The interventions will 
occur in three collectors (AA, P and W); and the Fifadji Bridge will be upgraded to 
complement civil works to be undertaken on the P collector.  
Page  2
Component 2: Municipal solid waste management (US$ 13.82 million equivalent). Lead 
Agency: Ministry of Environment and Protection of Nature (with the participation of the 
municipalities). The objective of this component is to enable Cotonou and neighboring 
municipalities of Abomey-Calavi, Porto-Novo, Ouidah and Seme-Podji to mitigate the 
negative environmental impacts resulting from the obstruction of the drainage canals with 
waste, and also from the mix of floods with poorly managed and disposed-off municipal 
wastes. This will be achieved by substantially improving the collection, transport and 
disposal of solid wastes in the project#s targeted areas and by strengthening the 
institutional and legal frameworks for SWM, as per the National Solid Waste 
Management Strategy (NSWMS). The following activities will be financed: (i) 
strengthening the institutional and regulatory framework for SWM, including capacity 
building of the MEPN, and support and capacity building to the municipalities and NGOs 
involved in pre-collection of municipal wastes in the five municipalities; (ii) construction 
of municipal solid waste collection points and transfer stations in the 5 municipalities of  
Cotonou, Abomey-Calavi, Porto Novo, Ouidah and Seme-Podji; (iii) construction of a 
controlled dumpsite at Abomey-Calavi; and (iv) the construction of an additional cell at 
the Ouesse landfill site.  
 
Component 3: Improved Municipal Wastewater Management and Sanitation (US$ 4.7 
million equivalent). Lead Agency: SONEB, Ministry of Energy and Water (with 
participation of the Cotonou municipality and the MEPN). The objective of this 
component is to develop an appropriate institutional and regulatory framework for the 
effective and sustainable management of municipal wastewater in Benin in view of 
mitigating the negative environmental impacts and health hazards resulting from the mix 
of runoffs from rains with latrines and septic tanks contents during the floods and leading 
to waterborne diseases in the aftermath of the floods.  The following activities will be 
financed: (i) capacity building and provision of technical assistance for establishing 
appropriate norms, standards, guidelines and regulations for more effective management 
of wastewater; (ii) development of urban wastewater master plans for the greater Cotonou 
Agglomeration (including Abomey-Calavi and Seme-Podji) and Porto Novo; and (iii) 
implementation of a small-scale decentralized sanitary drainage and wastewater treatment 
pilot project.  
 
Component 4: Flooding and disaster risk preparedness and management (US$ 5.03 
million equivalent). Lead Agency: Ministry of Interior through the DPPC in conjunction 
with MEPN. The objective of this component is to increase the level of preparedness in 
Benin for addressing future flooding and to strengthen the capacity of the institutions 
involved in Flood and Disaster Risk Management. Activities financed under this 
component include: (i) the development of an early warning system; (ii) the 
implementation of an information dissemination and awareness raising program on 
floods; and (iii) the institutional strengthening of key institutions and other principal 
actors on management of crisis and risks associated with flooding to increase the 
efficiency of the National Flood Emergency Plan.  
 
Component 5: Project management (US$ 2.89 million equivalent). This component is 
designed to provide effective and efficient management support for the implementation 
of the project, including the development and operationalization of an effective and 
efficient Monitoring and Evaluation System, and all fiduciary requirements (safeguards, 
procurement and financial management.   
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed emergency operation will cover Cotonou and the nearby municipalities of 
Porto Novo, Ouidah, Seme-Podji, and Abomey-Calavi.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is classified as environmental category B because no activity funded under 
the Project is expected to have a significant negative environmental or social impact.  The 
Project triggers two safeguards policies: OP4.01 on environmental assessment and 
OP4.12 on involuntary resettlement.  Activities under the project are not expected to 
generate any adverse environmental or social effects, as a large part of the project is 
geared towards sustainable urban development.  Two safeguards instruments associated 
with the proposed project are the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The existing ESMF and RPF of 
the initial Benin Urban Environment Project (disclosed in-country on June 25, 2010 and 
July 8, 2010 at Infoshop) will be revised and up-dated. These documents will be 
disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop within six months of effectiveness and prior to 
the commencement of civil works.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site 
specific, thus easily remediable.  No long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen during 
project implementation.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The capacity of borrower to address safeguard issues is considered adequate. Safeguards 
are well mainstreamed into the original project implementation. All contracts and bidding 
documents have the environmental and social management clauses inserted. The essence 
of this is to enable contractors to follow up on environmental and social due diligence 
during civil works. The Benin Environmental Agency (ABE) is the Environmental 
Protection Authority in Benin. It is well known in the sub-region and will be responsible 
for monitoring the implementation of the safeguards instruments of the proposed 
operation. The environmental mitigation and monitoring plans will also be carried out by 
the PMU and executing agencies; that are already familiar with Bank safeguards 
guidelines and processes. The PMU will recruit an environmental and social specialist 
that will work with the environmental and social consultants of the executing agencies to 
implement social safeguards issues and environmental aspects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders still remain the following:  
 
-
Ministry of Urban Development, Land Reform and Coastal Erosion Protection 
and Ministry of Environment and Protection of Nature  
 
-
All stakeholders (Government, Agencies and Ministries, NGOs, private sector, 
communities, development partners, etc.) are being consulted regularly. Key issues raised 
in some of the consultations were the number of collections points per municipality and 
the availability of land for the construction of new collections points. The municipality 
promised that land will be made available and the allocation will come directly from the 
office of mayor and they do not envisage any contentions as these land owned by the 
municipalities. Since the locations and number of the collection points were not known at 
appraisal, the project decided to adapt the existing RPF of the former Benin Urban 
Environment project. The proposed project will continue the dialogue with key 
stakeholders and the project will rely on the RPF and ESMF to ensure that the 
appropriate mitigation measures are taken into account in accordance with the Benin and 
the Bank's safeguards policies in consultation with key stakeholders. This participatory 
approach will be carried on throughout implementation, maintenance, supervision and 
evaluation of the project activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/30/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/30/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/30/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/31/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/01/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/30/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in conformance with OP/BP 8.00, the 
completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments were not required 
as a condition for appraisal of the project.  However, the safeguards instruments: the 
ESMF and RPF of the former Urban Environment Project will be revised, updated and 
adapted for the current operation. These instruments will be disclosed in-country and at 
the Info shop within six months of project effectiveness and before the commencement of 
civil works.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
03/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Maman-Sani Issa 
03/22/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
03/22/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/31/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
03/22/2011 
Comments:   
