Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/09/2011 
Report No.:  AC5754
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Benin 
Project ID:  P115886 
Project Name:  Agricultural Productivity and Diversification 
Task Team Leader:  Kofi Nouve 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 12, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Crops (40%);Agricultural 
extension and research (20%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (40%);Other rural development (40%);Rural policies and 
institutions (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
31.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.70 
 Local 
Communities 
6.70 
 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
15.00
30.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to restore and improve productivity and value 
addition for selected value chains.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project activities will be organized around the following four components:  
 
Component 1. Adoption of Improved Technologies and Restoration of Productivity 
(US$27.3 million; of which IDA support of US$10.0 million and GFRP support of 
US$11 million). Under this component the Project will finance the adoption of improved 
technologies for the development of the food security and export-oriented value chains 
(aquaculture, maize, rice, cashew and pineapple). It will also support the restoration of 
the means of production of households affected by the flood, particularly the productions 
of cereals (maize and rice), aquaculture, and livestock.  
Page  2
Component 2. Development/rehabilitation of Irrigation and Market Infrastructures 
(US$17.7 million of which IDA support of US$9 million and GFRP support of US$4 
million). The component will finance the rehabilitation and development of small scale 
irrigation infrastructures to improve productivity and reduce output variation, and the 
construction and rehabilitation of market and storage infrastructures, some of which were 
destroyed by the recent floods.  
 
Component 3. Value Chain Coordination and Agricultural Financing (US$8.2 million of 
which IDA support of US$5.6 million and GFRP support of US$0 million). This 
component aims to improve the coordination of targeted value chains and to help 
improve access to financial services for project beneficiaries. It will provide business 
development services to help address critical supply and demand constraints to the 
provision and access to credit and financial services in agriculture. It will also support 
building value chain institutions through the organization of value chain participants into 
a
well structured inter-professions and the organization of producers around structuring 
activities, such as rice milling, fingerlings and fish feed production.  
 
Component 4. Sector Program Coordination and Project Management (US$8.1 million 
of which IDA support of US$6.4 million and GFRP support of US$0 million). This 
component will help strengthen the capacity of 
the Ministère de l#Agriculture, de 
l#Elevage et de la Pêche (MAEP) to effectively coordinate the implementation of the 
sector program (including PADA) and to manage and monitor the Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project activities will be carried out nationwide, with focus on areas with natural 
proclivity toward the targeted value chains. Therefore, pineapple production activities 
will be confined in the South, particularly in the Atlantique-Littoral and in the Mono-
Couffo regions. Cashew nuts activities will be concentrated on the Central part of the 
country, whereas maize-related activities are expected to be carried out all over the 
country (with first interventions in the lowlands that have been severely affected by the 
recent flood). Rice production will be concentrated in Malanville, Glazoué, Ouémé and 
Tangiéta river basins.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is expected to have a positive environmental impact through its support for 
agricultural technologies that promote the better use of land and water resources. From an 
environmental and social safeguard standpoint, the proposed project is a Category B 
project. However, all activities must be screened to determine the need to carry out an 
Environmental and/or Social Assessment, and when applicable an Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and/or Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(EMP or ESMP) will have to be prepared and cleared by the Bank and the ABE.  
 
This suggests that environmental and social impacts of the project, for the most part, 
will be moderate, site-specific and manageable to an acceptable level. Potential 
environmental risks could include point and nonpoint pollution of water sources, and 
other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals (fertilizers, pesticides or 
herbicides), and negative environmental impacts associated with the rehabilitation of 
irrigation or small-scale civil works, such as storage facilities. 
 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) and the Population Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared and 
disclosed both in-country and in Infoshop prior to appraisal. Furthermore, with regards to 
the policy OP7.50 Projects on International Waterways, the Niger River Basin Authority 
has been notified of the proposed project and the non-objection letter from the Authority 
has already been received by the Bank.   
 
It is anticipated that project activities will not lead to major land acquisition or major 
restriction of access to sources of livelihood. Nevertheless, the fact that the project will 
involve development of private irrigation lands and community irrigation infrastructure, 
and as some land acquisition and/or restrictions of access to resources and/or livelihoods 
could take place during implementation this triggers the OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy. However, since specific irrigation sites are not yet known by the 
borrower, as due diligence, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared 
for the Project.  In the event that people are physically or economically displaced because 
of the Project#s activities, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared in 
accordance with the requirements of OP4.12, before the commencement of any relocation 
Page  4
activities. This plan will be subject to Bank approval, consulted upon, and disclosed. The 
RPF has been disclosed in country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is classified as environmental category B because no activity funded under 
the Project is expected to have a significant negative environmental or social impact.  
 
There is no major indirect and/or long-term impact due to anticipated activities in the 
project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower knows and has experience with Bank safeguard policies with other Bank-
funded projects in the agriculture and rural development sector. Through the 
implementing agencies of the ongoing projects, the Country has relatively reasonable 
capacity to implement safeguards measures within project activities. The Coordination 
Unit of PADA will be in charge of the implementation of the project activities, including 
safeguards-related measures. The project will sign a MoU with the ABE, which is the 
Government Agency responsible for reviewing Environmental and Impact Assessments 
(EIAs), supervising implementation compliance of the Environmental and Social 
Management Plans and RAPs.  
 
Nonetheless environmental and social assessments undertaken for project activities will 
determine the needs for additional capacity building on safeguards as necessary.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
stakeholder workshop was organized involving representatives of professional 
organizations, farmers' organizations, civil society and NGOs to discuss the results of the 
safeguards documents. 
 
These safeguard documents (ESMF, PMP and RPF) have then been finalized and 
disclosed both in country and at the Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/20/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  5
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/20/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/20/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
Page  6
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kofi Nouve 
02/09/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
02/09/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
02/09/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/09/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
02/09/2011 
Comments:   
