Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/10/2011 
Report No.:  AC6187
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bolivia 
Project ID:  P122007 
Project Name:  National Roads and Airport Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gylfi Palsson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (95%);Aviation (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
29.20
29.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives are to improve the year-round transitability of the 
San Buenaventura # Ixiamas national road and improve the safety, security and 
operational reliability of the Rurrenabaque Airport.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project comprises three components: (i) Improvement of San Buenaventura # 
Ixiamas National Road; (ii) Upgrading of the Rurrenabaque Airport; and (iii) Institutional 
Strengthening of ABC and AASANA, and other relevant entities.  
 
Component 1. Improvement of San Buenaventura # Ixiamas National Road.  
 
Improving the San Buenaventura#Ixiamas National Road through the carrying out of the 
necessary civil works and supervision activities for, inter alia: (a) the completion of an 
asphalt concrete pavement; (b) the rehabilitation of existing drainage and other road 
protection structures; and (c) the construction of approximately 21 bridges.  
 
Page  2
Civil works will be bid in one package (two lots) for improvement of the 113.65 km 
road and through a single supervision consultancy. The San Buenaventura - Ixiamas 
(northwest orientation) in Iturralde Province of the prefecture of La Paz falls under the 
Primary Road network (PRN), which connects the main departmental cities and principal 
highways. The road segment will be part of the PRN that joins the city of La Paz with the 
cities of Cobija and Trinidad, the capitals of Pando and Beni prefecture#s respectively. It 
will also help link linking cities such as Rurrenabaque, Reyes, Santa Rosa, Yata, Puerto 
Cabinas, Tomichuco and Riberalta.  
 
On the whole, the alignment of the new technical design follows the alignment of the 
current road, including its initial 2 km which traverse the urban area of San 
Buenaventura. Significantly, between Km 52 and Km 55 the road is diverted to bypass 
the town of Tumupasa. The road contracts will support mitigation of HIV/AIDS 
transmission.  
 
Component 2. Upgrading of the Rurrenabaque airport  
 
Supporting Phase II of the Rurrenabaque Airport Upgrading Program, through: (a) the 
carrying out of the necessary civil works and supervision activities for the construction of 
a
new taxiway, apron, control tower, operations building, rescue and fire fighting 
buildings, an access road, and a passenger terminal; and (b) the acquisition and 
installation of aviation control, rescue  and firefighting equipment.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening of ABC and AASANA, and other relevant 
entities  
 
The component will support the following activities  
 
(a) 
Strengthening the capacity of: (i) ABC and (ii) AASANA, to perform their 
functions effectively and efficiently, through the provision of technical assistance 
(including audits), training, and incremental operational costs required for Project 
administration and monitoring, and to implement the Good Governance and Anti-
Corruption Action Plan.  
 
(b) 
(i) Strengthening ABT#s monitoring capacity, through: (A) the construction of 
two checkpoints to prevent illegal logging and oversight productive and tourism activities 
in the the areas north of Ixiama and San Buenaventura, integrated with axleload controls 
administered by VIAS BOLIVIA; (B) the provision of vehicles, computers and, 
communication equipment, (for the carrying out of inspections in the different areas 
under ABT#s jurisdiction); (C) the provision of technical assistance for the carrying out 
of studies aimed at: (1) assesing illegal logging in the area benefiting from the Project as 
well as providing recommendations for diminishing it; and (2) reviewing and updating 
existing policy on forest concesion and its implementation intruments (i.e. management 
plans and financial capacity assesment); (D) the acqusition of high resolution satellite 
images during Project implementation, for the purposes of tracing changes in forest cover 
in the area benefiting from the Project; and (E) the carrying out of technical workshops 
for colonos, indigenous population and municipal authorities on various topics related to 
sustainable forest management.  
Page  3
(ii) Strenghtening SERNAP#s monitoring capacity, through: (A) the provision of 
personnel, equipment and vehicles for the prevention of illegal logging and poaching in 
the buffer zone of the eastern border of the Madidi National Park; (B) the construction of 
a
campground facility to serve as headquarters of park rangers, to be located 4 kilometers 
from Tumupasa, in the village of Sadiri; (C) the carrying out of workshops to strengthen 
coordination among the different stakeholders present in the Madidi National Park; (D) 
the preparation of an annual operational plans for the Madidi National Park and its buffer 
zone; and (E) the provision of technical assistance for the design of a financially 
sustainable mechanism for the management of the Madidi National Park, as well as a 
legal and policy framework for granting ecoturism concessions and promoting tourism.  
 
(c) 
 Providing support for the creation and subsequent operation of a participatory 
working group, composed by representatives from affected municipalities, local 
government agencies, Non-Governmental Organizations working in the area, and other 
concerned stakeholders, for the sustainable development of the area economically 
benefiting from the project.  
 
With regard to indirect environmental impacts, the Vice Ministry for Public Investment 
and Foreign Financing (VIPFE) will be the governmental institution responsible for 
ensuring coordination among governmental agencies technically responsible on 
environmental and social management to be strengthened under project Component 3b 
and 3c and other institutions as needed. Coordination meetings will be convened every 
four months and an Aide Memoire will be prepared after each meeting. The Coordination 
Unit at VIPFE will be daily managed by a coordinator and an assistant. The designated 
coordinator will report to VIPFE#s senior management. This Unit will have the necessary 
equipment and logistics to effectively coordinate with agencies and institutions 
responsible for implementing the aforementioned measures. This Unit will have as main 
function ensuring that mitigation measures under responsibility of different institutions 
are timely and efficiently implemented. VIPFE will perform as coordinating and 
supervising body for implementation of measures (ii-vi) mentioned in the previous 
paragraph, whose design and implementation on the technical ground will be SERNAP#s 
and ABT#s responsibility, among other institutions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The San Buenaventura-Ixiamas corridor will link the cities of San Buenaventura in the 
South with Ixiamas in the North in the department of La Paz. The Rurrenabaque airport is 
located in the department of Beni.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Raul Tolmos (LCSEN) 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO) 
Ms Ruth Llanos (LCSSO) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Component 1. Improvement of San Buenaventura - Ixiamas Road Corridor  
 
The length of the San Buenaventura- Ixiamas road to be rehabilitated runs close to the 
Madidi Integrated Management Area and National Park, increasing the risk of illegal 
logging, forest degradation and increased disruption of critical natural habitats. The 
updated EIA report contains sound measures to address direct environmental impacts 
caused by works.  Special attention will be paid to exploitation of zones of borrow and its 
impact on endemic fish populations and the surface hydrology. With regard to the 
indirect environmental effects and risks, a preliminary list of measures to address indirect 
environmental risks has been prepared. The effectiveness of these measures will require 
effective supervision and monitoring by ABC, the Bank and civil society and effective 
coordination among key stakeholder working in the project area as well as GoB#s 
leadership on sustainable territorial development.  
 
Component 2. Upgrading of the Rurrenabaque airport  
 
This component would focus on upgrading of the Rurrenabaque airport.  As a result, 
positive social benefits and minor reversible environmental impacts are expected during 
upgrading due to construction and rehabilitation works. Project management consists of 
management and monitoring and evaluation efforts.  These activities will enhance the 
social and environmental benefits of the Project by ensuring that goals are met.  
 
Component 3: Institutional and Capacity Support.  
 
This component will strengthen the institutional capacity of AASANA and ABC and of 
other relevant non-executing agencies (ABT, SERNAP etc.) as necessary, including the 
social and environmental aspects of the project during execution. This component is 
critical to strengthen, with a longer-term perspective, environmental management and 
natural resources exploitation governance in the project area.  
 
The GoB shall create and maintain operational a participatory working group with 
composition and structure acceptable to both the GoB and the World Bank, for the 
sustainable development of the area economically benefiting from the Project. Said 
Page  5
working group may be composed by representatives from affected municipalities, 
government entities and civil society organizations working in the area, as well as other 
concerned stakeholders.  
 
The following Safeguard Policies apply to this project:  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
The length of the San Buenaventura- Ixiamas road to be rehabilitated runs close to the 
Madidi Integrated Management Area and National Park, increasing the risk of illegal 
logging, forest degradation and increased disruption of critical natural habitats.  
 
Three environmental assessment reports have been prepared by the client and reviewed 
by the Bank to fully meet the aforementioned environmental safeguards: (i) an 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) report, and its constituent EMP, for the road, 
completed in 2009 and substantially and satisfactory updated/upgraded very recently; (ii) 
a
report containing sound measures to mitigate the indirect environmental impacts of the 
road; and (iii) an EA report, and its EMP, for the Rurrenabaque airport . With regard to 
the first report, the following environmental mitigation programs to address direct 
environmental impacts during rehabilitation have been substantively improved in terms 
of their objective, scope, training requirements, equipment and personnel, schedule and 
budget:: (i) environmental and vial training, (ii) traffic control and environmental 
signaling, (iii) revegetation and erosion control, (iv) community relations, (v) 
archaeological resources restoration, (vi)  flora and fauna preservation, (vii) fire 
prevention, (viii) forest protection, (ix) camp sites construction and operation, (x) 
installation and operation of industrial areas, (xi) operation of machinery and equipment, 
and (xii) exploitation of borrow zones.  
 
The aforementioned second report on mitigation of indirect environmental impacts 
proposed  the following mitigation measures: (i) participatory environmental monitoring 
program (targeted to mitigation of direct environmental impacts), (ii) strengthening of 
ABT#s surveillance and control capacity, (iii) strengthening of SERNAP#s capacity to 
patrol the Madidi NP#s limits, (iv) support productive initiatives that prevent the 
conversion of forests to agricultural lands, (v) support  implementation of the Municipal 
Preservation Area in Ixiamas,  (vi)  carrying out a Strategic Environmental Assessment to 
the road in combination with other economic infrastructure and investments in extractive 
non-renewable industries, and (vii) establishment of a participatory working group on the 
project area#s sustainable development A Coordination Unit with required personnel and 
logistics will be set up at the Vice Minister for Public Works and External Financing 
(VIPFE) to daily coordinate and follow up implementation of mitigation measures (i) to  
(vi) listed in this paragraph.  
 
The third environmental report consisted of an Environmental Assessment (EA) and its 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared by AASANA for the airport 
component of the project. This EA and its EMP was presented to key local stakeholders 
in a workshop held in Rurrenabaque on February 10.  
 
Page  6
Due to the complex and sensitive operating environment in which this project will 
occur, an effective and accessible grievance mechanism has been established (or built 
upon) to capture and manage grievances and public input throughout the project process.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)  
 
This policy is triggered given the location of the San Buenaventura-Ixiamas road 
adjacent to Madidi National Park. The improvement of the road infrastructure in close 
proximity to the National Park may increase the risks to the Park and its critical habitats. 
The report on indirect environmental impacts has identified such potential risks and 
impacts to both Madidi National Park and natural habitats outside of the park in both 
official buffer zones and other areas and described the mitigation and possible offset 
actions that will be implemented to avoid, minimize and manage these impacts. This 
report also evaluated the current institutional capacity of SERNAP in the Madidi National 
Park to manage and control such risks. Specific actions to mitigate these risks have been 
identified in the aforementioned report and incorporated in project sub-component 3b. 
Financial resources for implementing these actions have been allocated in project budget.  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)  
 
The policy is triggered given the potential change in the health and quality of forests 
that may result from project activities. Actions to offset these potential impacts have been 
identified in the aforementioned report on indirect environmental impacts and 
incorporated in project sub-component 3b.  Financial resources for implementing these 
actions have been allocated in project budget.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09)  
 
Since this policy is not triggered, the EMP outlines controls to ensure that any activities 
that propose to procure, store or handle pesticides are not supported by the project.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)  
 
The team has determined that project activities might impact known physical cultural 
resources. The EIA includes corresponding information. The EMP describes the actions 
that will be taken to minimize and manage these impacts on eight archeological remains, 
which are identified because they contain graveyards, pottery artifacts, ruins of a fortress, 
ruins of houses and paleontological remains.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)  
 
An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) in compliance with OP 4.10 has now been completed 
and disclosed and it indicates that the minority ethnic groups located in the project area 
are the Tacanas and Esse Ejjas.  
 
The IPP was prepared through a series of consultations with leaders, and traditional 
authorities of the TCO Tacana I, and they expressed interest in the project and its 
perceived positive impact. The IPP activities are based on the #Sustainable Development 
Strategy of the TCO-Tacana in the management of natural resources, 2001-2005#, which 
was prepared, and is currently being updated by the Indigenous Council of the Tacana 
People (CIPTA, acronym in Spanish), with the support of the Wildlife Conservation 
Page  7
Society (WCS/Bolivia). CIPTA constitutes the representative body of 30 indigenous 
Tacana communities who inhabit the Iturralde province, 20 of which find themselves 
within the TCO Tacana and are subject to the mentioned strategy that was prepared in a 
participatory manner. The IPP includes activities to address: the need for increased 
management and protection of the Tacana TCO in order to prevent any invasions by new 
migrants; the development of productive projects based on the sustainable use of natural 
resources; and communication processes and publications to strengthen the Tacana ethnic 
identity. The IPP has an action plan made up of nine components: 1) management and 
protection of the TCO; 2) Productive projects based on sustainable resource use; 3) 
Norms during project execution; 4) Communications and public consultations; 5) 
Stregthening the Tacana#s ethnic and cultural identity; 6) Supporting the Esse Ejja 
community; 7) Strenthening tourism capabilities; 8) Supporting social management and 
control; 9) Supporting youth educational processes; 10) Supporting other communities. 
The first draft of the IPP was revised to incorporate observations related to its 
sustainability, and its relationship to the TCO#s management strategy as well as other 
mitigating measures. This phase counted on the support of organizations that work with 
the indigenous groups (i.e. WCS and CI) as well as direct meetings with CIPTA, however 
due to recent flooding, the Consejo de Corregidores has not been able to meet # they plan 
to meet before 15 May 2011 to review further the IPP, make revisions and provide their 
final approval by that date. The final IPP, if revised, will then be redisclosed. The IPP has 
a
defined budget and lays out a clear set of activities and responsibilities. In terms of a 
timeline, CIPTA and CIMTA will incorporate each activity into their annual plans.  
 
The situation of the Esse Ejja people is very complicated. The Esse Ejja are the most 
vulnerable group because their economic activities are fundamentally based around 
hunting, fishing and the gathering of forest fruits. They don#t have their own territory and 
they are semi-nomadic. Due to their socio-cultural characteristics and  high vulnerability,  
the IPP will put aside resources to support the elaboration of a specific strategy in order 
to plan policy actions, and rescue and protection activities. Due to Esse Ejja socio cultural 
characteristics and their high vulnerability, the IPP provides resources (US$ 100 
thousand) to support the elaboration of a specific strategy, The Eyiyoquibo community, 
part of the Esse Ejja people and the TCO Tacana I, were also involved in the consultation 
process. There are also populations of Quechua and Aymara immigrants from the Andes.  
 
The IPP and the Social Assessment have confirmed that plans to rehabilitate the San 
Buenaventura-Ixiamas road enjoy the broad support of indigenous peoples (including 
those who are potentially adversely impacted) in the project area. In both the IPP and the 
SA gender issues have been incorporated and resources have been allocated for 
supporting CIMTA (the Indigenous Tacana Womens Organisation), in terms of 
strengthening their rights and providing support to their plans for economic development. 
Furthermore, these resources will provide training and technical assistance to help them 
establish mechanisms for complaints during the construction phase.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
A
Resettlement and Compensation Plan  (Plan de Reasentamiento e Indemnizaciones de 
Poblaciones Afectadas -- PRIPA) was prepared in 2007-2008 to address the adverse 
Page  8
impacts of Right of Way (ROW) acquisition for the San Buenaventura-Ixiamas National 
Road.  At the request of the Bank, ABC has produced an updated PRIPA which takes into 
account (1) changes in the legal status of land affected by the project in rural areas as a 
result of the implementation of a titling program by the National Agrarian Reform 
Institute (Instituto Nacional de Reforma Agraria--INRA), (2) construction of new 
buildings since 2008, (3) change the width of the ROW to be acquired for the project in 
the urban and rural sections of the road, and (4) requirements of the World Bank Policy 
on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).  
 
The original PRIPA was developed under the assumption that the width of the ROW in 
urban and rural areas was going to be 100 meters (50 meters on each side, from the axis 
of the road).  During project preparation the Bank was informed that (1) the INRA had 
titled properties assuming that the road#s ROW was only 40 meters and (2) the 
municipalities of San Buenaventura and Ixiamas had developed their urban plans 
assuming that the road#s ROW was 20 meters.  Based on these findings, the Bank 
recommended ABC to adapt to these developments by reducing the ROW to 40 meters in 
rural areas and to 20 meters in urban areas.  ABC agreed with this recommendation, 
which will reduce the adverse impacts of the road project on the local population 
significantly.  
 
The original PRIPA predicted that the road would affect 217 dwellings and other 
structures built within the 100 meter ROW. However, many new structures have been 
built since 2008 and, therefore, the figures would have been significantly higher today. 
According to the updated PRIPA (based on a 20 meter ROW in urban areas and a 40 
meter ROW in rural areas) the road will only affect 70 structures: 40 dwellings, 18 
commercial structures (mostly kiosks and small stores) and 12 additional structures 
(entrances, walls, sheds, etc.).  
 
In rural areas, the lots titled by INRA have limits that coincide with the boundary of a 
40 m ROW. Therefore, the project will not require the purchase of land in rural areas, 
except in cases where it is necessary to make minor adjustments in the frontal boundaries 
of the land due to errors of measurement.  However, the PRIPA has identified 223 cases 
in which the project will affect crops and trees in areas that encroach the 40 meter ROW, 
i.e., cases in which the owners who benefit from INRA#s titling program are using land 
beyond the limits established by INRA.  
 
In the 70 cases where dwellings and other structures are affected, ABC will provide 
replacement dwellings of better quality and value.  In the 40 cases where dwellings are 
affected, it will be possible to rebuild the dwelling on the residual land of the lot affected.  
 
The updated PRIPA establishes procedures for relocation, compensation, and 
rehabilitation of affected persons and communities taking into account the requirements 
of OP 4.12.  It covers land acquisition and resettlement caused by the project from San 
Buenaventura to Ixiamas.  The only section that is not covered by the updated PRIPA is a 
3
km
section, the Tumapasa Bypass (Variante Tumupasa), which will be built to avoid 
Page  9
adverse impacts on the town of Tumupasa, with indigenous Tacana population.  ABC, at 
the request of the Bank, is modifying the original design of the Bypass for technical and 
social reasons.  The current design would affect four structures and a gas station, which 
were built after the completion of the original PRIPA.  A compensation plan, specifically 
for the Bypass will be prepared by ABC, once the revised designs become available.  
According to the original PRIPA, the entire 3 km section only affects four agricultural 
lots.  The compensation procedures defined in the updated PRIPA will be used to 
compensate the owners of these lots for the loss of land, crops and trees.  With the new 
design, the Bypass is not expected to affect dwellings or other structures.  
 
In the case of the Rurrenabaque Airport, the construction of the facilities that will be 
financed as part of this project (new taxiway, apron, control tower, operations building, 
rescue and fire fighting building, access road and passenger terminal) do not require land 
acquisition.  It will take place on land that is already in the possession of the AASANA.  
AASANA is currently fencing the 300 meter safety zone of the new runway, which is not 
financed by the Bank.  All the land within the 300 meter safety zone of the new runway is 
also in possession of AASANA.  The safety zone meets international standards for the 
type of aircraft that is currently operating in the Rurenanbaque Airport. However, in the 
future it may be necessary to expand the safety zone to 400 meters to permit the operation 
of bigger planes. This expansion would require the partial taking of 13 agricultural 
properties. AASANA has prepared an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan (Plan de 
Compensación a Personas Afectadas por las Obras de Ampliación y Mejoramiento del 
Aeropuerto de Rurrenabaque), which defines the procedures to compensate the owners of 
the 11 properties, in the event that the expansion occurs, as well as a property  that 
encroach the safety zone of the old runway.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term negative indirect environmental and social impacts might ensue because of 
road rehabilitation given the environmental and social complexity in the project area 
together with ongoing processes and initiatives. In the case of the upgrading of the 
Rurrenabaque airport, no significant social and environmental impacts will ensue. 
Positive effects will be accrued from the support and strengthening of the government#s 
environmental and social technical capacities at different levels.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
bypass will be built as part of Component 1 (Improvement of San Buenaventura - 
Ixiamas Road) to avoid adverse impacts of the road on the town of Tumupasa, with 
Tacana indigenous population.  The reduction of the width of the ROW of the road (from 
100 to 20 meters in urban areas and from 100 to 40 meters in rural areas) will avoid the 
displacement of families and businesses living within the 100 meter ROW.   
 
Page  10
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
While both ABC and AASANA have some capacity for managing environmental and 
social issues, the improvement of the San Buenaventura-Ixiamas road will be a very 
challenging project for ABC. Significant safeguards risks derive from the corridor#s 
location alongside Madidi National Park. Madidi has an area of 18,958 square kilometers, 
and is part of one of the largest protected areas in the world, and one of the most 
biologically diverse regions. An important environmental risk is the potential for 
increased illegal logging (although its source has yet to be determined) and encroaching 
into the Madidi National Park. Social risks include some resettlement and increased 
migration to the area because of the road improvement. ABC#s capacities for managing 
environmental and social risks will be strengthened given the risks involved in the San 
Buenaventura- Ixiamas road component.  
 
This includes engagement of two additional experts in ABC safeguard unit:  A social 
specialist trained as an anthropologist or with experience working with local indigenous 
peoples, and an environmental specialist, both for the duration of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public Consultation and Disclosure in Designing the EIA, including the RP, IPP and SA:  
 
With regard to consultations with potentially affected stakeholders in the road area, two 
consultation events in each one of the main towns along the road (San Buenaventura, 
Tumupasa and Ixiamas) were held in 2007 and 2008 the context of the EIA process. 
These consultation events included indigenous people (mainly Tacana) and local 
authorities and leaders. Also, during the preparation of the Social Assessment in 
December 2010, consultations with indigenous people and colonists were held. In 
addition, three workshops were organized during January, 2011 to consult the affected 
land owners and other stakeholders about the resettlement, compensation and 
rehabilitation procedures included in the PRIPA.  An understanding of the process and 
support for the compensation arrangements was expressed.  The workshops took place in 
San Buenaventura, Tumupasa and Ixiamas.  
 
An informative meeting with conservation NGOs was held in La Paz on February 4, 
2011. During this meeting three safeguard instruments were briefly presented: (i) the 
EIA, (ii) the Social Assessment, and (iii) the Indigenous People Plan. Three of the most 
prominent international NGOs on conservation attended this meeting such as The Nature 
Conservancy (TNC), Conservation International (CI) and the Wildlfe Conservation 
Society (WCS), along with other NGOs.  These three NGO have been working in the 
project are for more than a decade. These NGOs were not against the project nor saw it as 
a
project with very high impacts. They were very collaborative and offered to share with 
the client and the Bank relevant technical information to put in place well designed 
measures to address direct and indirect environmental impacts.  It was argued that this 
project can be an opportunity for the GoB to develop good practice which can be copied 
Page  11
for other road projects. All safeguard instruments have been disclosed on the website of 
ABC and in the Bank#s InfoShop before appraisal.  
 
Consultations Undertaken  
 
Workshops 
Date 
Location 
Number of Participants  
 
1st Public Consultation 
10/15/07 
San Buenaventura 
29  
 
2nd
Public Consultation 
10/16/07 
Tumupasa 
44  
 
3rd Public Consultation 
10/17/07 
Ixiamas 
35  
 
4th Public Consultation 
1/14/08 
San Buenaventura 
61  
 
5th Public Consultation 
1/15/08 
Tumupasa 
20  
 
6th Public Consultation 
1/16/08 
Ixiamas 
86  
 
Consultations during PRIPA  and Social Assessment 
Oct 15 # Nov 27 2010 Iximas, 
Tumupasa, San Buenaventura  
 
Consultation on EA report with conservation NGOs 
02/04/11 
La Paz 20  
 
The original EIA for the road was disclosed in country on December 23, 2010 and in 
InfoShop on January 5, 2011. The updated EIA and the report on potential indirect 
adverse environmental impacts due to road operation were disclosed in country on 
February 14, 2011 and in InfoShop on February 16, 2011.  The EA and EMP for works at 
Rurrenabaque airport was disclosed in country on February 14, 2011 and in InfoShop on 
February 16, 2011.  
 
Status of safeguard disclosure for the project.  
 
Safeguard Disclosure Status Local disclosure 
Bank disclosure  
 
San Buenaventura Ixiamas # Road  
 
Original EA  
 
Original PRIPA  
 
Updated EA and Indirect Impacts Mitigation  
 
Updated PRIPA  
 
Social Evaluation and IPP  
 
23-Dec-2010  
 
23-Dec-2010  
 
1-Mar-2011  
 
25-Feb-2011  
 
1-Mar-2011  
 
05-Jan-2011  
 
05-Jan-2011  
 
1-Mar-2011  
 
28-Feb-2011  
 
1-Mar-2011  
 
Rurrenabaque Airport  
 
EA  
 
Abbreviated Resettlement Plan  
 
13-Jan-2011  
 
25-Feb-2011  
 
16-Feb-2011  
 
1-Mar-2011   
Page  12
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/04/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/13/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/13/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/13/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/14/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n.a.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
Page  13
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  14
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gylfi Palsson 
03/09/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Raul Tolmos 
03/09/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
03/09/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Ruth Llanos 
03/09/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/09/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
03/09/2011 
Comments:   
