Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/24/2011 
Report No.:  AC5822
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bolivia 
Project ID:  P106700 
Project Name:  Agricultural Innovation and Services 
Task Team Leader:  Wilhelmus Gerardus Janssen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (67%);Rural policies and institutions (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
23.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed development objective is to strengthen INIAF and Bolivia#s Agricultural 
and Forestry Innovation system in order to contribute to productivity growth, rural 
development and the income-earning potential of Bolivian families dependent on 
agriculture and forestry.  
 
This objective will be achieved by (1) supporting the Agricultural and Forestry 
Innovation System; (2) strengthening core INIAF activities and (3) supporting INIAF#s 
institutional development.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Strengthening the National Agricultural and Forestry Innovation System 
(SNIAF) (US$5.9 million)  
 
The National Agricultural and Forestry Innovation System (SNIAF) is composed of 
three types of actors: (i) knowledge generation and dissemination: public and private 
universities, research institutes, laboratories, experimental stations and NGOs; (ii) 
productive actors:  producers, agribusinesses and producer organizations; and (iii) public 
Page  2
sector-policy makers: the Ministries of Rural Development and Land and of Science and 
Technology, and Departmental and Local Governments. Component 1 will strengthen the 
information and technology flows between people and institutions in the SNIAF, and 
promote the interaction and participation of research and innovation actors in the SNIAF. 
This will be achieved through two subcomponents:  
 
(a) 
Developing policies, strategies and governance of the SNIAF (US$0.4 million). 
Here the following activities will be carried out: (i) the formulation of policies for SNIAF 
(ii) the development of a communication and information strategy to bring together the 
actors of the innovation system (iii) the development of a governance framework.  
 
(b) 
 Establishment of a competitive Research Fund (US$5.5 million). A competitive 
Research Fund will be established to support strategic collaborations among national and 
international research entities and producers# groups. The Fund will finance applied 
research on ecoregional and climate change issues outside of the products prioritized for 
the INIAF led research alliances.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening core INIAF activities (US$ 27.5 million)  
 
The objective of Component 2 is to strengthen INIAF#s research, technical assistance, 
seed and genetic resource management programs. There are four sub-components: (a) 
improving INIAF#s research programs; (b) improving INIAF#s technical assistance 
services; (c) consolidating the national seed system and (d) managing Bolivia#s genetic 
resources.  
 
(a) 
 Improving INIAF#s research programs subcomponent (US$15.9 million) will 
support research in 6 strategic areas: wheat, potato, quinoa, dual purpose cattle, 
horticulture, and forestry, through strategic research alliances. Each alliance will develop 
a
4-year work program identifying activities and responsibilities of each partner. setting 
out the activities and responsibilities of each partner. Each alliance will also define 
capacity development requirements. The alliances will be supervised by an INIAF 
research manager. Working in alliances will also allow INIAF to develop its own 
capacities and obtain impacts more rapidly than if it would work alone.  
 
(b) 
Improving INIAF#s technical assistance services subcomponent (US$3.6 million) 
will support the development of the national technical assistance system, as implemented 
by subnational authorities and NGOs, and as supported by INIAF. Departmental 
agricultural and forestry innovation councils will be established; capacity building 
programs will be designed and implemented; with the leadership of departmental 
governments two technical assistance pilot programs will be implemented. In two pilot 
departments the Departmental government with the support of INIAF will carry out the 
technical assistance and rural extension program identified by the Departmental Councils. 
The choice of pilot departments will reflect the importance of improving agricultural and 
forestry production, the willingness to co-finance as well a balance between the west and 
the east of the country. Results of the pilots will be shared with other departments, in 
order to encourage them to develop similar programs.  
 
(c) 
 Consolidating the National Seeds System subcomponent (US$5.1 million) 
supports the consolidation of the national seed system in Bolivia. It will focus on:  
increasing the use of quality seed in the western departments of the country; improving 
Page  3
the quality of the INIAF seed program laboratories; and strengthening the laws, norms, 
and standards in seed commercialization.  
 
(d) 
Managing national genetic resources subcomponent (US$2.9 million) will 
establish a national network of germplasm banks: The network will be made up of base 
banks, active banks and work banks. The existing Toralapa station will continue to 
function as the base bank for Andean roots and tubers; Andean grains; legumes and 
cereals; and forestry. Other germplasm collections such as recalcitrant seeds (seeds that 
do not survive drying and/or freezing ex-situ), life plant collections and livestock will be 
kept in other appropriate base banks as part of the genetic resources network.  
 
Component 3: Supporting INIAF#s institutional development (US$18.3 million)  
 
Component 3 aims to strengthen INIAF#s institutional and organizational capacity. It 
has two subcomponents.  
 
(a) 
 Improving the organizational and internal capacities of INIAF subcomponent 
(US$17.5 million), focuses on consolidating an institutional management model that 
takes into account INIAF#s national and sub-national roles. Special attention will be 
given to Human Resource Management policies, especially to the adoption of 
recruitment, personal development and reward policy that will allow INIAF to compete 
with universities and other knowledge based organizations. Other functions that will 
receive attention are Financial Management and Resource Management. INIAF will also 
establish its presence in the different parts of the country by opening or improving 
departmental offices.  
 
(b) 
Developing external leadership and collaboration capacities subcomponent 
(US$0.8 million) will promote the institutional strengthening of INIAF as a sectoral 
leader and convenor.  INIAF#s strategy is largely based on putting in place collaborative 
arrangements, through its competitive fund, its research alliances and its technical 
assistance pilots.  The successful implementation of this strategy not only requires 
technical (hard) skills but also social (soft) skills.  Training programs will be established 
to strengthen simultaneously the technical and the social capacity of INIAF#s leadership 
and professional staff, and to promote outreach activities.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (US$1.6 million)  
 
For transparency and management purposes project funded activities to support INIAF 
in the implementation of PISA have been organized in a separate component.  
 
(a) 
 Support to INIAF for implementing PISA subcomponent (US$0.6 million). For 
the duration of the project the INIAF organization will be strengthened in order to 
implement the ambitious program of work and to comply with fiduciary, safeguards and 
accountability standards. For further information see section 4A.  
 
(b) 
Developing an information and M&E system for INIAF subcomponent (US$1.0 
million).  This subcomponent will support project implementation, but will be maintained 
within INIAF after project closure. The M&E system will serve to monitor the progress 
and evaluate the impact of proposed projects activities as well as that of other INIAF#s 
programs.   
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities will be spread across the country, principally in research stations and on 
farmer fields. The research projects funded through the Competitive Fund may be located 
in any part of the country. The Research Alliances will do research at different locations, 
as defined by the origin of the alliance partners. The two technical assistance pilots will 
be located in different zones (Highlands, Valleys or Tropical area). Seed activities will 
initially be focused on the tropical area (soybean) but will then be strengthened in the 
Valleys and Highland areas. Forestry research and technical assistance will be undertaken 
in Forest areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
Environmental safeguards. In preparation of the project INIAF undertook an 
Environmental Assessment (EA). Based on the proposed project interventions, the EA 
identified, analyzed and evaluated potential direct and indirect impacts, both positive and 
negative, and considered the extent to which general conclusions on the use and 
exploitation of natural resources in the project areas can be drawn. The EA was based on 
a
desk review, selected field visits and consultation workshops in areas where the project 
might be active. The EA reviewed the national environmental policy framework, as 
defined by the new Constitution of Bolivia. The new Constitution strongly emphasizes 
and provides a mandate for sustainable resource use in agriculture, forestry, and land 
management in general while defining a new role for the state as the guardian of natural 
resources, in pursuit of a better quality of life and a healthy environment,  The assessment 
concludes that the current public environmental policy as well as the pertinent Bolivian 
Page  5
legislation and the World Bank safeguard policies are largely compatible and that it is 
unlikely that there will be difficulties in implementing the safeguard policies.  
 
The project is not expected to have significant adverse environmental impacts and has 
been classified as a Category B project. The environmental risks of the proposed research 
and technical assistance activities (component 1, 2.1 and 2.2) can be estimated as very 
low given they are small-scale. Instead, the environmental impacts are most often 
expected to be positive from expected improvements in agricultural management and 
reduced pesticide use from greater production efficiency. For component 2, sub-
components 3 and 4 (seeds system and germplasm banks) possible unintended adverse 
effects were identified during project preparation mainly related to pesticide use.  For the 
research fund proposed under component 1 and the research consortia, extension pilot 
programs, agriculture innovation councils proposed by component 2 it is not possible to 
identify and address all likely impacts during project preparation given that the nature of 
the interventions will become known as the collaborations and priorities emerge. These 
adverse risks must be prevented at the stage of research subprojects definition. In this 
regard, forests and natural habitats will require special attention due to the key role they 
play in natural cycles (water, nutrients, biodiversity, etc.) and more so when subject to 
human pressure.  The project environmental management strategy provides for a 
framework approach to safeguards in these cases which has been used effectively in other 
projects such as the ongoing Rural Alliances Project upon which this project builds many 
of its approaches.  
 
OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management). The 
project has broadly reviewed the issues likely to emerge in the environmental and social 
context. To the scope of analysis included: the use of agro-chemicals; water management; 
ground water depletion and conjunctive uses, water quality, land degradation and soil 
erosion, especially where new innovations may quickly be spreading across farmers. 
Unforeseeable risks may occur in very special cases such as disseminating technologies 
that lead to the use of pesticides or substances that can harm natural resources such as 
soil-water-biodiversity if proper measures and capacity-building is not considered.  
 
Based on the EA and potential impacts identified, an environmental management plan 
(EMP) and pesticide management plans have been prepared which will guide project 
safeguard activities during implementation and will be integrated into the operational 
manuals. To address unforeseeable risks, the project will also develop a simple manual of 
good practices associated with the six strategic products: wheat, potato, quinoa, dual 
purpose cattle, horticulture, and forestry (See C2 # Sub-C 1) and the EMP integrates a 
simple framework to assess environmental risks in activities carried-out under demand-
driven sub-projects that may be funded through the research fund and other sub-
components. Furthermore a checklist of prohibited activities is included in the 
environmental management plan, which will be used to assess the acceptability of 
competitive research proposals and activities in the research alliances and technical 
assistance pilots.  
 
Page  6
The Pest Management Plan identifies a series of alternative strategies that may be 
applied and disseminated in project activities in order to avoid pesticide based control of 
insects and diseases. These strategies include agronomic management (through crop 
rotations, intercropping, use of certified seeds, border crops etc.), biological control (by 
means of natural predators), the use of bio-insecticides, legally prescribed sanitary norms, 
and integrated pest management (based on crop monitoring systems and threshold levels 
and a focus on control rather than eradication). Furthermore the pest management plan 
has identified a blacklist of chemical compounds forbidden to be used by Bolivian 
legislation and by World Bank norms, as well as a list of pesticides of low toxicity that 
may be used in integrated pest management strategies. The Pest Management Plan further 
provides guidelines on the application of low toxicity pesticides and on mitigation 
actions. The Pest Management Plan outlines the need for training and capacity building 
among professionals, individual farmers and farmer groups and highlights the need for 
mass media use, in appropriate languages, to communicate pest management issues.  The 
Pest Management plan proposes a permanent evaluation system, in order to continuously 
improvement pest management strategies and in order to further sharpen the Pest 
Management Plan itself. Since the precise location of project activities, and therefore the 
precise nature of the pest management issues will be defined in the course of the project, 
the Pest Management Plan outline the general principles but is not able as yet to identify 
concrete and specific actions.  
 
Social Safeguards.  In preparation of the project INIAF undertook a Social Assessment. 
The work was conducted through a systematic analysis which included the following key 
issues: i) Socio-cultural and gender diversity of beneficiaries in the different project 
components, ii) Existing institutions and social organizations (standards and coordination 
mechanisms), iii) Analytical description of the key stakeholders identified; iv) 
Mechanisms for consultation and participation (existing and applicable); v) Description 
of political and social risk elements. The project has found new opportunities in the 
setting of the new State Constitution established by the Constitution and which 
mainstreams indigenous peoples, native and peasant rights and gender equity. During this 
process interviews with key stakeholders were organized and consultations were carried 
out in five macro-ecoregions (Altiplano, Valles, Tropics, Chaco and Amazonia). These 
workshops were attended by 142 men and 66 women representatives from public and 
private service operators and agricultural producers of different crops.  
 
The largest share of consultations took place in the Highlands, followed by 
organizations of the Chaco, the Amazon and the Tropics. The contributions of men and 
women also differ regionally, but involved mostly women farmers, but few have access 
to decision-making and participation when it comes to issues of technical assistance or 
extension due to insufficient training, subordination or time constraints due to other 
responsibilities. Most raised the need to develop strategies that incorporate the central 
women occupy in production.  
 
The consultations also recommended that organizations INIAF should play a 
coordinating role, as in some communities various institutions conduct research without 
coordination. Partnerships between municipal and departmental governments were 
suggested in order to promote local knowledge. For the Amazon the recommendation is 
Page  7
to promote research that is appropriate to the characteristics of local ecosystems and 
targets forest management.  
 
Regarding OP/BP 4.11 on Indigenous Peoples, the SA considers INIAF beneficiaries to 
be rural populations. Therefore, beneficiaries amount to approximately 3,109,095 people, 
of whom 1,606,744 are men and 1,502,351 are women. Making projections from the 
latest 2001Census, 61.97% of the target population is identified as indigenous and native 
peoples. The SA therefore recommends that the project should not prepare an Indigenous 
Peoples Plan (IPP) but that instead the whole project should be developed and considered 
as an IPP, and therefore the actions and activities must be conducted taking into account 
this framework. One of the implications is to emphasize consultative processes in the 
development of the different project activities.  
 
The SA systematized the information on the various indigenous groups and identified 
socio-cultural and organizational characteristics that differentiate the communities and 
organizations from Andean highlands and lowlands. The new constitution recognizes 34 
indigenous peoples and states that each department or local government should use both 
Spanish and the predominant language of the area. In this context, the communication 
strategy of the project is to design communication products adapted to the objectives and 
sought results. The SA also systematized the different territorial levels and areas of rural 
economic organizations, OECAS, which during the consultation process asked for 
different levels of technical assistance related to their levels of organization and their 
access to markets.  
 
For these purposes a social consultation and participation plan has been prepared and 
budgeted that emphasizes the creation of new income and employment opportunities, 
social inclusion, enlarged participation, enhanced transparency and social overview of 
project activities and improved equity in access to project activities and results. To put 
this plan in place four types of actions are key: INIAF staff must be prepared and must 
have the means to engage in the social interactions required for successful project 
implementation; social vulnerability patterns must be mapped and possible partners 
organizations for INIAF in each intervention area must be identified; INIAF procedures 
must prioritize the participation of vulnerable groups, recognizing their social 
organizations; communication and information strategies must be appropriate to the 
target groups that they wish to reach, in terms of language, choice of medium, and type of 
message. These actions must be specified for the different geographical parts of the 
country, recognizing the major differences to be found between different indigenous 
groups. A further finding in the plan is that INIAF must manage the expectations in the 
target audiences, clarifying that it will not be able to directly address their concerns.   
 
The social consultation and participation plan counts with a budget of USD 250K and is 
focused around the following actions: improving transparency, consultation and 
information sharing with producer organizations;  integrating producer organizations in 
research and technical assistance activities; strengthening farm organizations and their 
leadership for accessing technical assistance and new technologies; participatory research 
and technical assistance with forest managers; developing outreach programs specifically 
Page  8
focused on women#s needs; community based monitoring of local project activities; 
monitoring compliance with the social consultation and participation plan. INIAF will 
maintain a social specialist on its staff to ensure the implementation of the plan.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
OP/BP. 4.04 (Natural Habitats) and OP/BP 4.36 (Forests). The project will undertake 
forestry research and technical assistance, including both natural forests and plantations. 
Such agricultural and forestry research is usually done on plots of small size, while 
adaptive testing and technical assistance activities may cover larger areas. The EA has 
not identified risks for significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats. Yet 
applied research is aimed at developing production technologies for adoption in medium 
or large scale and there may be indirect risks. A second potential risk factor comes from 
the fact that not all activities will be carried out on INIAF#s own experimental fields 
where oversight can be easily achieved. Research or technical assistance in existing 
forests may cause possible unintended degradation of habitats as a direct effect.  A 
negative list has been prepared to prevent activities with possible negative impacts on the 
forest and its natural habitat, including:  
 
#
Prohibiting introduction or inclusion (if they have been introduced) of species on 
the red list of invasive species (except under strict protocols in controlled experimental 
fields where INIAF can guarantee that there will be no spread).  These protocols are 
being integrated into the project EMP as well as the framework and operational manuals;  
 
#
No large scale adaptive research in habitats that already have been degraded will 
be supported;  
 
#
No introduction of livestock (cattle and goats) under open access native forest 
canopy or native forest in regeneration will be considered for funding;  
 
#
Ban on cutting native forests (especially primary and secondary regeneration), full 
cleaning of the undergrowth and the practice of burning (within or adjacent to the 
ecosystem). Only exception would be demonstrable health issues.  
 
Regarding the OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, this safeguard is not triggered 
because INIAF will not perform activities that will require it. No land purchases will be 
made for the demonstration plots, which will done on the property of community 
members. The project will not constrain any access to public lands.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower#s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies. The National Institute for 
Agricultural and Forestry Innovation (INIAF), the proposed implementing agency, was 
established in 2008 and does not have deep experience in safeguard policies. INIAF has 
started to participate in Bank led safeguard management courses. Safeguard training 
activities, safeguard monitoring are included in the project budget. Resources to facilitate 
Page  9
social consultations and participatory approaches have also been budgeted.  It was agreed 
that a full time social safeguard and a full time environmental safeguard specialist will be 
hired, reporting directly to the Project Coordinator. They will interact with the 
coordinators of the (sub)components, placed in the regular INIAF organizational 
structure. It was agreed that the MANOP will include the Social Assessment and 
INIAF#s social consultation and participation plan.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Grievance mechanism: Due to the complex and sensitive operating environment in which 
this project will occur, the team will ensure that an effective and accessible grievance 
mechanism is established (or built upon) that can capture and manage grievances and 
public input throughout the project process, from preparation through execution. The 
grievance mechanism will be established under the authority of the INIAF Board. World 
Bank implementation support missions will revisit the effectiveness of the grievance 
mechanism.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/26/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/26/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/26/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/26/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2011 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  10
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  11
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wilhelmus Gerardus Janssen 
12/02/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ricardo Larrobla 
12/03/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ruth Llanos 
12/03/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
12/03/2010 
Comments:   
