                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                Report No.: 62291


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Bosnia and Herzegovina                Project ID: P108000
Project Name: Sava Waterway Rehabilitation Project
Task Team Leader: Richard Martin Humphreys
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15,        Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: ECSSD                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Regional integration
(33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           30.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                         0.00
        Local Sources of Borrowing Country                               5.00
                                                                         5.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed project development objective is to improve the operational performance and
safety of commercial and leisure vessels on the Sava River, thereby contributing to improved
utilization of the river ports. The project proposes to achieve this objective through the following
three components: (i) the rehabilitation of the Sava River within Bosnia and Herzegovina; (ii)
targeted investments to improve the operational performance of, and access to, the river ports on
the Sava River in Bosnia and Herzegovina; and (iii) necessary implementation assistance and
institutional support.
  The proposed project is also benefiting from the establishment and administration of a free
standing Hybrid Trust Fund (TF) to administer the EU Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA)
Grant. The proposed Project Development Objective for these trust fund activities is to support
the conduct of key preparatory work.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed investments include activities related to the enhancement of the navigability of the
river/waterway, together with associated potential investments in port infrastructure in the river
ports. Specifically, works will involve dredging of the main fairway to increase the water depth,
construction of bank protection work, potentially involving land take, groynes and sills, to
alleviate erosion and impede sedimentation in the channel, and small bridge
rehabilitation/construction. In addition, the waterway has a number of areas along its banks that
are protected, or of special scientific or environmental significance. A more detailed description
of the provisional components is provided in the following paragraphs:

  (a) Component 1: The necessary river rehabilitation works. The first component comprises
the necessary civil works, involving river dredging and training works, riverbank protection and
where necessary land acquisition, site clearance, and the placing of rock or braced blocks, or
geotextile material, to return the Sava River to Class Va status between Brcko and the
international border with Serbia at the confluence of the Drina River and to Class IV status
between Brcko and the confluence with the Una River at the point where the border with Croatia
diverts from the Sava River.
  (b) Component 2: Targeted investments to improve the operational performance of the river
ports. The second component has two sub-components: (i) targeted investments to improve the
operational performance of the river ports, including, but not restricted to, Brcko port; and (ii)
investments to improve road and rail access in Brcko to facilitate plans to concession Brcko port
in parallel to the Bank financed project.
  (i)    The first sub-component provisionally includes the following: (i) the completion of
works on the reconstruction of the quay wall; (ii) the connection of the main rail track with
tracks within the port; (iii) the procurement of forklifts; and (iv) the procurement of new bucket
grabs for the gantry cranes. A call to procure consultants to prepare the detailed design and
ESIA for the civil works was published on March 7, 2011.
  (ii) The second sub-component supports the proposed plans of BD Authorities to reroute the
rail tracks away from the city center to avoid the need for freight trains to traverse the city center.
In addition, approximately 2.5 km of the road access to the port needs to be asphalted. A call to
procure consultants to prepare the detailed design and ESIA for the civil works was published on
March 7, 2011;
  (c) Component 3 - Implementation Assistance and Institutional Support. This component
would provide necessary project management and implementation assistance to the project
implementation unit. Provisionally, the following sub-components were identified for potential
inclusion in the project: (i) the procurement of a qualified firm to supervise the civil works in the
waterway, and for the access rail and road links in Brcko; (ii) the procurement of a qualified firm
to supervise the safeguard aspects for the works in the waterway, and for the access rail and road
links in Brcko; and (iii) the procurement of consultants to prepare bidding documents to manage
and maintain the waterway using an output and performance based approach after the project.
  The Project also involves the establishment and administration by the Bank of a free standing
Recipient-Executed Trust Fund (RETF) to manage the EU Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA)
Grant Monies. These monies will be used to undertake the necessary preparatory works for the
Sava Waterways Rehabilitation Project in BiH including the de-mining of the south bank of the
Sava River, between Belgrade and Brcko, and the preparation of a detailed design for the
rehabilitation works in the waterway, and the associated Environmental Impact Assessment
(ESIA). The RETF includes the following components and related activities:
 (i)    Component 1 - The preparation of the detailed design, tender documents and the
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, Environmental Social Management Plan
(ESIA/ESMP) for the rehabilitation works to return the Sava River to Class Va status between
the port of Brcko and the confluence of the Sava River with the Danube River in Belgrade;
 (ii) Component 2 - the demining of the south bank of the Sava River in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, between the confluence with the Una River and the Drina River, and the removal
of any UXO in the waterway; and
 (iii) Component 3 - the hiring the international demining expert to supervise the component.

D. Project location (if known)
The location of the project is the basin of the River Sava in Bosnia and Herzegovina, between the
confluence of the River Sava with the River Danube at Belgrade, and the confluence of the River
Sava and the River Una in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The broader program extends to the port of
Sisak in Croatia.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Borrower is familiar with the Bank safeguard policies triggered by this project given its
experience developed during preparation and implementation of similar Bank-financed projects.
The environmental and social aspects related to the proposed new investments will be
implemented under the supervision of an assigned specialist within the respective PMU. Civil
works contracts for specific port rehabilitation investments will include provisions on how to
address environmental and social mitigation and monitoring aspects during works. The project
environmental and social management plan will recommend the appropriate institutions
responsible to implement the related environmental and social aspects.

 The de-mining activities and removal of UXO and other related mine debris is the responsibility
of the Demining Commission at the state level (as per the BiH Demining Law), which has the
BH Mining Action Center (BHMAC) as its technical body. BH MAC will be acting, under the
MCT, as the implementing unit for the demining operations to be funded from the IPA grant. All
mining operations if BiH are following Standard Operational Procedures (SOP) that are built on
the fundamentals of International Standards for Mine Clearance Operations (IMAS). These
include adequate guidance on technical and safety measures (as well as training) that are
implemented at each site during all stages requested for de-mining activities (site survey, land
release, mine clearance and mine stockpile destruction).

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Naima A Hasci (ECSS4)
   Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSS3)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    The project is proposed as category A for environmental assessment purposes given the
specific rehabilitation infrastructure works related to Components 1 and 2. All EIA will be
undertaken by parties independent of the design or works. The Client is finalizing the approval
process for the project EIA including an EMP related to the specific infrastructure investments
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes         No         TBD
proposed on the river sector between Brcko (BiH) and Sisak (Croatia) in BiH This EIA was
prepared by Croatian authorities and reviewed by the EU experts/consultants and was generally
approved with some recommendations to be done in the further phases. It also awaits Bank
review and approval in line with OP 4.01. The EIA with EMP for the sector Belgrade-Brcko will
be prepared as part of the IPA project and will meet the requirements of the national legislation
and well as the EU and World Bank environmental and social provisions. Furthermore, an ESA
with ESMP will be developed by Client for the targeted investments under Component 2 that
will improve specific infrastructure related to river ports operational performance (e.g.,
reconstruction of a quay wall and rail tracks connection between city and port). For the de-
mining activities funded by the RETF, the IMAS including specific measures for environment
protection and safety and occupational health procedures will be attached to the Contractors
technical specifications and implemented and monitored at the site. These international standard
measures do meet the OP 4.01 requirements. The actual demining operations will be supervised
by an International Consultant during the entire duration of works and will provide assessment of
activities progress as well as of implementation and application of environmental protection
measures at site in line with IMAS provisions. Finally, the draft ToRs for the ESIA funded by
the RETF will be disclosed in Infoshop and in-country prior to Appraisal to meet the OP 4.01
document disclosure requirement.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                          X
    The waterway has a number of areas along its banks that are protected, or of special scientific
or environmental significance. The policy is triggered since project interventions including
dredging, river banks rehabilitation, and possibly land clearing might be located in the proximity
of protected areas including Ramsar sites, for which provisions of appropriate conservation and
mitigation measures will be necessary during works.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
    The preliminary EIA (FS stage) has determined the possibility of archeological chance finds
in the Sava riverbeds or river banks areas.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    A Social Assessment will be undertaken to determine the social issues and local context
within which the project is being implemented. This policy is triggered as the project activities
anticipate potential land acquisition in the context of the river correction works, and the works in
Brcko town. The team will support the client to prepare Resettlement and /or Land Acquisition
Action Plan and Socio-Economic Census/Survey and disclosed in country and in the Infoshop.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                       X
    The policy is triggered since the Sava River is an International waterway, passing through 4
riparian countries, and is linked hydrologically to the Black Sea basin and the Danube sub-basin.
As a follow-up to consultations with LEGEC and LEGEM, the team requested the Sava River
Commission to inform these countries about the project goals (including the de-mining activities)
during the 3rd Joint Statement Implementation Meeting that will be held in Vienna in April
2011. A copy of the final announcement of this meeting, the agenda, and relevant presentation
and the Minutes of the discussions will be sent for Bank’s records in order to meet the OP 7.50.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 04/30/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before
   appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form
   and language that are accessible to Project Affected People. The final ESIA and the
   Resettlement Policy Framework would be expected to be commissioned and are expected to
   be available by the scheduled Appraisal date of September 15, 2012 The Bank#s policy
   requires that the specific studies and expected timeline should be specified during the PAD-
   stage and recorded in the ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Richard Martin Humphreys                                    05/16/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Agnes I. Kiss                                               05/16/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Henry G. R. Kerali                                          05/16/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
