Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/27/2011 
Report No.:  AC5600
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P114810 
Project Name:  Amazon Region Protected Areas Program Phase II (GEF) 
Task Team Leader:  Adriana Moreira 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Central government 
administration (20%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (25%);Biodiversity (25%);Environmental policies and 
institutions (24%);Participation and civic engagement (13%);Land administration and 
management (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
15.90 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
25.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
30.00 
 
World Wildlife Fund 
15.00
70.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Global Environmental Objective is the same as the Project Development Objective 
(PDO), which is to expand and consolidate the protected areas system in the Brazilian 
Amazon region and to strengthen mechanisms for its financial sustainability.  
 
The specific objectives of the project are: (i) to create 13.5 million hectares of additional 
new protected areas in the Brazilian Amazon; (ii) to consolidate 30 million hectares of 
protected areas; and (iii) to further capitalize the ARPA Endowment Fund (FAP) by 80% 
above current level of funds.   
 
3. Project Description 
As most of the targets of ARPAs phase 1 have been met, the present proposal for phase 2 
will scale up the work carried out during phase 1, building on its achievements, 
Page  2
innovations and lessons learned. ARPA phase 2 will retain the structure of phase 1, and 
include the following components:  
 
Component 1 - Creation of new protected areas. ARPA phase 2 aims to create 13.5 
million hectares of new protected areas in the Amazonian biome over a four year period.  
These protected areas will include parks, biological reserves, ecological stations, 
extractive reserves, and sustainable development reserves. These areas will be divided 
between strict protection and sustainable use PAs.  The number of hectares allocated to 
each type of protected area will be determined once the process of identifying protected 
areas is underway, considering the needs of local populations and the conservation 
priorities.  
 
The selection of PAs will be based on the Map of Priority Areas for the Conservation, 
Sustainable Use and Benefit-Sharing of the Brazilian Biodiversity, which was updated 
from 2005 to 2007 as part of ARPA phase 1. According to the Ministry of Environment, 
the selection of protected areas should take into account the most recent scientific 
information, with special consideration for the location of indigenous peoples, intensity 
of threats of deforestation and land conversion, habitat connectivity, and potential to 
offset climate change and generate revenues through carbon market or payment for 
ecosystem services mechanisms.   At each level federal, state, and local officials will rely 
on the protected area creation guidebook developed as part of ARPA phase 1 as guidance 
for selecting and designating protected areas. Furthermore, two new studies of 
conservation planning methods will be carried out to supplement the Estratégia de 
Conservação e Investimento (ECI, Conservation and Investment Strategy) developed in 
phase 1.  
 
The procedures for establishing protected areas are determined by the National System 
of Protected Areas (SNUC), and are detailed in Brazilian federal law No. 9.985, June 18, 
2000, and Decree no 4.340, August 22, 2002.  Public consultation will be carried out for 
each new protected area to be created, with studies on environment, land rights, and 
socioeconomic data informing the final decisions about the location of new protected 
areas.  Additionally, the implementing agencies will undertake public consultations and 
circulation of the draft decrees of protected area creation.  
 
Component 2 - Consolidation of protected areas. Consolidation, or formalizing 
management of protected areas, is essential to achieving conservation aims, and to 
guaranteeing that conservation areas remain protected long into the future. ARPA phase 2 
plans to consolidate 30 million hectares of PAs. The ARPA phase 1 experience indicated 
that to be considered consolidated a protected area should meet the following 
requirements: (i) the PA physical limits should be defined and demarcated; (ii) a private 
property assessment has been conducted; (iii) the PAs provisional protection plan is 
functioning; (iv) a PA Management Council is functioning; (v) a management plan has 
been established; (vi) a critical subprograms management plan has been implemented; 
(vii) a management plan for environmental conservation is monitored; (viii) there is a 
buffer zone control and a protection plan; (viii) an administration plan, including 
maintenance, and a staffing plan are in place; (ix) there is infrastructure and equipment; 
Page  3
(x) there are institutional cooperation arrangements; and (xi) the PA financial 
sustainability has been assessed.  
 
Main activities of consolidation will include land demarcation, provision of basic 
equipment for enforcement, staffing in protected areas, and capacity building for staff.  
New management plans will be produced with a special focus on the impacts of climate 
change, community-based management, and protecting threatened species.  Actions taken 
in the consolidation process will depend on the type of protected area, and the current 
level of management capacity. PA management councils will be created to foster more 
participatory management. ARPA phase 1 focused primarily on consolidating strict 
protection PAs. The second phase will focus on replicating consolidation activities in 
sustainable use PAs.  
 
The Brazilian government distinguishes between two stages for consolidation in its 
Conservation and Investment Strategy. The first stage of consolidation is intended for 
new protected areas, which will receive support from ARPA for a maximum period of 
two years. Financial support will be determined by a budget specified in the ECI. The 
first stage of consolidation focuses on getting the minimum number of staff and basic 
equipment in the PAs, as well as establishing PA management councils to participate in 
and oversee PA management. Once the protected areas have undergone the first stage of 
consolidation, they will be elegible to progress to a second stage, in which the protected 
areas will continue to improve management and monitoring in line with the plans and 
budgets established in ARPA phase 1. The second stage increases the staff working in the 
PAs as needed, improving demarcation and geo-referencing of the PA, and ensuring that 
the Advisory Councils, financial management, and procurement are functioning as 
planned.  
 
Component 3 - Long-term sustainability of protected areas. One of the main 
achievements of phase 1 was the establishment and initial capitalization of the Fundo de 
Áreas Protegidas (FAP), ARPAs endowment fund, which reached US$ 27.2 million at 
the end of phase 1.  FAP was capitalized with resources from ARPAs donors (GEF, KfW, 
and WWF) and with over US$ 3 million from other donors, such as O Boticário and 
Natura (two Brazilian cosmetic companies). The diversity of donors demonstrates 
ARPAs high profile as a major project in the Amazon.  
 
This component will work to generate additional revenues for FAP, with a goal of 
increasing the endowment fund to US$ 49 million (an increase of 80%) by the end of 
phase 2.  It will also support institutional capacity building to develop effective and 
transparent mechanisms for the disbursement of FAP resources to ensure the proper post-
consolidation management of protected areas. Other options, in addition to the 
endowment, will be explored under this component to assure the necessary financial 
sustainability of the protected areas system. This will include advancing the search for 
and testing of appropriate revenue-generating mechanisms for PA sustainability and 
income-generating activities for communities in buffer zone areas to complement existing 
government mechanisms and fully meet all protected areas management needs.  As part 
of this work, studies on potential returns of income generating activities will be carried 
Page  4
out, and financial sustainability plans will be generated, taking into account different 
costs for different types of protected areas. Under this component, GEF resources will 
support studies for potential revenue generating mechanisms for protected areas focusing 
especially on climate change related mechanisms (REDD+) and support FUNBIO in the 
development of fundraising strategies.  
 
Component 4 - Project coordination, monitoring, and management. This component will 
focus on improving management and monitoring based on the arrangements established 
during phase 1, and will include work across the three main components. This component 
will support the improved operation of the Project Coordination Unit (UCP) within the 
Ministry of Environment (MMA), as well as the operation of FUNBIO.  
 
This component will also support the strengthening and coordination of the ARPA 
programs advisory board (namely the Technical Forum, Scientific Advisory Panel, and 
Project Commissions). During phase 1, MMA and FUNBIO developed several 
innovative coordination and management systems, such as: (i) the Contas Vinculadas that 
allow for more autonomy of PA administrators to spend small amounts of their budgets; 
(ii) the Cérebro system used by FUNBIO and PA administrators to plan and monitor PA 
budgets; (iii) the Conservation and Investment Strategy, which is the projects budget 
planning framework; and (iv) ARPAs Integrated System of Coordination and 
Management (SiSARPA), an IT tool that coordinates the Cérebro system with the 
National Registry of Protected Areas, facilitating communication among project 
participants at all levels. These innovations will be maintained and improved during 
phase 2.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Brazilian Amazon Region, spreading over the following states: Amazonas, Pará, Acre, 
Amapá, Rondônia, Roraima, Mato Grosso and Tocantins.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO) 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO) 
Ms Adriana Moreira (LCSEN) 
Ms Agnes Velloso (LCSSD) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is expected to generate a positive impact on the environment, with the 
expansion of the Protected Areas. The creation and consolidation of PAs has proved to be 
a
viable strategy to reduce biodiversity loss and deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon, 
through the containment of anthropogenic pressures and the promotion of the sustainable 
use of natural resources. Also, the simple fact of designating land-use is already hugely 
effective in counteracting the illegal land market, by conferring permanent private and 
public land ownership rights.  
 
Social issues to be considered in relation to project implementation include poverty, and 
the unique socio-economic issues inhabitants in the Amazon region face - land tenure 
issues, ensuring equal participation in terms of gender and ethnicity in participatory 
natural resource management, indigenous peoples'rights, and involuntary resettlement, 
especially potential adverse effects from possible restrictions on natural resource uses.  
 
With respect to social issues, it is expected that the project will have largely positive 
impacts since PAs are important to secure land tenure for traditional communities and 
eliminates or greatly reduces the risk of these communities being expelled or losing 
access to natural resources for their livelihoods. However, given the success of Phase 1 in 
creating new PAs, there is now less land available for the creation of additional protected 
areas, specifically in the deforestation frontier. This aspect increases the likelihood for 
conflict, despite the existence of a strong legal legislation framework for public 
consultation for creation of new PAs (Law of the National System of Protected Areas - 
SNUC).  Nevertheless, the process to review and update the Amazon portion of the Map 
of Priority Areas for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Brazilian Biodiversity, 
supported by ARPA I in 2006, incorporated robust community participation aspects that 
contributed to mitigate potential conflicts in the process of creation of new PAs. This 
map will help identification of potential areas for creation of new PAs under ARPA II.  
 
Page  6
To further address the issue of eventual conflicts, the  creation process for all PAs will 
involve broad public consultation. During Phase 1, the governmental agencies 
implementing ARPA increased capacity to conduct public consultation processes. It is 
now widely accepted that public consultation allows for adjustments in the PA creation 
process, responding to needs and demands of local stakeholders. During the previous 
operation 10.8 million hectares of sustainable use reserves were created combining social 
demands and priority areas for biodiversity conservation and also implementing 
subprojects for alternative sustainable income generation in communities located in 
buffer zones of threatened protected areas. ARPA Phase 2 will invest in improving the 
capacity of local communities to access governmental policies and programs directed at 
the sustainable use of natural resources. The preparation of environmental, 
socioeconomic and land tenure diagnoses of the selected priority areas will also be 
required for the creation of Protected Areas due to the characteristics of land tenure in the 
Amazon region, where a significant portion of the forest areas indicated by the Map of 
Priority Areas comprises unclaimed public lands, a condition that minimizes the necessity 
of land acquisition by the project. This approach was successful in Phase 1 and is 
expected to be replicated in Phase 2.  
 
Social safeguard operational policies triggered by the project are OP 4.10, Indigenous 
Peoples, and OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement.  
 
Consultations with indigenous people
s´ representatives were carried out on the project 
and the draft IPPF prior to appraisal. Indigenous responses on the project and the IPPF 
were quite positive.  The overall objective of the site-specific Indigenous Peoples Action 
Plans (IPAPs) to be developed and supported under the project is to foster collaborative 
management arrangements between neighboring indigenous peoples and the protected 
area, and to mitigate any potential natural resource use restrictions for indigenous peoples 
inside the protected area as well as to ensure indigenous access to sacred sites.  The IPPF 
has been already publicly disseminated. One of the lessons of phase 1 was that the project 
should focus on indigenous communities neighboring PAs and assess the degree to which 
the potential natural resource restrictions in the PA exist and could be mitigated and how 
indigenous communities could become more involved in co-management arrangements.  
Wider indigenous peoples´ issues are the focus of other government actions, such as the 
new mission of FUNAI for protection and promotion of indigenous rights, the successful 
PPTAL (concluded), which demarcated over 45 million hectares of indigenous lands in 
the Amazon, and the PDPI, -, both subprojects of the PPG-7 (Brazilian Rainforest 
Conservation Pilot Program) - and other governmental and nongovernmental programs.  
 
It is not expected that physical involuntary resettlement will occur, because the project 
has formally committed to not include any PAs that might require physical resettlement 
and/or land acquisition.  Nonetheless, a Resettlement Planning Framework (RPF) was 
developed.  Overall, the project is expected to contribute to positive social outcomes 
relating, for example, to increased well-being and livelihood security for populations 
living in sustainable use conservation units, as well as improved natural resource and 
environmental conditions and potential economic benefits to local populations from 
improved tourism, local involvement in PA management as well as additional or 
Page  7
improved opportunities from park management and nature-related tourism, among others.  
However, some livelihood activities in sustainable use protected areas could be 
potentially adversely impacted by restrictions, which is also true for integral conservation 
units.  These potential adverse economic impacts will be mitigated by the project's 
Process Framework.  Both the RPF and the Process Framework have been consulted and 
already publicly disseminated.  
 
Finally, the implementation agencies (MMA, ICMBio and State agencies) have already 
developed and successfully implemented an environmental management framework, 
including a resettlement framework, for the ARPA Phase 1. These frameworks will be 
strengthened along with the existing conflict resolution mechanisms which could include 
the creation of multiagency working groups to deal with specific issues. Socio-
environmental aspects and safeguards will be monitored at the PA level by the 
responsible agencies and at the Project level by the Ministry of the Environment (MMA).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential positive impact of the project for biodiversity is significant given the major 
focus of the project in the creation and consolidation of Protected Areas in the Amazon 
Basin, including parks, biological reserves, ecological stations, extractive reserves and 
sustainable development reserves. In these latter two types of areas, traditional 
communities and indigenous groups can plan land use aiming at income generation 
through the continuation of their traditional practices, while averting deforestation. 
Traditional communities and indigenous peoples land management and production are 
generally compatible and benign in terms of impacts on biodiversity, the changing 
context surrounding community lands bring increasing pressure to carry out non-
traditional forms of land use and management.  Project activities and capacity-building 
will seek to foster conservation and sustainable management of natural resources while 
providing tools such as participatory diagnostics and planning activities, strengthening of 
local organizations, participatory monitoring and evaluation that will generate an 
improved platform for community decision-making on a sustainable use of the available 
natural resources.  
 
There may also be a potential for nonphysical displacement such as when the creation or 
consolidation of Protected Areas causes local populations to have restricted or even to 
lose access to natural resources they previously used.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to mitigate these adverse impacts, the previous operation (ARPA Phase 1) 
applied a Process Framework that included a range of approaches from participatory co-
management to the development of alternative livelihood activities. Additionally, the 
Page  8
previous operation was important in providing the responsible governmental agencies 
with the capacity and means to improve monitoring and control actions directed at the use 
of natural resources in PAs.  Lessons learned during the previous operation were applied 
to the development of the Process Framework for ARPA Phase2.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During project preparation, the Environmental Assessment (EA),  Process Framework 
(PF) and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) were prepared and consulted, 
as well as publicly disseminated prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/27/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/18/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/25/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/29/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  10
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Moreira 
04/15/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Adriana Moreira 
04/15/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky 
03/14/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
04/26/2011 
Comments:   
