                                                                                      59298

                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/26/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Brazil                              Project ID: P125006
                                             Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Brazil: N2O Emission Reduction Project
Task Team Leader: Sebastian Martin Scholz
Estimated Appraisal Date:                    Estimated Board Date: N/A
February 16, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSEN                         Lending Instrument: Spanish Carbon Fund
Sector: Environment
Theme: Carbon Finance
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source: Spanish Carbon Fund
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing               Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project       Yes [ ]                  No [X]


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:
The development objective of the proposed project is to reduce emissions of N2O, a powerful
greenhouse gas, which would, in the absence of the project, have been emitted into the
atmosphere contributing to the damaging effects of climate change.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:
The French chemical company ,,Rhodia Group owns and operates an adipic acid production
plant in Paulinia, in the state of São Paulo, Brazil. The adipic acid plant in Paulinia was
constructed in 1965 and expanded in 1996 and 2001.

As a consequence of the incentives created by the CDM, Rhodia Group installed an N2O
collection and thermal decomposition process equipment to the then already operating adipic
acid plant in 2006, which did not imply the expansion of the already existing facility in Paulina.
Before that, the project had been registered under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) in
December 2005.
The thermal decomposition installation reduces GHG emissions compared to a baseline situation
in which N2O would be released to the atmosphere in the waste gas stream of the adipic acid
production chain. The difference of the baseline and the scenario with installed N2O oxidizer
results in approximately 42 million tCO2e (i.e., Certified Emission Reductions, or CERs in
short) for the first crediting period between 2007 and 2013. Verifications as required by CDM
regulations are being conducted on a regular basis and around 600,000 ERs are currently being
issued every month. Over three dozen verifications and issuances of the project have been
completed by the UN CDM Executive Board so far.

A license to operate the plant was provided by Brazilian authorities in 2005 and has been
recently renewed till 2013. No complaints about the project have surfaced in the five years that it
has been operating.

The World Banks Spanish Carbon Fund commitment to purchase ERs will end on December
31, 2013 and the Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) will define this date as the
closing date of the project, clearly identifying the Banks supervision period.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
The Brazil N2O Emission Reduction Project is located in the Campinas Metropolitan Region,
one of the most developed regions in the country. The Campinas Metro Region has an excellent
infrastructure compared to other regions of Brazil, and thus attracts different industries.

More specifically, the project is located in Paulínia, a small municipality with eighty thousand
inhabitants, situated NW of the city of Campinas. Paulínia has one of the most important
petrochemical industry districts in the country, which includes the Paulínia Refinery (REPLAN),
the largest oil refinery in Brazil.

The regions main environmental challenges are air and water quality degradation, caused by
urban sanitation deficiencies, transportation related emissions and industrial activities. The
region is densely populated, but its air quality levels are generally in compliance with Brazilian
standards.

However, ground-level ozone levels in some specific spots, such as Paulínia, may exceed
national standards during a few days of the year. Looking to improve air quality, the São Paulo
State Environmental Agency (CETESB) defined specific air emissions standards for the
Campinas Metro Region.

Paulínia is situated inside the Piracicaba River Basin, one of the most important rivers of São
Paulo State, responsible for water supplies of the Campinas Metro Region and part of the São
Paulo Metro Region.

The Paulínia Industrial District is located in the Atibaia Basin, a Piracicaba tributary, draining
important counties, such as Bragança Paulista, Campinas, Limeira, Americana, Piracicaba and
Paulínia. The Atibaia River supplies water for the city of Campinas, among others. After passing
through Paulínia, the river joins other tributaries, and forms the Piracicaba River.

The Piracicaba basin is considered one of the most contaminated in the country, due lack of
urban sanitation and industrial activities. In the 90s, the São Paulo State Government initiated a
comprehensive basin reclamation program, with the goal of restoring the Piracicaba basin water
quality by 2030.

The São Paulo State has a distinct environmental institutional capacity. The São Paulo State
pollution Law dates back to 1976, and its environmental agency was created at the same time.
The São Paulo State Environmental Agency (CETESB) is probably the best equipped agency in
the country, and is in charge of licensing and supervision of the main industrial activities in the
state. All environmental aspects related to Rhodia's industrial complex are controlled by
CETESBs local office in Paulínia.


E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
Rhodia Group has a comprehensive Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) management
system and conducts numerous actions promoting environmental protection. The Group has
introduced a global reporting system for accidents and incidents that have an impact on the
environment, and improved the management of its discharges and emissions, among other
activities. The EHS policies and programs of Rhodia Group are described in its annual report
"Essential Rhodia". 1 The Groups operations in Brazil have a standing ISO 14001-2004
certificate, among other quality certificates, and follow an EHS integrated management system
developed by Rhodia.

The Paulínia industrial complex also has a specific EHS management plan, with numerous
measures to eliminate or offset adverse environmental impacts, or reduce them to acceptable
levels. The facilitys EHS management system is denominated SIMSER, the Portuguese
abbreviation of ,,Integrated Safety & Environment Management System.

EHS measures are in general the responsibility of the Paulínia Corporate Unit EHS/Emergency
Division, formed by 40 full time staff, amongst them 24 dedicated to emergency activities, 14
staff for EHS issues, and two assistants.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
   Augusto Mendonça ­ Environmental Specialist
   Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa ­ Social Specialist




1
    Available at www.rodhia.com
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                  Yes         No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
Given that the thermal reduction process is ongoing in an existing chemical facility, the proposed
approach is to ensure compliance with all applicable Federal and Sao Paulo State environmental
laws and regulations as well as applicable World Bank Group Environment, Health, and Safety
standards (in particular, the WBG Industry Sector Guidelines for Petroleum-based Polymers
Manufacturing). The Terms of Reference for the environmental audit, which is being conducted
at present by specialized independent consultants, includes a thorough review of all baseline
information such as: air emissions and odors, water use, treatment, and effluents, soil and
underground water quality, corporate health and safety standards and reporting, legacy issues
with regard to environmental compliance, public complaints, associated facilities, monitoring
capabilities, emergency response, health and safety (community and worker) among other
aspects.

In addition, the Task Team has visited the site and interviewed local municipal and state
environmental authorities. The audit report will comprehensively cover these characteristics by
systematically screening the safeguards-relevant aspects of the N2O abatement unit, the adipic
acid plant, the industrial complex in which the adipic acid plant is located as well as Rhodias
operations in Brazil in general. In addition, all the compliance measures for the ERPA phase of
the project will be included in an Environmental Management Plan that will be referenced in the
agreement. Any non-compliance during the project life by the company would be considered in
this document, including the measures for Bank supervision and reporting and applicable
national legal requirements.

An independent consultation with key stakeholders will be part of the audit report and the
findings from these consultations will be disclosed as part of the audit report. The report will be
disclosed at the World Banks InfoShop as well as in-country. The Rhodia Group has established
a newsletter distribution list based on which the company shares news and facts of public interest
with its adjacent stakeholder communities. It is envisaged that the audit report, or an online link
to the report, will be communicated to these stakeholders by means of the aforementioned
newsletter.

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                          X
The Rhodia facility is crossed by the Atibaia and Anhumas Rivers with areas of riparian
vegetation along the margins of the river. Federal law designates margins of rivers for
protection. The chemical facility exists prior to this legislation and is exempted from its
requirements, however the company has maintained an important area of remaining natural
habitat and has taken measures to protect the fauna and flora of the facility. The measures it has
taken to protect the waters of the river from contamination from any potential spills include a
stormwater collection system that can retain and treat all the water from the facility in a
significant rainfall or flooding event onsite. There is an online water quality monitoring system
for effluents that are discharged to the river while extraction of water from the facility is licensed
appropriately.
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                Yes          No         TBD
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                          X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                       X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                    X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                               X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                        X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared:

   A QER will not be part of the preparation cycle of this operation. QERs are in general not
   required for stand-alone carbon finance operations, like the one proposed here.

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS:

   The target date for completion of the PAD-stage ISDS is February 8, 2011.

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.

   The process of preparing the environmental audit report has been launched during a World
   Bank mission in December 2010, which was followed up by a second mission specifically
   dedicated to the kick-off of the audit report during the week of January 3, 2011.
