Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/08/2011 
Report No.:  60227
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P120391 
Project Name:  Federal University Hospitals Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Andre C. Medici 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 3, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
412.00
412.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to strengthen the performance of the REHUF Program, by: 
(i) improving hospital governance and management by results; (ii) modernizing of the 
Borrower's hospital technology; and (iii) improving hospital care, research and education 
processes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project consists of the following Components:  
 
(i) Component 1: Modernization of the FUH: Support the implementation of the Eligible 
Expenditure Program under the REHUF Program. This Component is structured as a 
Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) to co-finance the Ministry of Education (MEC) REHUF 
Program, disburse against results and use the country financial and fiduciary systems to 
the extent possible.  
 
(ii) Component  2: REHUF Program Institutional Strengthening : (a) 
Support the 
strengthening of the governance, management and innovation capacity of the FUH 
through the provision of technical assistance, training and equipment, in the areas of 
Page  2
governance and management, infrastructure and technology, health care, education and 
research, as well as transparency and accountability. (b) 
Financing of FUH 
Subprojects in line with REHUF Program priorities to improve managerial, clinical, 
teaching, training and research processes. Component 2 will finance a series of training 
and technical assistance activities to support institutional strengthening.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in 46 Federal University Hospitals in the Federal 
District and in 21 States.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project triggers two World Bank Operational Policies: OP 4.01 
Environmental Assessment and OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples. OP 4.12 Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy is not triggered. OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural resources may 
eventually be triggered. These policies and any mitigation measures will be reflected in 
the Project Operational Manual (POM). Bank supervisions will follow up on compliance.  
 
Environment  
 
OP4.01 is triggered as the activities in the Eligible Expenditure Program (EEP) that will 
possibly be supported by the project may potentially have environmental impacts that 
require an environmental assessment (renovation of hospital infrastructure).  Project 
activities will not result in increased hospital waste, but the project will carry out an 
assessment on health care waste and implement a Hospital Waste Management Action 
Page  3
Plan to monitor the proper disposal of health care waste by the Federal University 
Hospitals according to national norms. The project will not involve any resettlement.  
 
The activities that will be supported by the project may have environmental impacts that 
require an environmental assessment. Actual expenditures being considered include 
hospital construction, expansion and rehabilitation. The construction of two new hospitals 
is being considered, for which a full environmental assessment will be undertaken as per 
Brazilian legislation, which is quite strict and of international quality. The sites for both 
new constructions are in urban settings, which are property of the Universities, in the 
same place as existing health facilities. Given these site locations no natural habitats will 
be affected, neither will any forest area. The sites are equally not situated in flood plains 
or geologic fault lines. The construction, expansion and rehabilitation of hospital 
infrastructure will follow Brazilian legislation with respect to civil construction residues. 
It will also follow strict guidelines that reduce the impact of dust, noise and sources of on 
the job localized site contamination (e.g. fuel residue). These measures will all be 
included in the Operational Manual and reflected in the bidding documentation when 
appropriate.  
 
The second source of environmental concern is that of health care waste (HCW). It is 
not expected that project activities will increase HCW. However, the project will support 
the monitoring of the proper disposal of health care waste in the Federal University 
Hospitals (FUH). The project will also support a capacity building effort to homogenize 
Health Care Waste Management (HCWM) across all FUH to the high standard already 
existent in some of the hospitals in the south of the country (Rio Grande do Sul and 
Parana).  
 
A
third source of environmental concern relates to the substitution of old medical 
equipment including those that use radiation technology. The project will establish that 
the winning bidder for new equipment will be responsible for the removal and 
appropriate disposal and final destination of this equipment following all the national 
norms for dangerous materials and radioactive residues. Project supervision will 
accompany this process to ascertain that this is done to acceptable standards.  
 
Social  
 
OP4.10 is triggered as the project includes 46 Federal University Hospitals, and one 
third of them are being accessed by ethnic minorities.  in Some of the Hospitals 
modernized under the project are located in Indigenous regions, or may be accessed by 
Indigenous Peoples residing in contiguous areas. A social assessment and stakeholder 
consultations were conducted and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework was 
published by the MEC. The social assessment assessed whether, and how, indigenous 
peoples would benefit from the project, and the capacity of the Federal University 
Hospitals to implement safeguards instruments.  
 
The project is expected to have a significant social impact on the health of the 
population in the area of intervention of these hospitals, as well as on medical residents, 
Page  4
and nursing and multi-professional students and programs taught at these hospitals. The 
FUH are important in the generation of knowledge to improve the quality of health care 
in the regions they cover.  
 
Consultations carried out during project preparation indicated the urgent need to 
rehabilitate the infrastructure and replace the equipment of these hospitals, to be able to 
respond to the demands of students in residency programs, and of the populations assisted 
in these health facilities. Consultations also revealed the need to support the efforts of 
hospitals accessed by ethnic minorities, adapting the delivery of certain services to 
respond to their special needs, under the HumanizaSUS program. As observed during 
consultations, hospital facilities rehabilitated under the project in regions of high 
concentration of indigenous peoples (Hospitals in Alagoas, Belem, Manaus, Mato Grosso 
do Sul,) would not have as much positive impact on the indigenous population as 
expected if tertiary services are not culturally pertinent.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any indirect and/or long term impacts due to 
anticipated future activities. The impact of construction, expansion or rehabilitation is 
expected to have a temporary and localized impact that will be mitigated through the 
adoption of measures that will reduce the potential negative impact these activities could 
have. It is expected that the project will have a positive effect by improving health care 
waste management across all Federal University Hospitals thereby reducing the amount 
of waste that is considered dangerous and also reducing the volume of waste that enters 
the waste stream through improved recycling and management practices. Waste that is 
generated from radiation treatment does not enter the waste stream until it is deemed safe 
and there are strict environmental safety standards that each hospital must adhere to. It is 
also mandatory that any hospital that offers these services must have a trained staff 
physicist who monitors and is responsible for the safety of disposing of such waste. The 
project will supervise these activities during supervision missions.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Considering that not all project activities have been defined, the Ministry of Education 
(MEC) has published an Environmental Management Framework, which describes the 
measures that will be adopted so that project implementation is consistent with Brazilian 
environmental legislation and Bank safeguard requirements.  In preparation for the 
project, the MEC convened a 2 day workshop that focused on health care waste 
management. All Federal University Hospitals were represented showing the strong 
commitment towards the adoption and implementation of homogenized HCWM practices 
throughout the University Hospital system. Various hospitals shared innovative and 
practical solutions in complying with Federal legislation . It was also evident that not all 
Page  5
hospitals were at the same level and were quite eager to adopt these solutions in each of 
their own hospitals.  
 
The MEC  published an Indigenous Peoples Planning   Framework to address issues 
affecting Indigenous peoples and poor ethnic minorities in the hospitals serving these 
groups. The IPPF will be discussed with the new Special Secretariat of Indigenous Health 
(SESAI), when this is fully established, is included in the Project Operational Manual, 
and was disclosed before appraisal.  
 
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was published by the MEC, which 
has capacity for implementation of the IPPF.  The cost of the IPPF is approximately 
USD200,000 and has been  included in Component 2.  
 
The Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP4.12) is not triggered as the 
construction/rehabilitation under the project will be executed on plots of land owned by 
the hospitals and currently occupied by the hospitals. Therefore, there will not be any 
cases of land acquisition or resettlement of social units or of any commercial activity, as 
none of the above occupy any of the plots of land that will be used.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for this project are hospital personnel (including staff, teachers, 
medical and nursing  students), patients who are benefiting from the improved hospitals 
and the population in general who will be better served with an improved health care 
waste management system.  
 
Consultations are regulated by Brazilian law and require that there be a 30 day open 
consultation period made available for any new construction such as the hospitals being 
considered. The key stakeholders for this project are patients who are benefiting from the 
improved hospitals and the population in general who will be better served with an 
improved health care waste management system, and hospital personnel (including staff, 
teachers and students). The Environmental Management Framework has been published 
after  a consultation period which allowed for input from local stakeholders. Given the 
overall positive impact project activities are expected to have, no major objections are 
anticipated. However, the MEC is open to accommodating feedback as it becomes 
available.  
 
Permanent consultations with stakeholders and beneficiaries of the health care system 
are built-into the health care system and carried out periodically. The "social control" 
councils are the key venues utilized by civil society and users of public services (health, 
education, social development, and so forth) to discuss issues related to quality of 
services. In the health sector, health councils include representations of stakeholders, 
beneficiaries, CSOs and health care service providers.  For the population at large, issues 
and demands discussed in the Local Health Councils (CLS) are submitted to the 
Municipal Health Councils (CMS) to be discussed by the Bipartite Commissions (CIB) 
conformed by members of the Health State and Municipalities. Issues are then submitted 
Page  6
to the State Health Council (CES) level and the National Council of Health (CNS) and 
further discussed and approved by the Tripartite Inter-sector Commission (CIT) 
conformed by 15 members representing the MOH, and Councils at the State (CONASS) 
and Municipal (CONASEMS) levels.  
 
For Indigenous Health, the mechanism is the same, but the institutional arrangement is 
different. Demands discussed at the Local Indigenous Health Councils (CLSI) are 
reported to the District Indigenous Health Councils (CONDISI). Four times a year, the 
Presidents of the 34 DSEI meet in the Permanent Forum of Presidents of CONDISI. The 
forum is consultative, propositional and analytical. The main aim of the forum is to 
enforce the norms of SUS particularly those specific to the national policy of Indigenous 
Health. Finally, the highest forum is the Inter-sectoral Commission of Indigenous Health 
(CISI)  
 
Health Councils, their conformation, terms and responsibilities are regulated by law. 
Issues typically discussed in the Councils are: satisfaction with the quality and quantity of 
health care services provided by the system; and health risks/hazards particularly related 
to the environment, water and sanitation, risks caused by industry development and 
urbanization. All municipal, district and state councils must monitor the health of the 
people in their jurisdiction, submit financial statements and render accounts. New 
Ministerial Resolution 2048 requires councils to monitor health indicators, under penalty 
for non-compliance. Aide-memoires (Actas) of Councils are disseminated on the MEC 
webpages of the Health Care Secretariat (SAS) and FUNASA. Women participating in a 
VIGISUS Project Consultation Workshop with Indigenous Women voiced serious 
concerns about the unequal representation of women in these Councils.  
 
Informal stakeholder consultations were carried out in FUH in Manaus, Belem and 
Uberlandia, as well as in a field visit to the Casa do Indio in Manaus. Consultations 
focused on two aspects, as follows:  
 
-
FUH infrastructure rehabilitation and equipment. In January 2010, the Government 
issued Decree 7082 which created the Federal University Hospital Program (REFUH).  In 
2009, MEC carried out an assessment of the operational conditions of the FUH network. 
The overall diagnosis included quantitative and qualitative information on more than 20 
Government programs. Participating hospitals elaborated proposals to upgrade their 
infrastructure and equipment to reach fully-operational conditions to offer quality 
medical residency and nursing programs, and quality medium and high complexity 
medical care.  
 
-
Informed Consultations with Stakeholders and Beneficiaries. The objective of the 
consultations was to learn more about the operation of the Federal Teaching Hospitals, to 
interview stakeholders, i.e. hospital directorates, residents, nurses, administrative staff, 
beneficiaries of health care services, NGOs working with the hospitals and the Casa do 
Indio in Manaus. There was special interest to learn more about the Humanization 
Programs being carried out by the hospitals with differential treatment for vulnerable 
groups, particularly for the large indigenous population in Manaus (where about 80% of 
patients are indigenous) and Belem.   
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/01/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/07/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/20/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/08/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/12/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/20/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
Page  8
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andre C. Medici 
03/08/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gunars H. Platais 
07/13/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
07/12/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Joana Godinho 
03/08/2011 
Comments:  PDO and description were updated. 
