Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5395 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/05/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P120139 
Project Name: BR Pernambuco Rural Economic Inclusion Project 
Task Team Leader: Edward William Bresnyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 31, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2011 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Agro-industry (30%);Water 
supply (20%);Information technology (10%) 
Theme: Rural markets (40%);Technology diffusion (30%);Trade facilitation and market 
access (20%);Rural policies and institutions (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
35.25 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
35.25 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
In the State of Pernambuco, rural poverty accounts for over one-third of the total state 
poverty, despite the rural population share of about 20%.  The rural poverty headcount of 
roughly 45% is slightly below that of the Northeast as a whole (50%) but substantially above the 
Pernambuco urban headcount of 25%.  Recent measures of the Human Development Index 
(HDI) show Pernambuco ranked 23rd among the 27 Brazilian states, with an HDI of 0.718.  
Examination of the data would indicate a rural HDI of roughly 0.550.  
 
2. 
One of the reasons behind this elevated level of rural poverty is low agricultural 
productivity. Pernambuco is home to 5% of the country's population and 6% of the agricultural 
labor force, yet generates only 2% of the Agricultural Gross Domestic Product (Ag GDP).  For 
the staple crops of beans and rice, yields for family farms are about one-half of those for non-
family farms. Yields in Pernambuco are only one-half of those for the nation as a whole.  Family 
farms, some 90% of total farm establishments statewide, capture only 52% of value-added 
production.  Average annual family farm income (US$5,100) is about one-tenth of that for 
Page  2
commercial farms, a contributing factor to a rural Gini coefficient which exceeds 0.8 (IBGE 
2006). Moving forward, the challenge for Pernambuco, as well as for Brazil more widely, will be 
to increase rural productivity with "climate-smart" and inclusive growth strategies.  
 
3. 
Another factor influencing rural poverty is the general scarcity of water in the state.  
Pernambuco is one of Brazil's driest states, with average annual per capita water availability of 
1,320 m3, equivalent to only 4% of the national average. The combined semi-
arid Sertão and 
transitional Agreste sub-regions represent 89% of the State's territory yet have only about 20% of 
its available water, with per capita annual water availability ranging from 400 m3 to 800 m3, 
respectively.  The impact of this extremely low level of water availability is a relatively stunted 
irrigated area (only 3% of the state's total agricultural area) and periodic lack of water supply to 
rural enterprises and households, significantly limiting the growth of commercial food 
processing and domestic preliminary processing.  Inadequate sewage systems also constrain  
commercial processing, particularly at the level of the smaller cooperative associations.  
 
4. 
A third factor which exacerbates rural poverty is the lack of structural investments in 
transport and logistics, which reduce access to local and regional markets, by leading to stunted 
market opportunities owing to high transport costs, increased transport times and reduced access 
to fresh markets, and increased costs of off-farm inputs.  Reducing these coordination costs, 
while achieving needed productivity gains, will be key to raising rural competitiveness.  
 
5. 
From the point of view of agricultural production, there is much ground to be gained by 
producers in Pernambuco.  Over the past decade, Brazil has become a globally competitive 
powerhouse in agriculture, with a nearly 70% increase in the value-added of crop production and 
a
ten-fold increase in beef exports.  Brazil is now the world leader in exports of poultry, sugar 
and ethanol and second worldwide in soybean exports.  These impressive results attest to a 
strong history of capital investment and technological innovation in the sector, particularly in 
agricultural research, focusing on commercial agriculture, which comprises 16% of total farms 
nationwide.  However, aside from strong performance in the horticultural sector around 
Petrolina, agriculture in Pernambuco has not participated significantly in this production and 
export boom.  
 
6. 
For these reasons, at a September 2009 meeting with Northeast Governors, the Bank 
articulated a strategic vision for continued engagement with Pernambuco and other Northeast 
states, emphasizing: (i) economic growth with inclusion and innovation; (ii) improved water 
productivity and management; and (iii) structural investments to enhance logistics and 
coordination.  The State of Pernambuco's multi-year investment plan (PPA 2008-2011) 
independently converges with this three-pronged approach by focusing on:  
 
-
strengthening value chains and forging local productive arrangements (LPAs);  
 
-
prioritizing expanded access to safe and reliable water for both human consumption and 
productive use through improved water resources development and constructing stronger water 
management policies and practices; and  
 
-
financing structural investments to improve the enabling environment and encourage greater 
private investment.  
 
Page  3
7. 
Recent examples of structural investments include the Suape Port Complex and the 
industrial pole of Vitoria de Santo Antão (agroprocessing); several big-ticket infrastructure 
projects are also planned, particularly the expansion of BR-101 and BR-104, water pipelines 
(Pajeu and Agreste) and irrigation canals.  The State has also worked to stimulate integration 
across several value chains, most notably fresh fruits and vegetables, dairy, livestock (e.g., lamb, 
goat), beekeeping and aquaculture. Efforts in the small-scale dairy sector show the benefits of 
building LPAs: under the program Milk for All (Leite para Todos) 4,400 enterprises have 
produced 33 million liters (2008), benefiting some 90,000 families across 154 municipalities.  
 
8. 
Main Challenges Facing Local Productive Arrangements:  Low rural productivity in 
Pernambuco is tied to several constraints, among the most important of which are:  
 
-
low technological innovation, in terms of product, process and organization, as well as 
downside risks of production losses and threats to household food security, which could be 
exacerbated by increased climate variability and subsequent water scarcity;  
 
-
weak market intelligence that hinders a coordinated and targeted supply response;  
 
-
poor access to capital, needed to boost smallholder asset accumulation on several fronts: 
physical, financial, human, managerial, and social; and  
 
-
disconnect between technical assistance and the needs of the family farm, both for meeting the 
market demands and reducing vulnerability through climate change adaptation.  
 
9. 
The public sector must also invest in structural investments that create the foundation for 
improved rural services provision and rural competitiveness, particularly in infrastructure (e.g., 
rural roads and water resources to improve logistics coordination), phyto-sanitary regulation and 
certification, information and communication technologies (ICT), and technical knowledge 
generation and diffusion. Meanwhile, responses from commercial actors in the rural sector are 
needed so that the market constraints limiting the competitiveness of family farms can be 
relaxed. Adoption of adequate technology, market know-how, and the link to the markets - all in 
a
market-driven and timely manner - are major areas where investment in private goods and 
leadership from the private sector are required.  
 
10. 
As per the State's PPA (2008-11), Pernambuco's approach to increased rural productivity 
builds on the following tenets:  
 
-
Regional/territorial approach:  Pernambuco's twelve administrative regions and its six 
Territórios da Cidadania will aid in concentrating and coordinating various Federal- and State-
level programs to boost economic and social inclusion.  
 
-
Climate-smart responses:  The proposed project would stimulate innovations that jointly 
increase agricultural productivity, increase the efficient use of scarce water, and promote climate 
change resilience while reducing carbon emissions.  
 
-
Innovation:  Rural producers must adopt new technologies and access greater commercial 
intelligence in order to thrive in dynamic markets. This will require fresh learning approaches to 
stimulate a "rural innovation culture" conducive to competitiveness and capable of connecting 
education to jobs.  
 
-
Associations: Collective action among small-scale producers can reduce asymmetric 
bargaining power in markets dominated by intermediaries.  Previous Bank-financed operations in 
Pernambuco have fostered more than 5,000 community associations, mostly composed of small-
scale producers that would be targeted under the proposed operation.  
Page  4
-
Value chains: Rural producer organizations that participate in value chains can: (i) improve 
uptake of technological innovation; (ii) expand access to timely commercial intelligence; and 
(iii) reduce individual risks through risk spreading across value chain actors.  
 
-
Equity:  Equity among value chain partners would be promoted through alliances (i.e. LPAs) 
that promote "win-win" market solutions.  
 
11. 
Responding to water scarcity and the persistent unreliable supply which constrains rural 
economic performance and social development, the State has prioritized the water sector in its 
development strategy, aiming to expand access to safe and reliable water for both human 
consumption and productive use through: (i) improved water resources development; and (ii) 
stronger management policies and practices. As climate change will further intensify moisture 
deficits in Pernambuco, significant adjustments in water use for food production will be required, 
especially in dry land areas where rain-fed agriculture dominates. Productive water use in semi-
arid rain fed cropping systems is quite low, averaging only 10 to 30% of total rainfall. Without 
improvements in "crop per drop", future shortages of water could render agriculture non-viable 
or propel a shift toward less reliance on annual crops and more on perennial and livestock-based 
production systems. Adaptation measures to moderate this scenario include:  
 
-
Rainwater harvesting, to capture and conserve rainfall;  
 
-
ICT solutions, leveraging soils mapping, precision agriculture, climate modeling and historical 
rainfall time-series to inform planting and input decisions;  
 
-
Crop diversification and crop biotechnology solutions, incorporating drought-tolerant crops, 
and, where feasible, nanotechnologies; and  
 
-
Supplementary irrigation, such as next-generation drip and aspiration technologies and the 
reuse of treated wastewater.  
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]  
 
12.
The proposed project would promote increased rural productivity of organized rural 
small-scale producers through their participation in Local Productive Arrangements (LPAs) and 
by expanding their access to supporting infrastructure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
13. 
The Project, with a total estimated cost of US$135.25 million, would be financed by a 
Specific Investment Loan (US$100 million) combined with counterpart financing from the State 
of Pernambuco (US$35.25 million). The proposed three project components would support the 
sustainable development themes expressed by the State of Pernambuco, chiefly through 
facilitating and strengthening LPAs and contributing to the universal access to basic rural 
infrastructure, primarily water and sanitation.  
 
14. 
Component 1: Investments in Rural Economic Inclusion (US$70.0 million) would 
finance business plans proposed, developed and implemented by participating rural producer 
organizations (RPOs). The business plan would define the RPO's role in the context of the LPA 
and would promote: (i) productivity-inducing, climate-smart investments in fixed capital (e.g., 
plant and equipment, minor productive infrastructure), working capital, training and technical 
assistance; and (ii) agricultural innovation, including business incubators, quality, labeling, 
value-added through processing, contracts with municipal governments, supermarkets and agro 
Page  5
industries.  RPOs would be responsible for a minimum of 20% of business plan financing, either 
in cash or in-kind. Business plan preparation, approval and eventual finance would be further 
governed by procedures outlined in the Project Operational Manual.  
 
15. 
Component 2: Complementary Rural Infrastructure (US$56.0 million) would support the 
State's efforts to: (i) extend its basic infrastructure network in rural Pernambuco, primarily access 
to water supply and sewage service for both productive use and household consumption; (ii) 
improve water productivity; and (iii) promote innovative management models for decentralized 
water administration and service delivery.  
 
16. 
Component 3: Project Management, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$9.25 
million) would support the incremental costs of: (i) the technical and administrative management 
of the proposed project, including incremental salaries; (ii) development, implementation and 
supervision of the Environmental and Social Management Framework, the Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework and the Project Communication Strategy; (iii) updates to SEDAR's 
Management Information System for use in project monitoring; and (iv) design, development 
and implementation of an impact evaluation module to track progress on results indicators.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
17. 
The area for the proposed project includes 180 municipalities - i.e., all municipalities 
statewide except for those which comprise metropolitan Recife.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
18. 
The State has demonstrated satisfactory capacity to implement safeguards policies in 
previous Bank-financed projects such as the ongoing Prometropole and the Rural Poverty 
Reduction Project - RPRP (2001-2009), both implemented through the SEDAR (SEDAR).  
 
19. 
State Secretary for Development and Regional Articulation (SEDAR), through its 
Technical Unit (UNITEC), would be responsible for day-to-day implementation of the proposed 
project, including safeguards.  Under the RPRP, SEDAR/UNITEC satisfactorily implemented an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF).  Additionally, UNITEC established a Technical, Environmental and Social Review 
Committee to confirm compliance with the Project Operational Manual, which included the 
Bank's Environmental and Social Safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO) 
Ms Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Based on the assessment of potential impacts under the proposed project, a Category B 
designation is proposed. As the exact type and nature of subprojects to finance business plans 
(Component 1) and small-scale community infrastructure (Component 2) would not be known ex 
ante (i.e., prior to project appraisal), the Borrower would prepare an Environmental and Social 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF would draw on lessons from previous operations 
implemented by SEDAR, including the Rural Poverty Reduction Project (RPRP). The ESMF 
will focus on Project-specific aspects, such as institutional arrangements and capacity, regulatory 
framework, environmental screening procedures and criteria and licensing.  The ESMF will also 
provide guidance on: (i) identifying the potential impacts associated with the typology of project 
investments; (ii) minimizing potential impacts for productive and infrastructure subprojects; (iii) 
specifying procedures to be used in assessing environmental and social impacts during the 
subproject design stage; and (iv) addressing identified impacts during subproject 
implementation. The ESMF would present a budget and implementation schedule, both of which 
would be integrated into the overall project operating plan.  
 
The proposed project interventions will be small-scale, demand-driven investments (i.e., 
subprojects). These subprojects would not cause significant adverse environmental impacts, 
related mainly to infrastructure development (i.e., water, sanitation and rural roads), new 
agricultural practices (i.e., product diversification, conservation agriculture, promotion of value 
added products, and product certification) and non-agricultural activities such as small-scale 
processing units. Potential adverse impacts will be limited, site-specific, largely reversible, and 
readily and reliably mitigated through known methods. The productive subproject selection 
procedures will be consistent with: (i) the national, state and local legislation concerning 
Brazilian Forest Code, natural habitats and protected areas (Law 4.771/65; SNUC - Law 
9985/00, Decree 4340/02 and Decree 5758/06); and (ii) World Bank safeguards policies.  
Negative impacts are mostly expected to result from small-scale construction activities under 
Component 2. Although these impacts are expected to be small, transitory and of short duration,  
the ESMF will specify guidelines and procedures to be followed by the construction contractors, 
covering aspects such as location of construction camps, clearance of vegetation, noise, traffic 
control, safety signaling, disposal of construction debris and waste material to be incorporated in 
the bidding documents for civil works. Compliance with the practices outlined in the Project 
Operational Manual would be a contractual obligation of the contractors.  
 
The Project implementation procedures will adopt strict environmental "screens" to ensure 
that approved subprojects demonstrate low potential for negative impact. The ESMF would 
assess the most common types of intervention expected, in order to propose mitigation measures 
apriori. The Project plans to establish a technical committee (as done under the previous RPRP) 
with the specific purpose of evaluating subprojects'environmental eligibility, and monitoring 
implementation compliance with Bank safeguards policy throughout the subproject cycle.  
 
SEDAR would submit to the Bank a draft EA and ESMF by end-November 2010, prior to 
project appraisal. The ESMF would also take into consideration the Environmental Thematic 
Review - QAT July 2002 recommendations, addressing "good practices" for construction and 
operational procedures, proposing an environmental management strengthening program, and 
training requirements to guarantee management capacity. The QAT recommendation regarding 
"dam's cumulative impact analysis" is not applicable.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
While activities are not planned for Areas of Permanent Preservation (APP) and Legal 
Reserves (RL), activities under the project components should nonetheless 
lead to positive 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
impacts on natural habitats, through the direct protection and rehabilitation of these areas, 
following the provisions of the Brazilian Forest Code. Nevertheless, OP 4.04 is triggered and all 
planning activities that may affect natural habitats must follow World Bank policies, identifying 
monitoring and management activities to prevent or mitigate any possible negative impact.  
 
The Project has provisions to regenerate and reforest water-producing systems (mainly 
riparian vegetation), benefiting also local biodiversity preservation and restoration. Subprojects 
resulting in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats will not be 
eligible.  
 
Springs and river margin areas are classified as Permanent Preservation Areas (APP), and 
legally protected by the Brazilian Legislation (Federal Law 4771/65). APP use for water systems 
development, intake and pipelines, requires specific permitting, mitigation and regeneration 
measures. Despite the expected positive impacts, the ESMF should include clear guidance 
regarding direct and indirect impacts on natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
It is not expected that Project implementation will have negative impacts on forest resources. 
Subprojects with the potential for conversion or degradation of natural forests or other natural 
habitats that are likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts which are sensitive, 
diverse, or unprecedented, are ineligible. The Project also excludes activities that require 
commercial forest harvesting, wood extraction or firewood use in the production chain.  
Activities resulting in deforestation and loss of native vegetation cover will not be allowed. The 
project would contribute to conserve and restore natural vegetation, generating positive impacts 
through the maintenance and/or recovery of natural vegetation on rural private land holdings on 
steep slopes, along water courses (up to a certain distance from the riparian margin) or in the 
vicinity of springs. Additionally, the project would contribute to conserve and/or restore a set-
aside area called Legal Reserve (Reserva Legal - RL) in these private holdings. As already 
mentioned, the subproject selection procedures would be consistent with the Brazilian Forest 
Code. Typical activities should support mainly conservation and restoration activities, and 
should be planned and executed in such a way to minimize or prevent negative impacts on forest 
areas.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project would not finance any pesticides or other chemical amendments that would 
trigger OP 4.09. Nevertheless, minor amounts of pesticides would probably continue to be used 
in the short term by a small portion of targeted small-scale farms. The project would encourage 
and support technical assistance for the adoption of organic agriculture and of proven, 
economically- and environmentally-sustainable Integrated Pest Management (IPM). This 
approach would increase farmer productivity (i.e., yields), reduce input costs and human health 
risk, and minimize adverse environmental impacts through the virtual elimination of pesticide 
use. The IPPM approach further improves the sustainability of agro-ecosystems by focusing on 
the knowledge and skills of farmers to better enable natural resource management.  
 
The need to use pesticides or herbicides should be indicated in each subproject, as well as 
the IPM measures to be adopted. When the use of pesticides or herbicides is justified, an analysis 
of potential negative impacts resulting from the us
e
of
these chemicals and the risks associated 
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
with the inappropriate handling or storing of their containers should be conducted. The projects 
should also include measures to reduce those risks, in compliance with Law No. 7802/89.  
 
A
Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared and incorporated into the ESMF and the 
Project Operational Manual.  The PMP would make use of the World Health Organization's 
Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to Classification (Geneva:  
WHO 1994-95).  The PMP would also exclude finance under the proposed project for 
formulated products that fall in WHO classes IA and IB, or formulations of products in Class II, 
if: (a) the country lacks restrictions on their distribution and use; or (b) they are likely to be used 
by, or be accessible to, lay personnel, farmers, or others without training, equipment, and 
facilities to handle, store, and apply these products properly.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Project implementation would not cause any negative impact on known physical cultural 
resources (PCR). Proposed subprojects with expected direct and negative impacts on known 
archeological, paleontological, historical or other culturally significant sites will not be eligible.  
 
The State of Pernambuco State has many historical and archeological sites. Brazil has a 
well-developed legislative and normative framework, which is under Federal oversight by the 
National Institute for Protection of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN). Pernambuco 
also has the State Agency, Fundação do Patrimônio Histórico e Artístico de Pernambuco 
(FUNDARPE), tasked with the identification, restoration and protection of PCR in the State.  
 
The "chance findings" procedures would be included in the Project Operational Manual for 
guidance during project implementation, particularly in regions with PCR sites already mapped 
by FUNDARPE.  SEDAR may engage FUNDARPE or other entities with proven experience to 
implement "chance findings" procedures.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
There are about 24,000 indigenous peoples in the State of Pernambuco comprising 10 
ethnicities of which Pankararu, Truká, Atikum, Fulni-ô, or Kambiwa constitute the majority.  
There are smaller numbers of the ethnicities of Kapinawa, Pankará, Pipipan, Tuxá and Xucuru.  
Approximately 90% live in 11 indigenous lands encompassing about 120,868 hectares, of which 
8
indigenous lands are regularized.  In addition, there are other indigenous communities in the 
State seeking recognition and/or regularization of their lands. The recently closed World Bank 
Rural Poverty Reduction Project (RPRP) in Pernambuco successfully implemented an 
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, established a network of collaborating governmental 
and nongovernmental organizations, and financed fourteen indigenous community demand-
driven subprojects that benefited about 5,000 indigenous peoples. The RPRP's Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework was highly participatory and included periodic consultations with 
indigenous peoples on plan activities and for monitoring and evaluation.  Lessons learned in the 
previous operation will be applied to the new project.  
 
During preparation of the new project, the client will carry out another social assessment 
and prior and informed consultations with indigenous peoples on the new draft IPPF for the new 
operation leading to broad community support.  The final draft IPPF will incorporate indigenous 
inputs and recommendations, document the consultation process, and take 
into account the 
Page  9
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
differing land access of indigenous beneficiaries.  The IPPF would be formally submitted to the 
Bank for review by the end of November 2010, and publicly disseminated prior to project 
appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project will not cause physical resettlement or economic displacement.  Nonetheless, the 
Bank team would further clarify the potential scope and procedures of subprojects during 
preparation. The team will also provide guidance to the client on special provisions that may be 
needed in the Project Operational Manual in the event of voluntary land contributions. If needed, 
a
Resettlement Planning Framework would be prepared, consulted and submitted to the Bank for 
review and publically disseminated prior to project appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/25/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
SEDAR has begun preparation of: (i) the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF); and (ii) the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).  Drafts of each would 
be submitted to the Bank for review and comments by end-January 2011.  The finalized 
ESMF and IPPF would be disclosed in the Infoshop and in-country prior to project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Edward William Bresnyan 
12/14/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
12/14/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
12/16/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  10
