Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2011 
Report No.:  60624
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bulgaria 
Project ID:  P120192 
Project Name:  Railway Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Mohammed Dalil Essakali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 22, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Railways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%);Trade facilitation 
and market access (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
97.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the quality and efficiency of railway 
infrastructure services in Bulgaria.   
 
3. Project Description 
The total project cost is estimated at EUR 70 million, including Value Added Tax (VAT) 
and contingencies, to be fully covered by the proposed loan. The implementation period 
would be July 1, 2011 to December 31, 2014, and the Closing Date would be June 30, 
2015. The proposed project includes two components:  
 
Component 1: Modernization of railway infrastructure maintenance activities. The 
component covers the procurement of equipment for inspection and maintenance of 
railway track and electrical systems. The component will provide NRIC with the 
necessary tools to implement higher efficiency maintenance working procedures and to 
reduce NRIC's operating costs, one of the most critical problems NRIC is presently 
facing, enhance the safety of railway operations, and improve the working condition of 
railway maintenance workers. The acquisition of this equipment is a necessary condition 
to achieve this efficiency and to reduce costs. The proposed parallel DPL Program is 
Page  2
expected to provide complementary conditions to further increase NRIC's efficiency. The 
DPL Program will support the implementation of internal reorganization and the 
introduction of new maintenance practices, methods, and processes to enable NRIC to 
reap the most benefits of the infrastructure maintenance mechanization to be introduced 
under the proposed project.  
 
Component 2: Support to project implementation. This component will support NRIC in 
connection with project implementation and management through:  
 
(a) 
Consultants' services for the audits of the project.  
 
(b) 
Training to NRIC staff on project management, procurement and financial 
management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project does not involve any civil works. The proposed project includes the 
acquisition of equipment to improve NRIC's capacity to maintain and operate the railway 
infrastructure in Bulgaria, and to increase the NRIC's overall productivity. There are no 
environmental impacts related to the purchase of this equipment.  
 
During project preparation in 2009 and 2010, it was proposed that the project would 
include civil works for the rehabilitation of a section of railway line, the modernization of 
power traction substations, the installation of fiber optic cables, and the construction of a 
centralized traffic control building in Sofia.These proposals were later dropped at the 
request of the Government, and only the acquisition of infrastructure maintenance 
equipment was kept under the final design of the project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSS4) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the World Bank's safeguard policies and procedures, including OP/BP 
4.01 on Environmental Assessment, the project has been classified as a Category C for 
environmental assessment purposes.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The railway infrastructure maintenance equipment will comply with strict European 
Union and Bulgaria technical and environmental standards.  They will be operated by 
certified workers knowledgeable of relevant operation and control procedures, operation 
monitoring and quality control aspects in line with Bulgarian and European Union 
legislation on railways safety.  The equipment will be kept in designated maintenance 
facilities.  Regular maintenance of the equipment is the responsibility of NRIC.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Bulgaria has a good EU-compliant legal and regulatory framework related to 
environmental and social safeguards, including requirements for environmental 
assessments and mitigation. NRIC has prepared and implemented several EU-funded 
projects, and it has its own environmental specialized department that deals with 
environmental aspects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are NRIC, railway transport operators, railway users, general 
population, and cargo shippers that will benefit from the improved railway services 
supported by the proposed project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  4
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed Dalil Essakali 
03/25/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
03/01/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein 
03/25/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
03/28/2011 
Comments:   
