                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC6194


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/17/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Burkina Faso                          Project ID: P120960
Project Name: Burkina Faso Donsin Transport Infrastructure Project
Task Team Leader: Fabio Galli
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 20, 2012 Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTTR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);Aviation (10%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%);Regional integration
(40%);Export development and competitiveness (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            65.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):             0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
                                                                         0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the competitiveness of air
transport in Burkina Faso while at the same time stimulating private sector development.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project is expected to fund: (a) road infrastructure improvements to connect the
planned site for the new airport at Donsin with Ouagadougou; and (b) Technical Assistance (TA)
to support the construction and concessioning of the planned new airport at Donsin. More
specifically, the project objectives are expected to be achieved through the implementation of the
following three major components:

 - Component A - Improvement and construction of road infrastructure to connect Ouagadougou
to planned Donsin Airport (about US$58.0 million inclusive of all taxes). This component is
expected to fund the following:
 (a) Techno-economic feasibility, social and environmental, technical design and detailed
engineering studies required for the road improvement and construction works to be carried out
under the proposed project (about US$1.0 million);
 (b) Upgrading and constructing main access road from Ouagadougou to Loumbila (RN-3) to
the planned Donsin Airport (about 33 km) (about US$41.0 million);
 (c) Constructing secondary access road from Nioniogo (RN22) to the planned Donsin
Airport site (about 8 km) (about US$10.0 million);
        (d)     Consultant services to supervise road works (about US$4.0 million);
        (e)     Implementation of social and environmental mitigation measures (about US$1.0
        million); and
        (f)     Studies, consultant services and equipment (about US$1.0 million).

 - Component B - TA to the Maîtrise d'Ouvrage de l'Aéroport de Donsin (MOAD) (about
US$5.0 million inclusive of all taxes). This component is expected to fund the following:

 (a) TA services to assist MOAD in putting in place the necessary Public Private Partnership
(PPP) framework to develop and operate the Donsin Airpot (about US$1.0 million);
 (b) Internationally experienced consultant services to provide long term TA to assist MOAD
in: (i) overall project management; (ii) development partner coordination; (iii) engineering
support and proofing; (iv) social and environmental mitigation measures management and
monitoring; (v) procurement and financial management support; and (vi) monitoring and
evaluation (about US$3.0 million);
 (c) Experienced communication firm to manage the Government of Burkina Faso's (GOBF's)
communications strategy concerning all aspects of developing the proposed Donsin Airport
(about US$0.5 million); and
 (d) Other TA, studies and consultant services that may be required to assist in the
development, construction and concessioning of the Donsin Airport (about US$0.5 million).

 - Component C - Project management, coordination and monitoring (about US$2.0 million
inclusive of taxes). This component is expected to partially fund the following:

 (a) GOBF's (MOAD and Project Coordination Unit (PCU)) management, coordination and
monitoring of project implementation activities including monitoring and evaluation of progress
achieved. The component will also fund the logistical support (including office equipment,
materials, supplies and vehicles) required to manage and coordinate project implementation
activities (about US$2.0 million).

 IDA is expected to fund about US$65.0 million out of a total estimated cost of about US$450.0
million required to develop the proposed new airport at Donsin. The balance of the funding
required is expected to come from GOBF, other development partners and the private sector.
However, the exact break down of the financing arrangements for the project is not available at
this point in time and will need to be confirmed during the project preparation process.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed project location is about 35 km Northeast of Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The GOBF has laid a sound institutional foundation for managing and monitoring the potential
adverse environmental and social impacts that the proposed project is expected to generate. More
specifically, taking into account the importance that GOBF places in the development of the
proposed Donsin Airport, it has already created a project implementing entity called the MOAD
which reports directly to the Prime Minister’s office. The MOAD has already established an
Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU) with the sole functioning of monitoring
project safeguards compliance. At present, the unit includes eight staff (one environmentalist and
one social scientist), and they are working closely, with the project legal adviser and the
communication specialist. The ESMU is expected to be supported by experienced international
consultants both during project preparation and implementation.

 The expected environmental and social impacts of the proposed road works envisaged in the
proposed project, including involuntary resettlement have so far been addressed by MOAD in a
proactive manner. The following social and environmental documentation has been prepared: (a)
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA); (b) Management of Cultural Heritage
Framework (MCHF); and (c) Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). These draft documents have set
out the safeguards measures to be addressed by the borrower to ensure compliance with social
and environmental policies for the proposed project, taking into account the broader
development of the Donsin Airport. Project Affected People (PAPs) have been extensively
consulted in the Project Impact Area (PIA), in conjunction with various assessments of
environmental and social impacts and in preparation of various mitigation measures to be put in
place. Resettlement and grievance redress committees have been created both at the village and
provincial level.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
   Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    Planned activities (rehabilitation and construction of road infrastructure and operation of
facilities) could have negative environmental impacts like: (a) pollution of water bodies located
nearest the new airport and surrounding aquifers in the same watershed; (b) loss of vegetation
and habitat for fauna and flora; and (iii) increased physical pollution (noise, air) and exposure of
surrounding communities to related sickness, etc. GOBF is expected to prepare a full
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) in compliance with Bank policies and the Burkina Faso
"Code de l’Environnement" and regulations on EIA. Furthermore, GOBF will prepare an
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), consistent with the EIA analysis, to
implement environmental mitigation measures such as the Airport Waste Management Plan
(AWMP), Emergency Plan, and safety measures during construction and operational phases of
the airport.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                  X
    The project area shows no specific natural habitat or biodiversity hot spot. However, the new
airport will be located near a permanent river and water reservoir, which could be hosting iconic
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No          TBD
species or serves as stopover for migratory fowl. This means that the EIA will focus on these
issues and depending on the findings, a specific action plan may need to be developed and
disclosed.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                              X
    Taking into account the likely physical cultural resources impacts that the planned
construction activities are expected to have, GOBF plans to prepare a Physical Cultural
Resources (PCR) study which will include a PCR Management Plan (PCRMP). The PCRMP
will be prepared, reviewed and subject to consultation, and disclosed before appraisal and
implemented before the commencement of the planned works.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    The road rehabilitation and construction activities will probably require land acquisition and
involuntary resettlement, and, possibly restrictions of access to resources. A RAP will be
prepared and disclosed before appraisal
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 03/26/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The full EIA report including the ESMP, and the RAP will be disclosed in the country and at
   the Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal. Furthermore, a PCR study, inclusive of a PCRMP, will
   be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Fabio Galli             05/17/2011
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   05/17/2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Ms Supee Teravaninthorn    05/17/2011
   Comments:
