Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5811 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/13/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burkina Faso 
Project ID: P124648 
Project Name: Mineral Development Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Boubacar Bocoum 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit: SEGOM 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
23.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed operation is expected to be an integral part of the continued World Bank support to 
improve mineral sector governance and, management, and its contribution to growth and 
sustainable development for the years to come.  It has two specific objectives: (i) to strengthen 
institutional capacity to manage the minerals sector in an efficient, accountable, and transparent 
manner and, (ii) to enable conditions for improving socio-economic benefits from industrial 
mining.  
 
The proposed operation will also support an array of cross-cutting issues, such as strengthening 
of the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) and other accountability mechanisms, 
enhancing capacity and coordination for mining revenue collection, enabling public private 
dialogue for the integration of the mineral sector into the local economy, and supporting 
extension services for artisanal and small-scale mining.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project, a Technical Assistance Loan (TAL), is expected to last five years until 
June 30, 2016.   The Project will focus on addressing capacity constraints and on enabling the 
economic inclusion of the sector.  It comprises four components.  
Page  2
Component A.  Ensuring Access to Resources.  
 
Sub-Component A.1. Policy, Legal, and Regulatory Framework.  Legislative and regulatory 
reform will cover the following aspects:  
 
-
Mining regulations;  
 
-
Mining community development framework;  
 
-
Fiscal policy and accounting standards;  
 
-
Guides and standards for the implementation of the updated Mineral Policy;  
 
-
Transparency and participatory policies.  
 
-
Environment, health and safety standards and guides, etc.;  
 
-
Mining and gender policies.  
 
Sub-Component A.2. Geo-Data Infrastructure. This sub-component will finance geo-scientific 
surveys and mapping of selected prospective and little known areas of Burkina Faso.  It will 
finance the upgrading of the existing GIS systems at the national geological survey (BUMIGEB) 
and at the mining cadastre to ensure adequate storage, management and assessment of the 
geological and titling information. The databases will integrate geological, geophysical and assay 
of exploration sites reverted back to the public domain. This component will also finance tools 
equipment and technology to ensure that BUMIGEP services meet international standards in 
areas such as laboratory assaying for example; and that it could support the proposed surveys.  
 
Component  B. Strengthening Institutional Sector Management Capacity, and Accountability.  
 
Sub-Component B.1. Strengthening Capacities of Public Institutions in Managing the Mining 
Sector.  The objective of this sub-component will be to develop the country's skill base to meet 
the requirements for efficient, transparent and accountable mineral sector management.  
 
It will include the following activities:  
 
-
Organizational audit of the mining sector institutions and implementation of strengthening 
measures.  
 
-
Establishment and equipment of units such mining inspectorate, legal department, economic 
and statistic departments, etc in the Direction of Mines.  
 
-
Rehabilitation of the mining cadastre office, supply and updating of IT systems.  
 
-
Mapping of existing skills and demands related to the mineral sector management, including 
legal, regulatory and  negotiation skills, bidding, investment promotion, geological survey, and 
geological information management skills, revenue collection and management skills, social and 
environmental skills related to mining, EHS-skills, inclusive ancillary infrastructure 
development, etc.  
 
-
Prioritization of skill needs and designing of training programs.  
 
-
Working with an education organization in the country to develop key curricula needed for 
sustained longer term training.  
 
-
Institutional capacity building for the enhanced implementation of the mineral law, 
regulations, standards and systems to ensure compliance of operations with established norms.  
Training will be provided for technical, environmental, social and health and safety inspections.  
Page  3
-
Equipment and strengthening of the artisanal mining extension services department.  
 
-
Environmental and social sensitization of artisanal miners.  
 
-
Strengthening the demand side of governance through capacity building for civil society, 
Parliamentarians, journalists, etc.  
 
Sub-Component B.2.  Framework for Tax and Revenues Collection from Mining.   Under this 
sub-component the proposed operation will assist with (i) development of coordination and 
collaboration framework between the Ministries of Finance and Mines, (ii) mapping of physical 
and financial control points, (iii) training on revenue information collection and processing (iv) 
development of management reporting systems and database on revenues, and (iv) procurement 
of tools needed for assessing the compliance of revenues collection.  
 
Sub-Component B.3.  Accountability Platform.  This sub-component will focus on (i) training 
and development of intelligible information sharing platform on mining for civil society, 
academics, media, mining communities and other mining stakeholders, and (ii) following up 
capacity building on issues surfaced through EITI reports.  
 
Component C. Enhancement of Socio-Economic Benefits  
 
Sub-Component C.1. Public-Private Forum for Facilitating Ancillary Infrastructure 
Development.   The objective of this sub-component is to facilitate planning and discussions on 
the costs, benefits and ways to approach ancillary infrastructure development around mines. The 
activities will include (i) evaluation of possible infrastructure development scenario, (ii) 
facilitation of a dialogue between potential investors, project sponsors and the government, and 
ways to enable communities' access to utilities in mining region through commercial means.  
 
Sub-Component C.2. Potential for Mining Growth Poles.  Under this sub-component the 
activities will include regional spatial analysis of integrated geological and mining information, 
infrastructure data, environmental and social priorities, and other economic opportunities around 
clusters of mines in Burkina. This analysis will draw on the sectoral environmental and social 
assessment and will not involve any land acquisition or restrictions of access to resources and 
livelihoods.  A classification will be made and further assessment done on the most prospective 
cluster to become a potential growth pole. The strengths and constraints will be identified along 
with success factors. The most prospective opportunities will be further enabled though 
identification of funding sources.  
 
Sub-Component C.3. Community Development and Local Content Knowledge Sharing. 
Knowledge platforms will be developed in the form of forums of exchange on in/out of country 
best practice in:  
 
a) The approaches to community development including engagement process, participation, 
funding, inclusion, gender, transparency mechanisms and alignment with local economic 
development plans.  
 
b)
Measures to improve the quantity and quality of goods and services procured locally 
including procurement forums and similar initiatives.  
 
c) The updating of selected mining areas local economic development plans.  
Page  4
The platforms are anticipated to using various communication medium to share good practice in 
improving mining socio-economic benefits. The idea of the development of a website to provide 
for an e-platform for continued knowledge sharing medium and for contributions to policy 
dialogue on mining benefits will be explored  
 
Component D. Project Coordination and Management  
 
This component will focus on project implementation and coordination, including procurement, 
financial management, and disbursement aspects. It will also include monitoring and evaluation 
of project implementation, including reporting, audits, and safeguards. An existing Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) within the Ministry of Mines, Quarrying, and Energy (Energy 
Division) will be used during project preparation, while human resources and capacity is built 
within the Mines Division to take over project management during implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Mainly Ouagadougou (key ministries and agencies) and regions where the Ministry of Mines, 
Quarrying, and Energy provincial offices. The project will support where relevant the 
development of local economic development plans where companies show commitment to 
engage in economic stimulation activities should alternative resources be lacking for the task.  
The current mines in Burkina are located in Namentaga (Taparko), Boulgou (Youga), 
Bal#e/Mouhoun (Wona-Fobiri-Mana), Yatenga (kalsaka), Soum (Inata), and Oudalan 
(Essakane).  Some advanced projects are located in Seno (Guiro-
Baildiaga), Sanguié (Perkoa), 
and Tuy (Kiere).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Burkina Faso is currently significantly challenged in the environmental and social management 
of the mining sector because of inadequately staffed and/or trained personnel in key ministries, 
including the Ministry of Mines, Quarrying and Energy; and the Ministry in charge of 
Environment.  
 
The proposed project is designed to assist the Government of Burkina Faso (i) to put in place if 
the appropriate legal, regulatory and fiscal frameworks, as well as updated social, environmental 
and other relevant standards and guides; (ii) to build capacity to increase oversight for technical, 
economic, environmental, health and safety compliance  of the sector; (iii) to promote 
transparency and build accountability mechanisms; and (iv) to stimulate further socio-economic 
benefits.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yacouba Konate (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is technical assistance aimed at strengthening the legal, regulatory, and 
institutional framework, as well as at improving capacity, governance, and planning in the 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
mining sector. The project does not involve civil works or land acquisition. However, future 
mining development activities are expected to build on the TA activities and will have 
environmental and social impacts that would be regulated under the strengthened legal and 
institutional framework.  
 
The terms of reference for a sectoral environmental and social assessment (SESA) will be 
developed, but the sectoral assessment itself will be carried out as part of the project 
implementation. This approach has been used for similar technical assistance projects, and the 
TOR will be disclosed for consultation both in in-country and InfoShop prior to Appraisal. The 
SESA will examine the current situation in the sector in terms of environmental and social 
management and describe potential environmental and social impacts in the sector, including 
site-specific and cumulative impacts, pollution, health and safety, and social issues (e.g. 
inclusion, gender, vulnerable groups, land administration/management, labour issues, conflict, 
etc.). This assessment will draw on extensive consultations with stakeholders and include 
discussions on community participation in the sector, governance, transparency, and conflict 
resolution.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/16/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The terms of reference for a sectoral environmental and social assessment will be disclosed 
for consultation both in in-country and InfoShop prior to Appraisal.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Boubacar Bocoum 
12/13/2010 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
12/13/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
12/13/2010 
Comments:   
