Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/31/2011 
Report No.:  AC6213
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Burkina Faso 
Project ID:  P124648 
Project Name:  Mineral Development Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Boubacar Bocoum 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 18, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SEGOM 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
33.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To strengthen the capacity of key institutions to manage the industrial mineral sector   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project is supporting the Government of Burkina Faso in addressing gaps and 
challenges along selected links of the EITI++ value-chain. It has three components:  
 
Component A: Fostering Beneficial Mineral Resources Development (US$15.0M). The 
objectives of this component are to secure increased private sector investment in mining, 
and increase value derived by government from these investments through: (i) updating 
of the legal and regulatory framework, (ii) improvement in the availability of geo-
scientific information and in sector promotion, and (iii) improved efficiencies and 
transparency of the Cadastre and Geology Office.  
 
Component B: Strengthening Institutional Sector Management, Coordination, and 
Accountability (US$15.7M). The objective of this component is to strengthen the 
institutional capacity of the government and other stakeholders for efficient and 
transparent mineral sector management through: (i) improved sector management 
capacities at the ministries of Mines, Finance and Environment; (ii) increased availability 
Page  2
of tertiary education to address the public and private mining needs, (iii) fostering 
transparency and accountability, and (iv)  analytic underpinnings and assistance to  the 
government in developing a strategy to enable improved social and economic benefits 
from mining.  
 
Component C: Project Management (US$2.3). This component will provide support to a 
compliant project implementation in the Ministry of Mines, Quarrying, and Energy 
(MMQE).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This Project is Technical Assistance to the Government and does not involve any land 
acquisition, or construction. Project activities will mainly take place in Ouagadougou 
(key ministries and agencies) and regions where the Ministry of Mines, Quarrying, and 
Energy have provincial offices. The current mines in Burkina are located in Namentaga 
(Taparko), Boulgou (Youga), Bale/Mouhoun (Wona-Fobiri-Mana), Yatenga (kalsaka), 
Soum (Inata), and Oudalan (Essakane). Some advanced mining projects are located in 
Seno (Guiro-
Baildiaga), Sanguié (Perkoa), and Tuy (Kiere). Training and sensitization of 
communities, CBOs, artisanal miners, and local government will take place in these 
areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yacouba Konate (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is technical assistance aimed at strengthening the legal, regulatory, 
and institutional framework, as well as at improving capacity, governance, and planning 
of the mining sector. The project does not involve construction or land acquisition.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Future mining developments are expected to build on the Technical Assistance activities 
and will have environmental and social impacts that would be regulated and monitored 
under the strengthened legal and institutional framework.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The terms of reference for a sectoral environmental and social assessment (SESA) have 
been developed and disclosed in country and at InfoShop prior to Appraisal. The SESA 
will be carried out during the first year of the project implementation. The SESA report 
will also be disclosed in-country and at Infoshop.  
 
Burkina Faso is currently significantly challenged in the environmental and social 
management of the mining sector because of inadequately staffed and/or trained 
personnel in key ministries, including the Ministry of Mines, Quarrying and Energy; and 
the Ministry of Environment. The proposed project is designed to assist the Government 
of Burkina Faso (i) to put in place the appropriate legal, regulatory and fiscal 
frameworks, as well as updated social, environmental and other relevant standards and 
guides; (ii) to build capacity to increase oversight for technical, economic, environmental, 
health and safety compliance of the sector; (iii) to promote transparency and build 
accountability mechanisms; and (iv) to stimulate further socio-economic benefits.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The consultant will develop a plan of public consultation, involving all project 
stakeholders including beneficiaries and people affected by the project. This consultation 
plan will extend to all stakeholders, including government agencies, civil society, private 
mining companies and local communities, interested or deemed to play a role in the 
implementation of environmental measures. The consultation plan should be 
supplemented by a research-analysis approach, including an analysis of the initial 
situation of the mining sector,the state of the industrial and artisanal mines, the analysis 
of the various groups of stakeholders and the analysis of scenario. The consultation plan 
should state the concerns, suggestions and recommendations of stakeholders and 
incorporate them in the report.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/21/2011 
 
Page  4
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Sectoral Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) TORs have been published in-
country and at Infoshop on 02/28/11. The SESA will be carried out as part of the 
implementation of the project, and will be disclosed upon completion (latest 1 year after 
effectiveness).   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  5
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Boubacar Bocoum 
03/25/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Yacouba Konate 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/31/2011 
Comments:  Dear Boubacar, 
 
The ISDS is cleared. Svetlana Khvostova or Genet Telahun may have processing comments. 
 
regards, 
 
Alexandra 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
03/25/2011 
Comments:  Kristina, 
 
The ISDS is cleared by me. Please make sure that you also get Alex's clearance as I believe that the 
project has not been delegated to the Sector Manager. 
 
Regards 
 
Paulo de Sa 
