Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5123 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/24/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burkina Faso 
Project ID: P120517 
Project Name: Decentralization Development 
Task Team Leader: Serdar Yilmaz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: October 4, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (75%);Managing for development results (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project (which represents the first tranche of a programmatic approach) seeks to 
harness emerging government commitment to local government reforms by supporting the 
implementation of critical aspects of the fiscal and administrative decentralization in Burkina. 
The proposed development objective of the project is to lay the foundations for improved basic 
service delivery by strengthening intergovernmental administrative and fiscal systems, 
improving organizational, institutional and individual capacities at the municipal level and 
enhancing citizen participation in decision making at the local level.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have three components dealing with financial, administrative and citizen 
participation/accountability issues and an additional component for project management and 
evaluation.  
 
Component 1 - Strengthening intergovernmental administrative and fiscal systems -  This 
component will support the establishment of a transparent and rule-based intergovernmental 
fiscal framework and robust intergovernmental administrative systems. It will assist the 
ministries of Economy and Finance and Territorial Administration and Decentralization to 
Page  2
develop their capacity: (i) to clarify the roles of de-concentrated and decentralized agencies; (ii) 
to improve the design of intergovernmental systems; (iii) to gauge the direction, pace, and extent 
of decentralization; and (iv) to directly engage with local governments in the decentralization 
process. Focus areas include fiscal transfers to local governments and regulation of human 
resource management, procurement, public financial management and information systems.  
 
Component 2 -Strengthening organizational, institutional and individual capacities at the local 
level to deliver quality basic services - In order to address capacity constraints at the local 
authority level, the project will develop an institutional development framework to:  
 
(a) Catalyze core institutional development to enhance the administrative capabilities of local 
authorities:  Following an identification of core administrative systems and capacities necessary 
for local authorities to function (through the working groups established for the project), the 
project will support the design of standardized/simplified administrative systems and it will 
support municipalities to attain basic levels of administration. The voluntary program will 
finance a yearly assessment of the administrative capacities of participating municipalities and 
the implementation of municipal institutional development action plans devised by participating 
municipalities to identify the resources (training, TA, materials) they need to establish core 
administrative systems. The authorities that show the most improvement each year will receive a 
monetary award and recognition of their achievement at the national level. Dissemination of 
good practices will form an integral part of this activity.  This aspect of the component will build 
upon the pilot Competition for Excellence in Local Governance (#COPEGOL#) methodology.  
Successful municipalities would also be eligible for additional financing to support innovative 
and context-specific proposals for improving their performance.  
 
(b) Enhance access to competent / professional human resources at the local level: The project 
will support the development of a local government civil service.  
 
Component 3: Enhancing local community participation and demands for accountability - 
Engaging local communities in decision-making, management of and monitoring service 
delivery is critical to ensuring quality basic services at local levels. The project seeks to trigger a 
shift in this direction.  This component aims to support the empowerment of local populations to 
monitor service delivery and local authority performance.  Under this component, activities 
supported by the project will build in community monitoring mechanisms to reinforce 
community engagement and promote a culture of social accountability in the early stages of the 
decentralization process.  To achieve this, the project will adopt and scale up the methodology 
applied under the community monitoring strategy recently put in place by the JSDF #Community 
Monitoring for Better Health and Education Service Delivery Project#.  It will use existing local 
structures in rural communes and support new or improved structures in urban communes to 
facilitate community monitoring of project-supported initiatives.  
 
Component 4: Project management and evaluation - This component will provide project 
management support to the Prime Minister#s Office in project implementation and support 
regular project evaluations as well as procurement and safeguards reviews and financial 
reporting and auditing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Beneficiaries will be country wide, at all levels of government. (Central Government, 
deconcentrated institutions and municipalities both urban and rural)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The project will finance small local community initiatives, including some civil works. 
Institutional capacity at the central level is generally considered adequate, although at the local 
level it is a cause for concern.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Koumare (AFTH2 - HIS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will finance small community projects, including minor civil works. To ensure 
an adequate screening process for safeguards, the project will prepare an Environmental 
Management Framework that will be reviewed by the Bank, consulted upon, and disclosed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The impact of project activities on natural habitat needs to be determined.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The impact of project activities on physical cultural resources needs to be determined.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will not finance activities that involve land acquisition or restrictions of access to 
resources or livelihoods.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/23/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/23/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard related studies will be launched during the PAD stage.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Serdar Yilmaz 
02/10/2010 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
01/19/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
01/24/2011 
Comments:   
