Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/17/2011 
Report No.:  AC5881
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P064876 
Original Project Name: Burundi Road 
Sector Development 
Country:  Burundi 
Project ID:  P123119 
Project Name:  Burundi Road Sector Development Additional Financing - SIM 
Task Team Leader:  Kingson Khan Apara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 27, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);General transportation sector (20%) 
Theme:  Other trade and integration (80%);Rural non-farm income generation (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
19.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00
3.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to contribute to the post-conflict revival of the Recipient 
through restoration of part of the priority road network, generation of employment for the 
rural poor, and improvement of institutional capacity in the road sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would help complete the physical outputs of the 
RSDP that could not be achieved due to an unanticipated cost overrun of US$7.3 million 
and a financing gap of US$11.7 million. It would be allocated to Components 1, 2, 4, and 
5
of
the Project, while Component 3 would be financed by the Recipient through 
counterpart funds. Project components under the AF would be as follows:  
 
Component 1: Rehabilitation of Paved Classified Roads - US$10.4 million (IDA). 
Completion, control and supervision of civil works for the rehabilitation of part of paved 
primary roads, comprising National Roads 1, 3, 7 and 10, through drainage improvement 
and spot rehabilitation.  
Page  2
Component 2: Rehabilitation of Unpaved Classified Roads - US$3.7 million (IDA). 
Completion, control and supervision of civil works for the rehabilitation of approximately 
100 km of unpaved  classified roads including Provincial Roads (RP) 101, 109, 120 and 
124.  
 
Component 3: Road Maintenance and Management: This component will be financed 
entirely by a Government parallel contribution of US$3 million. Routine maintenance on 
the entire paved road network of some 1,100 km, and on 250 km of unpaved roads 
rehabilitated under the original project, and periodic maintenance on selected roads of the 
classified paved network, through labor-intensive and output-based contracting 
approaches.  
 
Component 4: Sector Management and Institutional Strengthening - US$2.1 million 
(IDA). (a) Consolidation of the functionality of data management and planning systems 
in road agencies and the Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Equipment (MTTPE); 
and (b) implementation of the Road Sector Policy Action Plan (RSPAP).  
 
Component 5: Project Management Support - US$2.8 million (IDA). Support for the 
management of the Project, including financial management, procurement, monitoring 
and evaluation, reporting , auditing, as well as preparing follow-on activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project includes paved and unpaved roads spread acoss the Burundi national territory   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Road rehabilitation has a positive overall impact, particularly on the social and 
economical environments. The potential environmental and social impacts of sub-projects 
in the proposed Additional Financing are of the same scope as those identified in the 
parent project and may include: soil erosion, noise and dust presumed to induce adverse 
physical environmental impacts during road construction works, possible destruction of 
vegetation (grass, trees); soil destruction (loss of arable lands, erosion, pollution by 
hydrocarbons, lubricants, organic wastes and other cut wastes); on water (increase in 
water sediments; pollution with the cleaning of machineries in water points and erosion 
of wastes at cut areas); construction milieu ( sound, dust, perturbation of traffic, 
uncontrolled wasting ); health (risks for accidents, cloud of dust).  
 
Activities proposed for the AF are very similar to those already completed under the 
parent project: They include rehabilitation and maintenance of sections of the paved and 
earth road networks.  Therefore the safeguards Category B, partial assessment, remains 
unchanged. As in the original project, these works focus mainly on the existing road 
alignments, with no realignment or incursions into the wider right of way.  They will not 
require alterations to the road geometry, or any economic displacement of persons or 
property like in the current project. No negative impacts have been noted on any abutting 
users or land holders. No new environmental risks are expected to arise under the AF, 
whose activities will not trigger any new safeguard policies.  The original project has not 
required any land acquisition and it is not foreseen in the works to be financed by the 
Additional Financing. For these reasons, neither the original project nor the Additional 
financing triggers OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). As has been done in the parent 
project, if implementation of original designs was to result in potential land acquisition 
and displacement of persons, the road width will be limited at such sites. This condition 
will be included in the bidding documents and is feasible, given the low volume of traffic 
in the next several years.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term adverse impact is anticipated   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
ESIAs for RN 3 and RN 10 were prepared before appraisal and disclosed in 2003 prior to 
the presentation of the original project to the Board in 2004. Since that time and in line 
with the safeguards arrangements approved for the original project, ESIAs have been 
prepared by an independent consultant for RN1, RN 7 and for unpaved roads, reviewed 
Page  4
and consulted upon. The ESIAs include works on the road sections to be financed by the 
AF, namely, drainage improvements and rehabilitation of degraded sections of RN1, 
RN3, RN7 and RN10, and rehabilitation of the remaining 100 km of unpaved roads. 
These ESIAs are being reviewed by Bank staff for consistency with final activities 
retained under the AF and will be updated as necessary and disclosed prior to the latter's 
appraisal.  
 
Prior to IDA approval of the bidding documents for each road works contract under the 
AF, the Borrower, through ODR, will define detailed environmental and social measures 
to manage potential environmental risks and mitigate their adverse impacts, in a manner 
satisfactory to IDA. The measures arising from each ESIA will be quantified and 
included in the bidding documents and works contracts. They will be implemented as an 
integral part of these works whose supervision engineer team will include an 
environmentalist.  
 
The National Road Agency (ODR) has an environmental unit whose staff has received 
training on Bank safeguards policies. This unit will be responsible for ongoing 
monitoring of the environmental aspects of the works.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Discussions held with community leaders, government officials and members of the civil 
society, during project preparation, led to the conclusion that threats of encroachment on 
the road could be avoided if local communities were empowered and motivated to 
assume full responsibility in the oversight of road preservation and security, especially in 
the hinterlands.  
 
The strategy to achieve this goal was to get communities to accept labor-intensive road 
maintenance as an integral part of their daily agricultural activities. In return they would 
receive symbolic remuneration for their contributions to road maintenance under multi-
year contracts. In this regard, three nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) were hired 
with the proceeds of the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) to conduct consultations 
involving local leaders and communities along all the roads covered by the project. These 
consultations sought to explain the benefits of the road works and their potential 
environmental and social impacts, and to document feedback from community members. 
They led to the formation of Community Development Associations (ADCs) whose 
members later received training on labor- intensive routine road maintenance and related 
environmental protection. The remunerative scheme is becoming increasingly popular 
and successful in the country and needs to be expanded and improved upon. Its nation-
wide coverage is expected to contribute to the reduction of social tensions in rural 
communities as well as contribute to HIV/AIDS thanks to its counseling sub- component.  
 
With regard to specific environmental and social protection measures, ESIAs were 
carried out following a participatory approach which was based on (i) field visits and (ii) 
discussions in organized meetings with road side populations, local administrative and 
traditional leaders, including village and opinion leaders. During each meeting the scope 
Page  5
of the project was discussed, in terms of its economic, social, cultural and environmental 
impacts. Measures to mitigate its impact and increase its wellbeing were presented to the 
audiences    .  
 
During implementation of the original project, these partners and stakeholders have 
further been consulted. Under the AF, a first workshop will be organized in consultation 
with the Ministry of Environment with a view to seeking further remarks from 
participants as part of a first beneficiary assessment. The workshop will include the 
media, technical and non technical partners, members of the civil society as well as 
NGOs, ADCs and other associations involved in social and environmental protection. A 
second workshop will be organized prior to the mid-term review involving the same 
stakeholders so that its lessons can be mainstreamed into project implementation.  
 
The ESIAs conducted for the project are:  
 
(i) Projet de Rehabilitation des Routes en Terre (RP 101, RP 109, RP 121, RP 124, RC 
234, RC 439, RP 120, RN 17, RN 16): Evaluation d#Impact Environnemental etSocial; 
(ii) Etude de faisabilité pour les travaux d#entretien périodique de la Route Nationale 3, 
Etude d#Impact sur l#Environnement# ; (iii) #Etude de fais abilité pour les travaux 
d#entretien périodique de la Route Nationale 10: Rugomb o-Kayanza, Etude 
d#Impactsurl# Environnement#; and (iv) #Actualisation del#étude de Réhabilitation 
Ponctuelle des Routes nationales: RN 1: Bujumbura-Akanyaru, RN5: Bujumbura-
Rugombo, RN 7: Bujumbura-Kato-Gitaba, Etude Environnementale (Février 2006)   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/18/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/25/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kingson Khan Apara 
03/07/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
03/07/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/07/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
03/07/2011 
Comments:   
