Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/07/2011 
Report No.:  AC5993
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P107851 
Original Project Name: Burundi - Financial 
&
Private Sector Development 
Country:  Burundi 
Project ID:  P125209 
Project Name:  Financial and Private Sector Development -Additional Financing Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sherri Ellen Archondo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTFE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Public administration- Finance (47%);Micro- and SME finance (28%);Banking 
(13%);Payment systems, securities clearance and settlement (12%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (31%);State enterprise/bank 
restructuring and privatization (28%);Small and medium enterprise support (25%);Legal 
institutions for a market economy (8%);Standards and financial reporting (8%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
There are no changes in the development objective or design of the project. The original  
PDO is to strengthen the financial system and improve the business enabling 
environment. This will be achieved by (a) modernizing financial sector infrastructure 
(Payment systems) and improving financial sector regulations; (b) supporting measures in 
selected PEs to improve the governance structure; and (c) improving the regulatory 
environment for businesses.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. 
 The scope of activities will be expanded in two areas:  (a) to finance the 
necessary IT infrastructure to support the payment system software (check clearing and 
card system); and (b) technical assistance activities that support macroeconomic reforms.  
Page  2
The results framework (Annex y) will be modified to include indicators for component 4 
(macroeconomic reforms).  
 
2.
The first area is development of the IT infrastructure at the BRB.  These key 
activities are prerequisite to the implementation of activities in financial sector reform.  
Totaling US$5.0 million, they include:  
 
(a) 
The setting  up of two (2) physically separated computer rooms in the basement of 
the main building which are  intended to host IT equipments operating in split-site mode 
(equipment spread among the two (2) rooms and providing high availability services, 
even in case of disaster in one room). World Bank additional funding would be related to 
the electro technical equipment (UPS, cooling, access control) and installation of cables.  
 
(b)  
The IT and infrastructure services required for providing the business services 
supporting the above mentioned World Bank funded project (payment system, 
supervision).  This includes, but is not limited to:  
 
(i) 
Data center servers, storage, networking and security equipment meeting 
international standards; as the BRB has no IT legacy, a set of business oriented IT 
services which comply with best practices and frameworks would be defined and built. 
Monitoring of the corresponding service levels is, quite logically, part of the project.  
Commercial banks would be allowed to use (subject to intellectual property) most of the 
corresponding developments for their own internal purposes, if needed, to make use of 
the BRB framework contracts for later hardware and software extensions, and for the 
development of appropriate users# procedures;  
 
(ii) 
The SWIFT network and security services for all check clearing and RTGS traffic 
as recommended by the EAC Central Banks;  
 
(iii) 
The set up of a data exchange portal for all inquiry/updates and file 
upload/download for banking and microfinance supervision,  and information registries 
projects, through various communication channels.  Appropriate user procedures would 
also be established; and  
 
(iv) 
The selection and installation of a banking application required as back office for 
the check clearing and RTGS applications. In particular, six departments (including, OBI, 
in charge of running the payment system, caissier de l#Etat, Money Market) would be 
computerized.  
 
3.
On the technical assistance activities, the AF would support a second generation 
of macroeconomic reforms began under the EMSP project.  Totaling US$3.0 million, 
these include:  
 
(a) 
Computerization of public finance management: The EMSP project played a 
major role in the development of a computerized Integrated Financial Management 
Information System (IFMIS), which is essential to improve budget execution and 
monitoring. It was also essential in the development of Human Resources Management 
Information System (HRMIS) interfaced with IFMIS. The future of HRMIS depends on 
two critical activities: (i) continued training of technicians responsible for managing the 
system (to internalize a process currently managed by a private enterprise); and (ii) 
securization and proper maintenance of the system. This activity will also include the 
development of a link with the payroll system in those departments in which payroll 
Page  3
information is currently transported or manually entered from printouts at the Ministry of 
Finance.  
 
(b) 
Updating the government-employees database and support to a cellule d#appui at 
the Ministry of Public Administration which will be created under the AF.  Since the 
census of government employees was conducted in 2008, the database compiled has not 
been updated. This will be necessary for an accurate management of the public wage bill. 
Moreover, once the cellule d#appui is created, resources will be needed to beef up initial 
capacity of the cellule.  
 
(b) 
Implementation of the business licensing procurement procedures and practices 
action plan: The creation of a Regulation Agency and a Central Procurement Directorate 
and the establishment of procurement units in key sector ministries were undertaken. 
Implementation of the reform needs to be combined with the provision of training and 
equipment for the central and decentralized procurement units. Low execution rates in 
capital budget are mostly explained by the poor implementation of the new procurement 
code.  
 
(c) 
Support to internal and external audit institutions.  EMSP provided support and 
training to the Cour des Comptes, the Inspection Générale de l#Etat and the Inspection 
des Finances. Internal audit units will also be introduced in key sector ministries. The AF 
should continue to provide support to Cour des Comptes (twinning arrangements with 
international institutions) and Inspection des Finances. It should also help the Inspection 
Générale de l#Etat define # in cooperation with other audit institutions # a Plan National 
d#Audits et Contrôles, aimed at coordinating the audit and control programs of relevant 
institutions.  
 
(d) 
Preparation of texts relative to business regulation (not initially planned in 
FPSDP).  
 
(e) 
Mining code implementation texts;  
 
(f) 
Dissemination of Mining code and implementation texts;  
 
(g) 
Agriculture pre-cooperatives law and dissemination.  
 
(h) 
Support to the Women#s Association and the Chambers of Commerce is included 
in the current Financial and Private Sector Development Project in the form of: (i) a 
guarantee fund; and (ii) capacity strengthening to the Association. The AF would enable 
the women to scale up their activities to strengthen their institution and provide a greater 
number of guarantees   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Bujumbura, Burundi   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (AFTEN) 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as Category C because it will finance technical advisory 
services that are unlikely to result in significant adverse environmental impacts. The 
installation of equipment will be managed according to national and local laws and 
regulations.  
 
The original project is being implemented according to the implementation plan and the 
team does not expect any environmental or safeguard issues from the additional 
financing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Mining Regulations. As noted in the PAD (Annex 4), the project (Component 3) would 
finance TA to prepare the mining code and accompanying regulations but the 
expectations would be that the code would ensure good environmental principles 
internationally accepted.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
N/A 
Page  6
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sherri Ellen Archondo 
02/12/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
02/12/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz 
02/12/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michael J. Fuchs 
02/12/2011 
Comments:  Alexandra Bezeredi 
Regional Safeguards Advisor, has cleared on 02/12/11 
