Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6041 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/16/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P117102 
Project Name: Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Meike van Ginneken 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 28, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTUW 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (84%);Sub-national 
government administration (5%);Other social services (5%);Central government 
administration (4%);Roads and highways (2%) 
Theme: Other urban development (33%);Access to urban services and housing 
(33%);Municipal governance and institution building (17%);Other financial and private 
sector development (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective for Phase I of the Program (APL1) is to improve planning and 
management of the sanitation sector as well as to provide access to sanitation services in selected 
areas. This will be achieved through piloting of new approaches, local planning exercises, and 
technical studies, and hands-on capacity building.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
APL-1 would finance three components: (i) Urban sanitation; (ii) Rural sanitation, and (iii) 
Institutional Strengthening and project management. Both the urban and rural sanitation 
component will combine hardware and software, anchored in local planning exercises and 
technical studies. The hardware activities will follow the main technology choices (latrines, 
condominial sewerage) and subsidy arrangements proposed in the National Sanitation Strategy. 
Soft activities will include hygiene promotion, sanitation marketing, and training to local private 
Page  2
sector that will start with research on the existing sanitation markets. Hands-on capacity building 
will be provided to the municipalities involved in the project.  
 
The Components are outlined below:  
 
Component 1: Urban sanitation (approximately USD16M)  
 
This component will focus on at scale pilot activities in Douala, the largest city in Cameroon. 
The choice for this city is based on the fact that it has a relatively strong municipality that has 
experience in implementing Bank project as well as the huge needs for investment in this high 
density city with a high groundwater table that has recently faced cholera. The component will 
support at scale pilots that integrate support hygiene promotion and marketing of household 
latrines with various technology approaches included in the National Sanitation Strategy. A 
program focused on household latrines and septic tanks will be implemented in one project area 
within Douala. This program will follow the same approach financed by the World Bank in 
others countries in West-Africa (Senegal, Burkina Faso, Niger)in which the municipality enters 
into tripartite contracts with local artisans and households. The project finances the construction 
of the latrine pit and slab while the household finances the superstructure. A small diameter 
community condominial sewerage system will be constructed in another area in Douala where 
latrines and septic tanks are not an option given population density, groundwater levels, and soil 
composition. The project will finance the network and treatment infrastructure for this 
condominial system while households will finance the works within their compound using 
participative methods tested in Ghana, Senegal, and Brazil. In both of these areas, public 
facilities will be constructed in schools, markets, and other public places. Lastly, sludge 
collection and treatment will be financed in both areas, including construction of sludge 
treatment plants and training to vidangeurs, and potentially subsidy to contracts for operation of 
sludge treatment plants and sludge collection with local operators (to be defined during project 
preparation). Public toilet facilities and sludge treatment plants will be fully subsidized by the 
project. Based on preliminary cost estimates, the component could provide 200,000 people with 
latrines/septic tank and 20,000 people with condominial sewerage.  
 
Component 2: Rural sanitation (approximately USD4M)  
 
The component will support hygiene promotion and marketing of household latrines in selected 
regions of Cameroon. It will provide partial subsidies to households to finance household latrines 
in a similar tripartite construction as described under the urban component and also finance 
public latrines in schools, medical facilities, markets, and other public places. The level of 
subsidy will be determined during project preparation. The component will also include capacity 
building to the private sector on how to develop latrines that consumers are willing and able to 
purchase. The component will target 200,000 people in two provinces of Cameroon (to be 
decided during project preparation).  
 
Component 3: Institutional strengthening and project management (approximately USD10M)  
 
The component will put emphasis on institutional TA to further clarify the role and 
responsibilities of various actors. This includes establishment of cost recovery mechanisms for 
sanitation (including a surcharge on water consumption), as well as TA at the national and local 
level for sanitation planning. It will include sanitation master plans for selected cities and 
technical studies for phase 2 investments, including soil studies to enable the choice between on-
Page  3
site sanitation and sewerage. The component will also finance the costs of the Project 
Implementation Unit in MINEE and other project management costs. The PIU will support local 
governments help setting up data base system and establish clear mechanism on how to collect 
and to convey data from municipality to the central level. Given the lack of disaggregated data 
on sanitation, surveys will be carried out in project areas to establish a clear baseline. The PIU is 
seen as a first step to establishing a full sanitation department in MINEE.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Douala and selected regions of Cameroon   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Given the lack of capacity on sanitation in Cameroon, the establishment of a small Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) in MINEE is deemed appropriate. The PIU will be responsible for 
coordinating the technical and financial implementation of project-supported activities. It will be 
headed by a Project Coordinator and staffed by a small number of specialists to be responsible 
for technical aspects of the project, including safeguards, as well as procurement specialists and 
financial management specialists. The PIU will be responsible for setting up and implementing 
regular monitoring and evaluation arrangements.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Given that the specific locations and number of activities to be financed by the project are not 
known now, Government will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF)and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). These will be  translated to EIAs or EMPs 
and RAPs or ARAPs during project implementation as and when necessary. The ESMF and RPF 
will have to be disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
This will be reviewed at appraisal since the locations are yet to be determined.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
A
firm decision will be taken on the Indigenous Peoples policy (OP/BP 4.10) as the project 
preparation evolves.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Given that the specific locations and number of activities to be financed by the project are not 
known now, Government will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). These will be translated to EIAs or EMPs 
and RAPs or ARAPs during project implementation as and when necessary. The ESMF and RPF 
will be disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
03/22/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF and RPF will be disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meike van Ginneken 
03/16/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/16/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alexander E. Bakalian 
03/16/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
