Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/06/2011 
Report No.:  AC6228
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Cameroon 
Project ID:  P117102 
Project Name:  Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Meike van Ginneken 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 6, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (90%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (70%);Municipal governance and 
institution building (10%);Rural services and infrastructure (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.25 
 LOCAL: 
BENEFICIARIES 
9.07
9.32 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to improve planning and management of the sanitation sector as 
well as to provide access to sanitation services in selected areas. This will be achieved 
through piloting of new approaches, local planning exercises, and technical studies, and 
hands-on capacity building.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Urban sanitation: This component will focus on full scale pilot activities in 
Douala, the largest city in Cameroon that integrate support hygiene promotion and 
sanitation marketing with construction of latrines, condominial sewerage, and sludge 
treatment plants.  
 
Component 2: Rural sanitation: The component will support hygiene promotion and 
sanitation marketing in the Extreme North Region. It will provide partial subsidies to 
households to finance household latrines and finance public latrines in schools and 
clinics.  
 
Page  2
Component 3: Institutional strengthening and project management: The component will 
provide technical assistance to clarify roles and responsibilities and establish a 
sustainable financing mechanism in the sector. The component will finance the Project 
Implementation Unit and other project management costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Douala and the Extreme North Region of Cameroon.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTEN) 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is categorized as B. By increasing access to sanitation and improving the 
disposal of sludge, the project is likely to have a positive impact on public health, the 
quality of life, and reduce environmental pollution.  However potential adverse impacts 
may arise during the implementation of civil works associated with the construction of 
sludge treatment plants and public latrines at medical facilities, markets and schools. 
These impacts are likely to be small scale and site-specific and typical of category B 
projects, thus easy to deal with.  
 
Two safeguards policies are triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Given that the specific locations and number of 
activities to be financed by the project were not yet known, the GoC prepared a draft 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a draft Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF). These substantial drafts were received by the World Bank on 
March 10, 2011. The Bank team provided comments and the final framework documents 
and safeguards documents have been disclosed. Once the physical locations of the 
Page  3
proposed construction sites have been identified, these framework documents will be 
ultimately translated, depending on the scale and amplitude of the foreseen impacts, into 
EIAs or ESMPs and RAPs or ARAPs during project implementation when necessary. A 
budget of 3% of the budget allocation for component 1 is set apart for the implementation 
of the possible mitigation measures identified in the ESMF and RPF to be further 
confirmed in the plans (ESIA/ESMPs and RAP/ARAPs).  
 
Social. The sanitation project will contribute to better sanitation services to underserved 
areas, particularly in informal settlements in Douala and rural areas in the Extreme North 
region. The project recognizes that community participation and buy-in into improved 
sanitation are important tools for sustainable health improvements. The project uses a 
demand-based approach to sanitation, with a strong focus on hygiene sanitation 
marketing. The information, promotion, marketing, and behavior change activities will 
follow international best practices.  Special attention will be paid to the poor, women, and 
vulnerable groups. The progress and results from the project will be made public. The 
interests of people who will be negatively affected by the project activities will be 
protected through the social safeguard provisions in the Development Credit Agreement.  
 
Land acquisition under the project is expected to be limited. No land acquisition is 
expected for components 2 and 3.Most of the infrastructures will be built within the 
compound of individual households with a partial subsidy from the project. The 
condominial sewerage system and the sludge treatment plants in Douala might require 
some limited land acquisition. As Cameroun does not have a comprehensive national 
resettlement policy, the RPF was prepared on the basis of the World Bank policy on 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The RPF outlines the principles and procedures 
to be followed in the event a component of the project leads to land acquisition, loss of 
valuable socioeconomic assets, or the loss of access to livelihoods resources. When the 
physical location of the construction sites will be made known, and depending on the 
scale and amplitude of the foreseen impacts, the borrower will either prepare a full or 
abbreviated RAP which will be reviewed by the Bank and subsequently disclosed both 
in-country and at the InfoShop, and compensations (if needed) will be paid-off prior to 
the start of any physical work.  
 
Environment. Suitable legal frameworks exist for the management of natural resources 
and the environment in Cameroon. The Water Act, the Forest Act, the Lands Act, and the 
National Environmental Management Act of (1972 revised in 1996), underpin the 
frameworks governing the project. There is a need to pay particular attention to water 
resources, forests, and ecosystem management as Cameroon's natural resource base is 
vulnerable to mismanagement, degradation, and floods. The recent cholera outbreak in 
Cameroun is attributed to among other aspects, poor water and sanitation services and 
poor hygiene.  
 
The ESMF stipulates a screening procedure that is to be applied after any civil works at 
specific sites are identified to determine potential negative social and environmental 
impacts as well as the effective and corresponding mitigation measure. It also sets out 
monitoring and institutional measures to be undertaken to minimize adverse 
Page  4
environmental and social impacts.  When the physical location of the construction sites 
will be made known, and depending on the scale and amplitude of the foreseen impacts, 
the borrower will either prepare an ESIA or an ESMP which will be reviewed by the 
Bank and subsequently disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to the start of 
any physical work.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project considered the options of latrines, condominial sewerage, and conventional 
sewerage in its economic analysis. However, the economic rate of return for conventional 
sewers was much lower than that of the other alternatives as benefits were similar but 
costs were very much higher.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The implementing agencies will be provided with the expertise for sound environmental 
and social management. A social and communications specialist in the CUD will be 
recruited to lead the communications strategy. Also, a socio-environmental specialist will 
be contracted on a retainer contract to help the CUD in project implementation and 
capacity building on social and environmental issues. The PIU in MINEE will also 
include a socio-environmental specialist from the Ministry. A substantial training 
program will target beneficiaries, local governments, ministry staff, and the private 
sector.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Multiple stakeholders will play important roles in ensuring the successful implementation 
of the proposed project and achieving the intended project outcomes. Sanitation is mostly 
a
private good (or at least the level of sanitation services that will be provided in 
Cameroon in the coming decade - latrines, septic tanks). However, sanitation has clear 
public implications as health and environment benefits only accrue if sanitation is 
implemented by all or nearly all households. Households are not only benefiting from 
improved sanitation but also bear the responsibility to construct and maintain on-site 
sanitation facilities. The demand driven approach will focus on involving them to the 
maximum in the project.  
 
During project preparation, the Ministry of Energy and Water and the Municipality of 
Douala played the lead role together with local government officials and the Bank 
consultants. They conferred with each other and with the communities through public 
meetings and through meetings with community leaders.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/10/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/05/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/10/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  6
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meike van Ginneken 
05/06/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
04/26/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
04/29/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
05/06/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
05/06/2011 
Comments:   
