Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/28/2011 
Report No.:  AC5183
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P087004 
Original Project Name: CV Road Sector 
Support Project 
Country:  Cape Verde 
Project ID:  P112767 
Project Name:  Cape Verde Road Sector Support Project - 2nd Additional Financ 
Task Team Leader:  Kavita Sethi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);Central government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Rural services and 
infrastructure (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.09
3.09 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Development objective: The populations on five islands will have improved access to 
social services and markets via improved and less vulnerable road networks. Two types 
of network interventions will be pursued in achieving this objective: (i) filling network 
gaps characterized by poor access, thus reducing extreme isolation; and (ii) rehabilitation 
on key links, thus preserving the integrity of the network. The project is expected to  
benefit poor and vulnerable populations.  
 
The project will contribute to the higher level poverty reduction objectives, stated in the 
GPRSP, of promoting economic growth and improving living conditions. This will be 
done by supporting improved management of the roads and infrastructure sectors and 
reducing the vulnerability of road networks, thus facilitating physical access of the poor 
to market opportunities and social services.  
 
Rationale for Bank Involvement  
Page  2
The Bank Group's program for Cape Verde for period 2009-12 is spelled out in the 
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) presented to the Board in April 2009. The Strategy 
provides a framework for the Bank Group's selective support for the implementation of 
the GPRSPII priorities to support its economic transformation.  The Bank Strategy is 
articulated around three objectives: (a) promoting good governance and public sector 
capacity; (b) improving competitiveness and the investment climate for private sector-led 
growth; and (c) strengthening human capital and social cohesion. The proposed project is 
an integral part of the CPS and focuses on pillars (b) and (c) above.  
 
The Bank has played a key role in supporting the Road Sector Support Program through 
the Road Sector Support project (RSSP). The RSSP is assisting with sector reforms and 
capacity building in contrast to other donor funding that is exclusively for physical 
investments.  Involvement by the Bank thus remains essential to furthering and 
entrenching reforms in the transport sector. Notwithstanding the difficulties in 
concentrating the road asset planning, investment and maintenance functions in the Road 
Institute, the Bank has been successful in promoting significant enhancements in the 
management of the road network. Now, completing the consolidation of the reforms in 
the road subsector by building stronger capacity is crucial, not only to ensure the 
sustainability of the achievements but also to push forward the reform efforts in the other 
transport subsectors with the aim of modernizing their management. The Bank's deeper 
involvement is expected to continue to have a catalytic effect on the utilization and 
availability of other multi and bilateral donor resources.   
 
3. Project Description 
IDA has joined other donors in financing a package of sector reforms, capacity building 
and civil works to meet priority needs in the road network. IDA has taken the lead on 
institutional aspects, particularly road management, while financing selected civil works 
to fill priority gaps not covered by other donor or domestic resources.  
 
Proposed Road network Rehabilitation and Upgrading: Praia - Cidade Velha.  The 
Government proposes for consideration, under the additional financing, the rehabilitation 
and upgrade of the road Praia-Cidade Velha (6 km).  
 
Rural Secondary/Feeder Roads: The government has proposed about 14 kms of 
secondary/feeder roads in the north of the island of Santiago for rehabilitation and 
upgrade.  Currently these roads are tracks, with an average 3 meter wide with sections 
either of cobblestone or earth.  The feasibility and design studies for these roads are also 
being procured.  
 
Proposed Support for Capacity building of Instituto de Estradas (IE). The proposed 
activity will continue to support the necessary creation of adequate capacity in the Road 
Agency with a focus on investment and maintenance planning, and contract management. 
The lessons learned under the pilot performance based maintenance contracts and the 
scale up of the PBMC will also be supported under this component.  
 
Page  3
The main outcomes indicators are: (i) Roads in good and fair condition as a share of 
total classified roads (%);  (ii) trip frequency in targeted areas (number per month per 
person); (iii) travel time to nearest market (minutes); and (iv) vehicle operating costs 
(USD/km). The core roads indicators are added to the results frameworks, including data 
on project beneficiaries, by gender.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project covers the Cidade Velha area, which is the first settlement in the islands and 
the site of the oldest church in West Africa. Cape Verde is seeking inclusion of Cidade 
Velha in the list of World Heritage Sites maintained by UNESCO. The construction of a 
by-pass contouring the old city is also being planned by the government. The 
rehabilitation of the road and the by-pass would help preserve the historical value of the 
old city as well as support the development plans for the area. A feasibility study of the 
proposed road is being carried out. The study will take into account demographic and 
economic activity trends, existing development plans for the area, as well as the 
conservation concerns applicable to UNESCO World Heritage sites.  
 
The project will also cover secondary or feeder roads in the north of the island of 
Santiago for rehabilitation and upgrade.  These secondary roads connect some isolated, 
but relatively populated rural settlements, and important agricultural production areas to 
the core road network.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS) 
Mr Medou Lo (AFTWR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified as Category B and safeguards performance under the original 
project was reviewed by a Bank safeguard specialist. Design and implementation of the 
Page  4
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMP) and Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) were found to be satisfactory.  For the activities to be 
covered under additional financing, the potential impacts of rehabilitation of the 6 km 
main road to Cidade Velha are expected to be minor on the surrounding environment.  
 
The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
and an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were prepared and approved by the 
Bank for the original project and these documents were disclosed on January 11, 2005.  
 
The updated EIA/ESMP for the road to Cidade Velha was disclosed November 11, 
2010. It includes measures for dealing with physical cultural resources, including chance 
finds procedures, which will be added to the civil works contractors' implementation and 
monitoring manuals. In this connection, the project will strengthen IE's capacity to 
supervise environmental and social performance.  
 
For rehabilitation of the 14 km rural roads, a preliminary review has been completed 
and does not indicate any need for involuntary resettlement or land acquisition.  Should 
there be any need for any resettlement, the ARAP will be updated as and when necessary, 
once the alignment of the proposed rehabilitation is finalized. The EIA for the original 
project, which includes the rural roads, will also be updated as and when necessary. Any 
updated EIAs, as well as the ESMPs, will be disclosed in-country, at the PCO and in all 
municipalities where works are planned.  
 
The specific guidelines on monitoring of environmental and social impacts contained in 
the updated ESMP will be incorporated into the bidding documents and contracts of civil 
works contractors.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The indirect impacts are improved socio-economic livelihoods and access to services of 
surrounding communities along the road network. There are risks of traffic accidents (due 
to disruptions), dust, noise, and other effects during construction, and increased traffic 
and movement of transport and populations after construction. Potential impacts of high 
speed traffic may affect both human and animal populations. All of these impacts are 
addressed in the ESMP and updated for the specific locations that will be covered under 
additional financing.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No other alternatives are considered as no adverse impacts are foreseen.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
With regard to the Cidade Velha road, an update of the original EIA/ESMP has been 
prepared as part of the feasibility study for financed road segments. The updated 
EIA/ESMP also analyzes if there will be a need for land acquisition. As covered in the 
Page  5
existing ESMP, in case resettlement and/or land acquisition will be required, the 
guidelines in the ESMP specify that an update of the original Abbreviated Resettlement 
Action Plan (ARAP) will be prepared. The updated ESMP has been disclosed in country 
and in the Bank's InfoShop in November 2010.  The availability of the safeguard 
document for comments has been announced in the newspapers and accessible to the 
public. These include a summary of the stakeholder consultations, especially with 
directly affected populations. The Updated EIA/ESMP will be part of the bidding 
documents, so that the contractor will be able to prepare his own contractor ESMP. The 
supervising engineer will be responsible for monitoring the adequate implementation of 
the contractor's ESMP. The Instituto de Estradas will establish a small environmental and 
social management unit, which will oversee the implementation of the Updated ESMP 
and Updated ARAP. With regard to the rural roads, the EIA will also be updated as 
necessary.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the beneficiaries, in the rural areas, who are poor, landlocked 
during the rainy season, and marginalized road users in the Cidade Velha Road area, and 
the vulnerable communities who will benefit from the secondary/feeder roads. The other 
stakeholders are commercial and merchandise transport users, and the institutions from 
government and social services who are able to deliver government and social services to 
the remote sites.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/16/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/11/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/15/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/07/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/25/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kavita Sethi 
02/15/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz 
02/23/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/15/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
02/15/2011 
Comments:   
