Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/25/2011 
Report No.:  AC5895
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Central Asia 
Project ID:  P120788 
Project Name:  Central Asia Hydrometeorology Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Salman Anees 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 24, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (100%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.52 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Climate Investment Funds 
7.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objective of the CAHMP is to improve the accuracy of hydromet services in 
Central Asia, with particular focus on Kyrgyz Republic and Republic of Tajikistan.   
 
3. Project Description 
The CAHMP proposes three components: (A) Regional Component designed to 
strengthen all participating NMSs; and two country-level components designed to 
improve capacity in the weakest NMSs; (B) Kyrgyz Republic; and (C) Republic of 
Tajikistan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
CAHMP activities will primarily be carried out in the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan. In 
addition, regional activities such as training and capacity building will take place in all 
participating countries including Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.   
 
Page  2
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will finance installation of equipment to monitor water levels and flow rates, 
mainly replacing old and non-functioning equipment at existing sites, and the minor 
rehabilitation of computer rooms and offices, for new equipment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No physical environmental impacts are expected and planned activities will have indirect 
environmental benefits.  The installation of new monitoring equipment may include 
minor temporary disruptions along stream banks, or other sites to be defined, but not of a 
scale which would justify requiring preparation of an EMP.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Operational Manual will have a section to address minor environmental issues 
arising from placement of monitoring equipment, disposal/installation of equipment and 
disposal of construction waste from office renovations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As this is Category C program, there is no requirementy for consultation/disclosure of the 
environment section of the OM. Implementing agencies are being made aware of the 
Bank's safeguards policies and their relationship to Project implementation.   
Page  3
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
N/A 
Page  4
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Salman Anees 
02/24/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
02/25/2011 
Comments:   
