Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/03/2011 
Report No.:  AC6237
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Central African Republic 
Project ID:  P124278 
Project Name:  CAR-Agro-Pastoral Recovery Project 
Task Team Leader:  Bleoue Nicaise Ehoue 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (75%);Agricultural extension and 
research (25%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (80%);Rural policies and institutions (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
23.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase productivity and production of 
selected food crops and livestock species in the project area.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will support activities designed to: (i) enhance the capacity of households in 
the project area to increase productivity and production of selected food crops and 
livestock species, as well as to market surplus production of those food crops and 
livestock species (or products derived from those livestock species, e.g., eggs, meat); (ii) 
strengthen public agencies, non-governmental organizations, and producer organizations 
and other community-based groups, and (iii) carry out project coordination and 
management activities, including project administration, financial management, 
procurement, monitoring and evaluation of project performance and impacts, and  
safeguards compliance.  
 
In terms of content, the project will support:  
 
Page  2
(a) 
increasing food crop production by focusing on provision of (i) consumable 
inputs for crop production (e.g., improved seed, fertilizers); (ii) capital equipment for 
crop production and processing (e.g., hand tools, cultivators, hullers, mills etc.); (iii) 
infrastructure to reduce post-harvest losses (e.g., drying floors, storage facilities); and (iv) 
of crop production advisory services.  
 
(b) 
increasing animal production through the: (i) introduction of parent stock of 
improved breeds (offspring will be distributed on a rotating basis), (ii) provision of 
livestock management advisory services; and (iii) strengthening of veterinary support 
services; (iv) the rehabilitation of slaughter houses  
 
(c) 
preparation and implementation of training plans, workshops, and study tours for 
managers and committee members of producer organizations and other community-based 
groups.  
 
(d) 
activities designed to strengthen the capacity of MRDA to carry out selected core 
functions, especially including program and project planning, implementation, and 
evaluation. The project will also: (i) support the development of a National Seed Law; (ii) 
provide specific technical and managerial support for ICRA; (iii) provide training for 
private multipliers in the project zone; and (iv) provide training for private firms and 
individuals, NGOs, and other agricultural input suppliers  
 
(e) 
activities designed to support producer organizations and community-based 
organizations, with the goal of improving their governance mechanisms and instilling 
them with sound business practices. The proposed project will provide training, technical 
assistance, and advisory services to build basic operating capacity in all of the producer 
organizations and community-based organizations with which it engages. Using 
participatory approaches to ensure engagement with the entire membership of each 
organization, the objective will be to rationalize organizational structures and functions, 
strengthen member commitment, and increase effective participation. Where appropriate, 
the proposed project will also work to improve business planning and management 
capacity in a selected number of more commercially oriented organizations.  
 
(f) 
coordination and management activities, including: (i) project administration; (ii) 
financial management; (iii) procurement; (iv) monitoring and evaluation of project 
performance and impact; and (v) safeguards compliance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
During the appraisal mission, agreement was reached with the Government to implement 
the project in the south-western part of the country, focusing specifically on two agro-
ecological zones: (i) the Guinean zone, including the prefectures of Lobaye, Sangha-
Mbaéré, and Mambére-Kadei; and (ii) the Guinean-Sudanese zone, including the northern 
bank of two sub-prefectures in Nana-Mambéré.  
 
The two targeted zones are suited to production of roots and tubers (cassava, yam, taro, 
sweet potatoes), cereals (maize, rice), bananas and plantains, vegetables grains (peanuts, 
Page  3
cowpeas), tree crops (coffee, cocoa, palm oil, pepper), and fruits (pineapple, avocado). 
Forest resources (especially wood), fauna, and mineral resources are also important 
sources of income. These areas are not well served by rural roads, and producers 
consequently face a huge challenge in delivering their agricultural products to markets. 
Market infrastructure, including storage facilities, is equally deficient   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While the project is not expected to have any large scale, significant and/or irreversible 
impacts, it may have small and site-specific impacts, such as soil erosion, pesticide 
poisoning, soil pollution, deforestation, depletion of soil fertility.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not incur potential indirect and/or long term impacts because of its small-
scale and also because appropriate mitigation measures for activities will be developed 
and implemented. Nevertheless there is a potential risk of cumulative impact of combined 
activities in these four prefectures. The project will ensure that this risk is mitigated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant. In the 'no-project' scenario, poverty and conflict over resources are likely to 
increase in extent and severity over most of the rural areas in CAR, especially in the 
regions where the project will be implemented. This will result in greater resource 
degradation than the 'with-project' scenario.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower's capacity to deal with safeguard issues is deemed to have been improved 
based on their combined track record in-country, as well as with previous Bank projects. 
The borrower will submit an ESMF which will (i) establish clear procedures and 
methodologies for the environmental and social planning, review and approval of sub- 
projects; (ii) specify roles and responsibilities, and outline the necessary reporting 
procedures, for managing and monitoring environmental and social concerns related to 
projects; (iii) determine the training, capacity building needed to successfully implement 
the provisions of the ESMF; and (iv) establish the project financing requirement to 
implement the ESMF. Environmental and Social Management Plans will be prepared as 
and when necessary during project implementation. As there are Indigenous Peoples in 
the project area, an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared, based on a social 
assessment and consultations with indigenous communities. The Plan will address project 
impacts on and benefits for Indigenous Peoples. Finally, the borrower will update the 
Pest Management Plan that has been prepared under the Food Crisis project. All these 
documents will be publicly disclosed in CAR and at the World Bank InfoShop 120 days 
after effectiveness of the project, as the project is under OP/BP. 8.0.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include rural producers in four prefectures  of which (i) the Guinean 
zone, including the prefectures of Lobaye, Sangha-
Mbaéré, and Mambére-Kadei; and (ii) 
the Guinean-Sudanese zone, including the northern bank of two sub-prefectures in Nana-
Mambéré, rural associations, mayors, local representative of the Ministry of Environment 
and Ecology, local representative of the Ministry of Agriculture.  The project will ensure 
that, during the preparation and disclosure of the safeguard documents and also during 
project implementation, they are consulted. The ESMF, the PMP and the IPP will clearly 
indicate the way that these stakeholders will be consulted during the implementation 
phase. All safeguards documents will be publicly disclosed and within the project means, 
at least the executive summary will be translated in the local language.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/19/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/19/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/19/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/19/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/19/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/19/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/19/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/19/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/19/2011 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
No 
Page  6
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bleoue Nicaise Ehoue 
04/25/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson 
04/25/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor 
04/25/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/25/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/25/2011 
Comments:   
