Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/20/2011 
Report No.:  AC6207
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P072030 
Original Project Name: Urban 
Development Project 
Country:  Chad 
Project ID:  P123501 
Project Name:  Additional Financing Urban Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jan Drozdz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (85%);Flood protection (15%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
27.40 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective will remain the same as for the original project, i.e. to 
increase sustainable access to municipal services for residents in targeted projected cities 
(N'Djamena, Moundou, Sarh, Abeche and Doba).   
 
3. Project Description 
The design and scope of the proposed Additional Financing will reflect the objectives of 
the project, namely (i) the completion of drainage and water infrastructure in Moundou, 
Sarh and Abeche and (ii) the scaling up of the impacts of the project with a focus on 
increasing sustainable access to water services by funding additional investments in water 
supply infrastructure, a Service Contract with a private operator, and by enhancing social 
accountability to improve the performance and governance of the recently established 
national water utility STE (Societe Tchadienne des Eaux).  The project will support 
expanded activities under Components A and B of the original project as well as new 
activities under an added Component C as summarized hereafter.  
 
Page  2
Component A: Strengthening municipal and urban management capacities (US$0.90 
million)  
 
Component A.2: Strengthening the capacity of the central administration and 
deconcentrated ministries to support the municipalities (US$0.90 million). Under this 
component, the project will finance the operating costs of the PADUR Implementing 
Agency (CCP) for three additional years.  
 
Component B: Provision of basic infrastructure and services (US$15.25 million)  
 
Component B.1: For the city of N'Djamena (US$8.57 million). Under this component 
the project will finance the construction of new storage tanks and pumping station, the 
construction and equipments of boreholes, the extension of the water distribution network 
and the procurement of connection fittings to expand piped water services.  
 
Components B.2, 3, 4: For the city of Moundou ($1.04 million), Sarh (US$1.66 
million), Abeche (US$1.60 million). Under this component the project will finance the 
completion of drainage and water supply works funded under the original project but 
facing cost overruns.  
 
Component B.6: M&E, studies, supervision of works and audits (US$2.38 million).  
Under this component, the project will finance, for the works funded under Component 
B: (i) the preparation of engineering studies and bidding documents, (ii) the preparation 
of environmental/social studies, (iii) supervision of the works; this component will also 
finance (iv) the preparation of a medium-term investment plan covering the 11 cities and 
towns where the STE operates, (v) financial audit of the project, (vi) the update of the 
project implementation and procedures manuals, (vii) Master Plan for N'Djamena water 
supply.  
 
Component C: Strengthening sustainable access to urban water services (US$11.25 
million)  
 
Component C.1: Service Contract (US$5.00 million). Under this component, the project 
will finance a 3-year performance-based Service Contract with a private operator to 
improve the technical, commercial, financial performance and accountability of the STE.   
 
Component C.2: Operating and rehabilitation fund (US$5.45 million).  Under this 
component, the project will finance the procurement and replacement of meters, the 
rehabilitation of networks, connections and boreholes, the procurement of equipment for 
a
call center, a customer census and update of the customer database, a communication 
campaign, a customer satisfaction survey and the set-up of a Geographical Information 
System.  
 
Component C.3: Technical assistance for the recruitment and supervision of the private 
Operator (US$0.30 million).  Under this component, the project will fund technical 
assistance for the preparation of bidding documents and data room for the Service 
Contract, for the management of the recruitment process of the private Operator and for 
the technical audit of the performance of the private Operator.  
 
Component C.4: Technical assistance for the financial sustainability and formation of 
the STE (US$0.50 million).  Under this component, the project will finance (i) a tariff 
study, (ii) technical assistance for the design and implementation of a mechanism of 
payment of public institutions bills, (iii) technical assistance for the completion of the 
legal, financial and organizational formation of the STE.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
N'Djamena, Moundou, Sarh, Abeche and Doba.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
From an environmental and social safeguards standpoint, the Urban Development Project 
-
Republic of Chad is a Category B project. That is, the environmental and social impacts 
of the project, for the most part, are expected to be minimal, site-specific and manageable 
to an accepted level. There are two Bank Safeguard policies triggered under the project. 
These include: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 
4.12) which are triggered for the original project.  
 
The two environmental safeguards instruments prepared by the original project are the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF). The original project is rated satisfactory in terms of overall safeguards 
compliance for both environmental and social (Involuntary Resettlement) safeguards.   
The ESMF and RPF were disclosed to the public within the country on June 7, 2006 and 
at the World Bank Info shop on June 16, 2006.  
 
The project development objective will remain the same as for the original project and 
the project will support expanded activities under the components A and B of the original 
project as well as new activities under an added component C which is to strengthen 
sustainable access to urban water services. None of the additional activities included in 
the proposed additional financing affect the environmental category of the Project, which 
remains at Category B.  
 
Page  4
No new safeguard policies are triggered. Given the contemplated additional financing, 
the ESMF and RPF have been updated to take into account the new activities and were 
disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop and in-country on April 11, 2011.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term adverse impact is anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In line with the triggering of the two operational policies cited above and because of the 
lack of site-specific information about the environmental and social characteristics of 
future investments in the additional financing, the Project updated the two safeguards 
instruments, namely the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), 
and the Resettlement Plan Framework (RPF) prepared for the original project.  
 
The ESMF and RPF set out standard methods and procedures, specifying how sub-
projects, whose locations are unknown at this stage, will systematically address 
environmental and social issues at all stages.  These include: sub-project screening, 
categorization, sitting, design, implementation, operational, and maintenance. At the core 
of this approach are: (i) the systematic screening of all sub-projects; (ii) procedures for 
applying the environmental checklist or for conducting ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs - 
whichever or combination of which is deemed applicable - for all identified sub-projects, 
(iii) institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified 
impacts; (iv) typical environmental management planning process for addressing 
negative externalities in the course of project implementation; (v) a system for 
monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures; (vi) environmental and social 
environmental clauses to be inserted in the bidding documents; and (vii) recommended 
capacity building measures for environmental planning and monitoring of project 
activities.  
 
Like the ESMF, the RPF also outlines the principles and procedures for resettlement 
and/or compensation of subproject-affected people, and establishes standards for 
identifying, assessing and mitigating negative impacts of program supported activities.  
In addition, the RPF will guide the preparation and implementation of resettlement action 
plans (RAPs) for each individual sub project that triggers the involuntary resettlement 
policy when needed. Specific ESIAs will be prepared for relevant activities before project 
implementation along with Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). All two safeguard 
documents will be reviewed and cleared by the Sector Manager before appraisal as the 
safeguard responsibilities of the project is transferred to the Sector Unit.  
 
Page  5
The Project has an environmental and social specialist who dealt with the 
implementation of the previous ESMF and RPF. He also helped in the preparation of an 
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) for the sub projects of the original 
project. In addition of the existing institutional arrangements under Urban Development 
Project, the STE will be reinforced by an environmental and social staff for a day by day 
follow up of mitigation measures regarding the additional funding focusing on STE with 
the main objective to create a long term culture of environmental and social management 
concerns in this newly created company.  The environmental and social staff within STE 
will be hired during the general recruitment of STE staffing process and no later than July 
1, 2012. The Project resources will be used to provide relevant training to this staff.  
 
The STE has been constituted at the initiative and by decision of its sole shareholder, the 
Government of Chad, after dissolution of the national water and electricity utility 
(STEE).  At the time of the Government's decision to dissolve STEE, the Government 
also took the initiative to prepare and finance a social plan that would benefit all STEE 
staff.  However, the Bank's involvement has not been sought in such decision nor the 
implementation thereof.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF and the RPF for the original operation have been prepared according to Bank 
and national safeguard policies, following a consultation framework, involving relevant 
stakeholder groups, both public and private, as well as in civil society and local 
communities, municipalities consistent with the approach adopted at project inception. 
During the project implementation, the consultation process used during the 
implementation of Urban Development Project will be reinforced by ensuring that during 
the preparation of all safeguards documents, all main stakeholders ,as listed above, are 
consulted and all environmental and social screening forms and alone EAs when 
applicable are publicly disclosed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/04/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/04/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  6
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  7
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jan Drozdz 
04/20/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna 
04/20/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor 
04/20/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
04/20/2011 
Comments:  The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities (ASPEN has 
confirmed that this can remain a category-B, transferred project). 
