Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/10/2011 
Report No.:  AC5954
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Chad 
Project ID:  P113030 
Project Name:  Local Development Program Support Project II 
Task Team Leader:  Soulemane Fofana 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 16, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Health (15%);Primary 
education (15%);Water supply (15%);Public administration- Finance (5%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Rural policies and institutions 
(25%);Decentralization (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00 
 Local 
Communities 
2.25
52.25 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall purpose of the Government's Local Development Program, as reflected in the 
(revised) APL program objective, is to provide improved access to infrastructure and 
basic social services in targeted districts, as well as improved planning, management and 
monitoring by local communities and communes of decentralized investments. The 
Project Development Objectives for Phase 2 are: (1) improved access to basic 
infrastructures and social services in targeted districts, and (2) improved planning, 
management and monitoring by local communities and communes of decentralized 
investments.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed operation includes two major technical components: (i) capacity building 
of local communities and communes and support to decentralization; and   (ii) 
decentralized financing of micro-projects. The Project also includes a project 
Page  2
management component to support project implementation activities.  The estimated cost 
of the Project is USD 77.25 million, of which IDA financing is USD 25 million.  
 
Component 1:  Capacity building of local communities and communes and support to 
decentralization (US$12 million, of which IDA US$4 million)  
 
The objective of Component 1 is to provide improved technical and fiduciary skills 
needed at the different decentralized levels and the national institutions responsible for 
decentralization.  The estimated cost of Component 1 is USD 12 million.  It will include 
two sub-components.  
 
Sub-component 1.1:  Strengthening capacity of communal and local communities  
 
Under this sub-component, the Project will finance capacity-building activities to 
benefit targeted communes and local communities. These will include: (a) participatory 
identification and prioritization of capacity-building needs to improve local governance; 
participatory diagnosis for the elaboration of Local Development Plans (LDPs) and 
Communal Development Plans (CDPs); (b) identification, submission, implementation, 
and monitoring of local and communal micro-projects as defined in the Local 
Development Plans (LDP) and Communal Development Plans (CDP); and (c) 
strengthening of civil society organizations in participatory local development 
management.  
 
Sub-component 1.2:  Support to decentralization  
 
Under this sub-component, the Project will provide technical assistance to strengthen 
the capacity of the national institutions responsible for decentralization, focusing 
especially on newly elected leaders, who will be empowered to assume their mission 
regarding local development.  These will help with the consolidation of priority activities 
of the Ministry Charged with Decentralization (MCD).  
 
Component 2:  Decentralized financing of micro-projects (US$56.25 million, of which 
IDA US$18 million)  
 
The objective of Component 2 is: increased availability of basic infrastructures in 
targeted districts.  It will support targeted financing of demand-driven micro-projects 
based on Local Development Plans (LDPs) and Annual Investment Plans (AIPs). All 
micro-projects will be identified through participatory processes and included in the 
integrated Local Development Plans (LDPs). The micro-projects, to be financed through 
a
matching grant mechanism, will promote access to basic socio-economic services, 
income-generating activities, and sustainable natural resources management through the 
adoption and application of innovative technologies. The Project will channel funds to 
communes and local communities to be used for financing: (i) socio-economic 
infrastructure micro-projects (education, health, water facilities, etc), (ii) environmental 
and natural resources management micro-projects (acacia plantations, sustainable land 
management, Sahelian gardens, etc.), and (iii) rural income-generating micro-projects 
Page  3
(improved seeds, agricultural equipment, drying facilities, small transformation and 
storage facilities, etc.. The estimated cost of Component 2 is USD 56.25 million.  
 
Component 3:  Project coordination and management (US$ 9 million, of which IDA 
US$ 3 million)  
 
The objective of Component 3 is to support the successful implementation of the 
project. It will support project coordination and management activities, including: (i) 
administrative activities; (ii) fiduciary activities including financial management and 
procurement; (iii) technical execution; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation of project 
performance and impact. The PMU will provide general coordination functions with all 
national institutions, especially those charged with decentralization, environmental 
stewardship, and natural resources management. It will further ensure compliance with 
the World Bank#s procurement, disbursement, financial management, and safeguards 
policies and procedures.  The estimated cost of Component 3 is USD 9.0 million.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented in all 61 districts of the country.  In the 19 districts in 
which LDPSP 1 was already active, the Project will support additional capacity building 
and finance additional micro-projects. In the other 42 districts, the Project will initiate 
operations.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The safeguards studies noted that the introduction of agricultural income-generating 
activities such as small-scale irrigation among the potential micro-projects to be financed 
in the zones of the Chari River, the Logone River, and Lake Chad, which are 
international water bodies, may have a cumulative effect on their use.  
 
Agricultural intensification due to Project-financed rehabilitation of irrigation works and 
capacity building may lead to increased use of pesticides and / or other agro-chemicals, 
which could have adverse impacts on water quality.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant adverse impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government of Chad has updated and disclosed, under a designated Inter-ministerial 
Project Preparation Committee, an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and a Pest Management Plan (PMP). 
These documents were prepared during the first phase of the program (PROADEL-1) and 
have been updated as necessary for use during the second phase (PROADEL-2).  
 
The ESMF specifies standards, methods and procedures, specifying how unidentified 
future micro-projects (whose locations are still unknown) will systematically address 
environmental and social issues in the screening and categorization, sitting, design, 
implementation, operational phases and maintenance of the micro-project lifecycle.  
 
The project team and implementers will ensure that the proposed mitigation measures 
are derived from micro-project-specific ESIAs/EMPs, and more specifically: (i) have 
been discussed and agreed upon by concerned parties; (ii) include an assessment of the 
capacity to implement the measures; and (iii) are acceptable within the national 
regulatory and legal framework, including laws and regulations concerning cultural 
heritage and antiquities.  
 
The Pest Management Plan (PMP) assesses relevant pest issues in Chad and evaluates 
current farmer pest control practices.  It calls for the use of IPM practices and details 
those IPM practices which have been shown to be efficacious. The PMP also provides 
guidance for limited and appropriate use of pesticides when non-chemical means are 
insufficient and chemical means are technically and economically justified.  It highlights 
Page  5
the criteria to be used in processing micro-projects, from preparation to approval, 
implementation, and monitoring, as well as the official institutions that should be 
involved, depending on the nature and contents of micro-projects. Micro-projects with 
potentially negative environmental and social impacts are required to formulate 
environmental impact assessments and are subject to public consultations. The PMP also 
recommends some specific training and practice modules on IPM and provides a 
comprehensive Action Plan for the implementation of its key requirements. Following 
clearance by the Bank, the updated PMP was disclosed in-country on November 29, 2010 
and at the Bank InfoShop on December 2, 2010, prior to appraisal.  
 
The RPF deals with policy, legal, and regulatory mechanisms on how to address cases 
of land acquisition, loss of livelihoods, and restriction of access in protected areas, on the 
part of affected people, as a result of project activities, in case they happen. It also 
provides a coherent framework, eligibility criteria and asset valuation methods for 
compensation and/or resettlement of affected people, as well as grievance mechanisms of 
affected persons, in case of unsatisfactory arrangements between the parties involved.  
 
OP 4.11 is triggered because Chad, as a country, is viewed as a vast country with a rich 
cultural heritage.  In view of the lack of specifics on the number, sites and scale of micro-
projects, it was judged prudent to use caution when implementing the various social and 
productive investments.  This involves ensuring that ESIAs consultants and contractors 
are able to do due diligence on, or are teamed up with PCR experts, to ensure that 
impacts on PCR are assessed and mitigation measures commensurate to those impacts, 
including proper handling of chance finds are implemented in the design, screening, 
implementation, monitoring and maintenance of subprojects, in accordance with national 
and Bank policies and procedures.  
 
Together, these safeguard instruments provide both a set of planning tools and the 
means for harmonious integration of the Project in its bio-physical and socio-economic 
environments, with the objective of maximizing positive impacts effects on these 
environments. The ESMF, RPF and PMP include institutional arrangements, outlining 
the roles and responsibilities for the various stakeholder groups involved, for screening, 
reviewing and approving micro-projects, as well as for implementing and monitoring 
their mitigation measures.  They also include provisions for capacity strengthening, to 
ensure that safeguard measures are adequately implemented.  
 
All of the aforementioned instruments were cleared and disclosed in the country and at 
the World Bank Infoshop, prior to appraisal. Prior to disclosure, a stakeholders' workshop 
was organized by the Preparation Committee. This approach was used to share the results 
of the updated studies, mainstreaming ownership, and seeking input from these 
stakeholders in order to improve quality and soundness of these instruments. 
Recommendations from both ASPEN and the stakeholders' workshop were incorporated 
into the final safeguard reports prior to disclosure.  
 
In the main, stakeholders' recommendations include: (i) Providing the various actors 
sufficient means to carry out the follow-up and the supervision of of micro-projects' 
Page  6
EMPs and/or RAPs; (ii) sharing as much as possible projects safeguards instruments with 
projects stakeholders; (iii) strengthening the capacity of the various stakeholder groups in 
environmental assessment and monitoring and reporting procedures, through training and 
sensitization programs; (iv) ensuring that proposed mitigations measures are effectively 
implemented; (v) ensuring that local communities are involved in the implementation and 
monitoring of subprojects; and making sure that the project implementation include an 
environmental and social sub-unit, whose role and responsibilities are cleared defined, to 
ensure that the project safeguard function will effectively be coordinated and carried out.  
 
These recommendations have been reflected in the ESMF. Relevant provisions from the 
three sets of report will be reflected in Project Implementation Manual (PIM).  
 
International Waterways: The safeguards studies concluded that the introduction of 
agricultural income-generating activities such as small-scale irrigation among the 
potential micro-projects to be financed in the zones of the Chari River, the Logone River, 
and Lake Chad, which are international water bodies, may have a cumulative effect on 
their use.  Therefore, in conformity with OP7.50, on November 30, 2010 the Government 
sent a notification to the Lake Chad Basin Commission to inform riparian countries about 
the proposed project activities. The Chad Basin Commission responded to the 
Government on December 3, 2010, authorizing the latter to implement the proposed 
PROADEL-2. The Commission invited the Government to inform the Commission 
before implementing small-scale irrigation micro-projects in order to agree on the best 
and suitable techniques to be used.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF, the RPF and the PMP were prepared following a broad-based consultation 
framework, involving all relevant stakeholders, including local communities and their 
representatives, farmers, herders, local services service providers, local NGOs, 
representatives from various Ministries including Ministry of Livestock, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Economics and Planning, Ministry of 
Water, the Ministry of Land Management, and the Inter-Ministerial Committee for 
Project Preparation . This participatory approach will continue and will be carried out 
throughout project implementation.  
 
All instruments were cleared and disclosed in the country and at the World Bank 
InfoShop, prior to appraisal. Prior to disclosure, a stakeholder's workshop was organized 
by the Project Preparation Committee. This approach was used to share the results of the 
studies, to mainstream ownership and seek input from these stakeholders in order to 
improve quality and soundness of the instruments.  The recommendations and relevant 
provisions from the set of safeguard documents will be reflected in Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  7
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/02/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/02/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/02/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/02/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/02/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/02/2010 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Page  8
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Soulemane Fofana 
12/07/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
12/16/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
12/21/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
01/10/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/10/2011 
Comments:   
Page  9
