Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/23/2011 
Report No.:  AC5922
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P091020 
Original Project Name: Fujian Highway 
Sector Investment 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P119862 
Project Name:  Fujian Highway Sector Investment Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaoke Zhai 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 10, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (99%);Sub-national government administration (1%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
97.00
97.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective of the FHSIP aims to increase the effective use of the 
road infrastructure in Fujian Province to support its social and economic development by: 
(i) enhancing its rural roads network; (ii) reducing transport costs; and (iii) facilitating the 
interconnection across the coastal provinces.  
 
The additional financing will support this goal without changes to the project 
development objective.   
 
3. Project Description 
The original project has four components:  
 
A.Rural Roads Improvement Program (RRIP). Construction of selected road sections of 
the Rural Roads Improvement Program, including provision of technical assistance for its 
supervision;  
 
Page  2
B.Yong#an-Wuping Expressway (YWE). Construction of 195 km long four lanes new 
highway section of the Changchun#Shenzhen expressway between Yong#an (Sanming 
City) and Yanqian in Wuping (Longyan City), including the acquisition and installation 
of electrical and mechanical facilities, the construction of buildings and annex areas for 
service and safety operations, and provision of technical assistance for its supervision;  
 
C.Highway Maintenance Program (HMPP). Development and implementation on a pilot 
basis of a program for sourcing out periodic and routine highway maintenance in selected 
sections of the Fujian Province highway road network, including staff training and 
provision of technical assistance;  
 
D. Institutional Strengthening Program (ISP). Carrying out studies and training activities 
as part of an institutional strengthening program for FPCD.  
 
The additional financing aims to scale up the impact of the RRIP Component of the 
original project by supporting:  
 
A.Construction of rural roads selected from the provincial level rural road databank, 
including provision of technical assistance for their supervision;  
 
D.Provision of training activities and study tours for the benefit of the local government 
agencies in the issues concerning: (i) environmental design and construction of rural 
roads and (ii) rural road maintenance and management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Additional Financing activities consist of rehabilitation or rebuilding of at least an 
additional 1,000 km of rural roads in the 61 counties/districts of 8 cities in Fujian 
province to a standard of Class III/IV all-weather roads. These roads are existing roads 
selected from the provincial-level rural road databank, identified in the 2010 feasibility 
study report and will be implemented in compliance with the RRI framework.  
 
The roads provide access between administrative villages, provincial roads, and natural 
villages. The proposed roads have an average length of about 5 km and are mostly 
unpaved and under poor riding conditions.  The project will help to improve their 
condition through paving.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (SASDE) 
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
An assessment of the environmental and social issues raised by the implementation of the 
project corroborated that:  
 
The most significant environmental and social issues of the Fujian Highway Sector 
Investment Project (FHSIP) were associated with the Yong#an-Wuping Expressway 
(YWE), which by itself warranted a Category A for environmental purposes. Because of 
its rehabilitation nature largely within existing rights-of-way, the Rural Roads 
Improvement Program (RRIP) did not require significant land acquisition or structure 
relocation, with the exception of a small number of roads that required small land 
acquisition or house demolition due to minor adjustments in curves.  Though to a reduced 
extent, the implementation of RRIP causes limited impacts on the environment including 
soil erosion and subsequent water pollution, damage on vegetation and wild animals, and 
noise and dust problems mainly during construction.  
 
The additional financing will continue with the same type of works as the original 
project. All the road segments are existing roads which need to be upgraded or rebuilt to 
a
standard of Class III/IV all-weather roads.  The final scope of works is identified in the 
feasibility study report by the FPCD.  
 
The additional financing will pose the same type and degree of social impacts as the 
current RRIP implementation in new project areas. An assessment of the environmental 
and social issues due to the implementation of the RRIP showed that:  
 
-
The great majority of projects posed no potential environmental impacts. Most 
issues were associated with the rehabilitation of roads in hilly terrains, and crossing of 
streams;  
 
-
Some roads (less than 5%) were rehabilitated near protected areas but no road was 
built in the core area of a  nature reserve;  
Page  4
-
As expected, engineering works for pavement projects did not involve land 
acquisition and house demolition that could affect the villagers# standards of living. 
Besides, given the small scale nature of the rehabilitation activities, the low grade of the 
roads and the short construction period, the rural roads reconstruction projects had 
limited influence on the production and livelihood of the local people during 
construction.  
 
-
Only a small number of roads required land acquisition or house demolition due 
to small adjustments in curves. The Resettlement Officers in different areas coordinated 
the relevant compensation according to the Bank-approved Resettlement Policy 
Framework, resettlement policies and regulations. All the interviewed project-affected 
peoples were satisfied with the resettlement results as reported by the External Monitor.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the nature of the proposed works along existing alignments no major long term 
adverse issues are envisioned.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Given its programmatic and demand-driven nature, an Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) was developed including baseline environmental data, environmental 
management and supervision scheme, EA procedures, training plan and supervision and 
reporting system.  The draft EMF for original project was reviewed by the Bank and its 
final version was submitted to the Bank in March 2006. The EMF was updated and 
disclosed in December 2010 for additional financing activities. Based on the EMF, an EA 
is to be prepared and executed by local implementation entities on a county basis prior to 
the commencement of construction works, and be subject to the approval of the County 
Environmental Protection Bureau. Mitigation measures proposed in the EA are to be 
translated into contractual obligations. FPCD will be responsible for the overall guidance 
and monitoring, while the city/prefecture highway bureaus will be in charge of the 
monitoring of compliance, and county communications bureaus for the implementation 
of the EMF.  
 
The county communications bureaus shall report from the environmental safeguards 
perspective on the completion of the construction activities and final quality of each road 
using checklists developed in the EMF.  For those roads applying for the Bank funds, a 
record of inspection shall be submitted to the Bank together with the approval 
verification of FPCD on the compliance with the EMF, particularly adequate disposal of 
construction debris and machinery wastes, recovery of borrow pits and temporary camps, 
control of noise pollution, protection of water and soil erosion. During supervision, the 
Bank will randomly check county EAs and the checklists for a sample of Bank-funded 
roads.  For reference, a similar procedure will be also applied to a sample of non-Bank 
Page  5
funded road segments, as a means to assess the dissemination of the framework beyond 
the Bank-funded roads.  
 
A
land acquisition and resettlement policy framework was developed for the eventuality 
of exceptional cases where land acquisition or relocation is required. This policy 
framework of original project has been updated in December 2010 according to local 
laws and regulations on land acquisition as well as World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement.  It describes the overall legal framework, planning principles, procedures, 
compensatory and rehabilitation approach, consultation and participatory requirements, 
grievance redress mechanisms, and organizational and monitoring arrangements. The 
county communications bureaus shall report from the resettlement safeguards perspective 
on the completion of the construction activities and the result of each road using 
checklists developed in the RAF.  
 
Considering the possibility of financing roads in ethnic minority areas, a stand-alone 
document for the minority nationalities development framework for the RRIP was also 
prepared and disclosed.  All roads to be financed under the project would follow this 
framework in identifying possible negative impacts to areas with minority nationalities, 
and in developing and implementing the necessary development plans.  
 
For the additional financing component, and based on the experience of the RRIP, an 
updated EMF, RPF and an IPPF were prepared to reflect the new project scope, new land 
related policy as well as project management arrangements. The updated EMF introduces 
simpler screening criteria and standardized engineering codes of practice for the 
rehabilitation of rural roads, as well as more guidance to supervision engineers to ensure 
proper management of environmental issue by contractors. The EMF also stresses the 
need for additional training on environmental design of roads and rural road maintenance 
at local level.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The policy framework for resettlement and ethnic minorities will be distributed to local 
areas for implementation.  Mechanisms are built into the framework for local population 
to participate in identifying negative impacts, development and implementation of 
mitigation measures.  All the EMF, RPF and IPPF applied to the additional financing 
activities have been reviewed and approved by the Bank, and have been disclosed in 
Fujian Province and in the InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2011 
 
Page  6
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The demand-driven nature of the RRIP does not allow the ex-ante knowledge of whether 
investments will actually take place in areas with ethnic minorities, though the possibility 
is low given the general situation in Fujian.  Nonetheless, this possibility is covered under 
a
stand-alone Minority Nationalities Development Framework.  This framework was 
initially included under the resettlement and land acquisition framework, which was 
disclosed "in-country" on March 28, 2006.  The stand-alone report was again disclosed at 
the end of April.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
N/A 
Page  7
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Xiaoke Zhai 
12/08/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
11/21/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Songling Yao 
11/17/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/14/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
12/12/2010 
Comments:   
