Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5715 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/15/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P122321 
Project Name: JiTuHun Railway 
Task Team Leader: John Carter Scales 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 9, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
6,103.00
6,103.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to respond to existing and anticipated 
transport demand along the Jilin-Tumen-Hunchun corridor by providing increased capacity for 
freight and passengers, and faster travel time and increased frequency of services for passenger.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support the construction of a new double-tracked electrified 360km long 
Passenger Dedicated Line (PDL) and related railway stations. The line will connect the 
northeastern city of Jilin in Jilin Province with its far eastern cities of Yanji, Tumen and 
Hunchun located in the Yanbian Korean Autonomous prefecture, close to the international 
border with Russia and North Korea.  
 
The proposed railway would be an extension of the high speed Intercity Changchun-Jilin 
Railway (117 km) currently under construction and designed for a speed of 250km/h.  With the 
proposed PDL, the passenger journey time between Jilin City and Tumen would be reduced from 
the current eight hours to less than two hours.  
 
Page  2
Once the project is complete, the existing single track railway would be used exclusively for 
freight trains. However, its performance would be enhanced since freight trains will not be 
required to wait for overtaking passenger trains as required at present.  
 
Various alternatives for the alignment are being considered particularly around  urban areas. 
The alignment being proposed is selected as it is the most direct, connects populated areas, meets 
the approval of local authorities and avoids most environmentally sensitive areas.  The project 
design institute has consulted urban planning development officials of the cities and counties in 
selecting sites for the proposed nine new railway stations to be built as part of the project.  
 
The planned implementation period is about five years, commencing in mid 2011 and 
commissioning planned by the middle of 2016. Similar to the last three Bank-financed China 
Railways projects, the Bank loan will most probably finance goods and equipment possibly 
consisting of signaling, electrification, bridge beams, and track fittings.  In addition the project 
may finance technical assistance components yet to be agreed.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed alignment for the corridor goes through a well developed transport corridor with 
an existing railway line (Changchun-Tumen Railway), an expressway (Changchun-Tumen-
Hunchun Expressway), two national highways (G302 and 301), and local road networks. The 
alignment area goes mostly through alluvial plain, urban areas, rolling hills, valleys and 
mountains. Given the presence of a number of sensitive areas in the vicinity of the project 
corridor  and good vegetation cover and dense water system in the east part of the project area, 
the area of the project presents moderate to high sensitivity from an ecological perspective.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
FCTIC engaged qualified consultants with experience on Environmental Assessment (EA), 
Resettlement Plan (RAP), Social Assessment (SA) and Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) under 
World Bank project to prepare the environmental and social safeguard instruments, either 
through FCTIC itself or through the design institute responsible for the overall project technical 
preparation. FCTIC confirmed the engagement of Southwestern Transportation University to 
prepare the RP and of the Central Minority University to review indigenous people aspects.  
Those two consultants have already started their assignment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Ning Yang (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is a Category A project due to its scale of potential environmental and 
social impact and the sensitivity of the project areas. A full EIA and EMP will be prepared 
according to OP4.01. The environmental impact assessment study has been commissioned to 
Railway Science Academy and
China Railway Engineering Group. The major environmental 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
issues envisaged include:  
 
Analysis of alternative alignments. Given the presence of a number of nature reserves, 
drinking water protection areas, tourism areas and developed urban areas in the vicinity of 
project corridor, an analysis of alternatives for the selection of the final alignment is the most 
important environmental and social impact mitigation tool for this project.  Several alternative 
alignments are being considered.  The final choice of alignment will be based on multiple criteria 
that will include: (i) connections with the existing rail network; (ii) minimization of land 
acquisition and resettlement; (iii) minimum environmental degradation in or near sensitive 
ecosystems such as protected areas, forest reserves and areas of poor geology; and (iv) 
connectivity with potential areas of economic development.  
 
Ecological Impacts/Crossing Sensitive Areas. The project areas represent moderate to high 
sensitivity from an ecological perspective. While effort is being made to avoid sensitive 
environmental sites through the analysis of various alignment alternatives, a few nature reserves 
and drinking water protection areas are still expected to be potentially impacted (either by 
tunneling or running at the edge of the area). Detailed baseline surveys, including ecological and 
biodiversity study and impact assessment are being conducted along the entire project corridor, 
with special focus on the protected areas.  Proper engineering design, restrictions to new access 
roads, camp location, and disposal sites in these areas, and environmentally sound construction 
practices will be adopted in such areas. A tunnel-bridge-tunnel scheme (e.g. nearly 66% of the 
alignment is tunnel and bridge) will minimize loss of surface of vegetation and related ecological 
impacts. A dedicated Water and Soil Conservation Plan will be developed to control soil erosion 
and rehabilitate vegetation at sites impacted by the railway construction.  
 
Access roads. The railway alignment will traverse river valleys, low hills and some 
mountainous region with little or very difficult access by road. If not well managed, the 
construction of new access roads may cause adverse impact that outweighs the environmental 
effort for the main alignment. The team is putting special emphasis on this issue during EA 
preparation. The existing rural road network (present for most part of areas) will be used to the 
maximum extent to access tunnel portals, bridges and other key infrastructure.  An 
environmental management framework for the evaluation and approval of new access road 
design and approval will be included in the EMP.  
 
Waste management. The railway line will include around 77 tunnels (approximate length 
160 km, or 44% of the total length). Given the large portion of tunnels throughout the 
mountainous region, proper management of disposal sites is an important issue for EIA. 
Foreseen access roads should be identified to the extent possible, and impacts and mitigations 
properly addressed in the EA. Consultation with local governments and communities shall be 
conducted.  
 
Soil erosion control plan. The mandatory Water and Soil Conservation Plan will deal with 
the erosion control for construction sites, access roads, tunnel shafts, camps, disposal/borrow 
areas and large temporary works, special attention shall be given to those sites that will be 
identified during construction stage, e.g. borrow/disposal areas, new access roads, new locations 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
of pre-casting plants etc. For these, a set of framework requirements shall be developed 
following the mature practices of past Bank-financed railway projects in China. The framework 
will serve as mitigation measures in the EMP, which shall include site selection principles, 
requirement of environmental design, review and approval procedures.  
 
Social disturbance and connectivity. The railway construction and operation will have 
adverse impact on local traffic, community connectivity, agricultural facilities and accessibility 
of rural production activities. These impacts will be addressed through adequate public 
consultation and sound engineering design during feasibility study and EA preparation, and good 
construction management during construction. Mitigation measures will include building 
adequate underpass and overpass etc. for those potentially impacted local communities.  
 
Cumulative/Indirect Impact. The EIA shall address the indirect impact from induced 
development of railway stations in terms of land use, urbanization and related environmental 
social and environmental concerns. The assessment of cumulative and indirect impacts will be in 
a
separate chapter/section in the EIA.  
 
Other issues such as noise and vibration, camp and construction management, will also be 
addressed in EIA as following standard environmental practices for design and construction.  
 
Public consultation and information disclosure. Two rounds of public consultation are 
required as per OP4.01 Environmental Assessment, i.e. (1) early stage of EA preparation before 
the TORs for the EA are finalized; (2) when draft EIA is available.  The consultation shall be 
conducted, i.e. both formal and informal meetings and interviews with the target groups, 
information dissemination campaigns through fliers, posters, and radio announcements; and 
questionnaire survey. The EIA is expected to summarize for each round: (i) the dates and venues 
of consultation events; (ii) the organizations or stakeholder groups consulted; (iii) the main 
comments provided, particularly regarding the perceived adequacy of mitigation and monitoring 
measures; and (iv) how the comments and recommendations were or were not taken into account 
in finalizing project designs. Once the draft EIA is available, the full report shall be disclosed to 
the public (e.g. through websites of local EPB or government forums) with announcement in 
local media.  
 
The final EA documents expected to be submitted to the Bank include the following, in both 
Chinese and English:  
 
-
A
full Environmental Impact Assessment Report;  
 
-
A
stand-alone Environmental Management Plan;  
 
-
An EA Executive Summary.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
This policy is triggered. During EA preparation, a total of 9 nature and water resource 
reserves have been identified in the vicinity of the project corridor. Careful alignment selection 
has avoided 6 of them. A tunnel/bridge scheme will be adopted for the sections to minimize loss 
of vegetation and environmental impacts, thus effectively minimizing the project footprint in 
these areas. An extensive ecological and biodiversity study will be conducted along the entire 
alignment, with special focus on protected areas. The study will address the principles and 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
requirements of the Bank policy on natural habitats, including identifying critical habitats, 
assessing short term and long term impacts on the protected areas from construction and 
operation of the line, assessment of fragmentation of habitats, specially the Nature Reserve 
habitats, crossed by the line, and identifying mitigation and compensation measures. In addition, 
consultation with relevant management authorities will be conducted and documented in the EIA 
report, and their concerns shall be incorporated into the project design and mitigation measures.  
 
Relation to the Potential Tiger Habitat in Northeast China. The proposed alignment corridor 
is located to the west and south of Hunchun city, while the existing official tiger habitat (i.e. 
Hunchun Wild Tiger National Nature Reserve) is in the northeast of Hunchun city extending 
further into Russia. The proposed project alignment will not affect the tiger habitat reserve and it 
is at least 10 km away from any of the Priority Wild Tiger Habitats as delineated by Bank/GEF 
Global Initiative. Therefore, the proposed project is not expected to affect these potential tiger 
habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
As a linear project, although some trees are expected to be cleared (a few hundred hectares as 
a
maximum), it will not significantly impact forested areas.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or have any impact on pest 
management practice. This policy is not triggered.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Three cultural relic sites have been identified in the vicinity of the project corridor. The 
project railway alignment avoids all the relic protection zones but will go through the 
construction control area between the Maoershan Cemetery and the Longtanshan Cultural Relic 
Protection Unit, through viaducts and tunnels. Assessment of potential adverse impact will be 
conducted in close consultation with relevant management authorities, and adequate precautious 
measures will be developed in EMP. Chance-find procedures will be included in the EMP and 
bidding documents.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The Task Team social development specialist conducted an Ethnic Minority (EM) screening 
during the identification mission. The mission was advised that there are some Korean minority 
villages in Jiaohe County and some Man minority villages in Yanji City along the project line, 
but their precise locations and IP status will need to be further investigated and reviewed as part 
of project design and preparation. Such EM additional screening data collection will take place 
as part of a social assessment in project areas to determine the applicability of OP 4.10. The 
social assessment (SA) under preparation will help the Task Team to further identify whether or 
not ethnic minorities are present. In the positive case, it will include consultation with IP 
regarding their level of support to the project and the preparation of an IPP or IPPF in 
accordance with the SA findings.  
 
An IPP or IPPF if IP will be prepared if ethnic minorities are found in the project area 
following the additional screening undertaken by the SA. A technical TOR for the SA has been 
prepared and submitted the WB for review.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will cause adverse social impacts due to land taking and resettlement.  The 
project goes through eight counties/districts in Jilin City and Yanbian Prefecture. While rural 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
areas affected by the project have low population density, the affected urban areas are quite 
crowded with an extensive number of houses/enterprises.  
 
Options for station locations and railway realignment have been proposed, but various 
alternatives are still under review, with particular attention paid to mitigating resettlement 
impacts. The current planning indicates that the alignment would include about 100 bridges and 
nealry 80 tunnels, accounting for about 65 percent of the railway length.  This is done, in part, to 
reduce land take and relevant impacts.  
 
Based on the draft estimation avaiable to date, about 1,400 ha. (about 20,300 mu) of land 
are to be permanently acquired and about 700 ha. (about 10,500 mu) are to be temporarily 
acquired. A RP should be prepared to address these impacts, which should include a RPF for 
resettlement related activities which are not clear at preparation stage such as camp sites and 
access roads. The RP will be based on the feasibility study of the project.  
 
Urban resettlement will be critical for the project. Rail stations close to urban areas will 
result in extensive resettlement at the following sites: Jilin, Dunhua, Antu, Tumen and Yanji. 
Urban resettlement should include impact investigation, compensation rate justification, but also 
proper restoration schemes. Since rural resettlement relies more on social security programs as n 
important measure in livelihood restoration, the RP should include a chapter to reflect the social 
security program approach in each county/district.  
 
Impacts during construction, mainly including facilities across the railway, temporarily used 
land, will be covered in the RP.  
 
All resettlement will be financed by provincial government, and the resettlement cost will 
be reflected as equity and shares in the project company. Local governments will be not required 
to finance but implement resettlement activities.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The policy is not triggered. The project will not involve any dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The policy is not triggered. The project will not involve any international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The policy is not triggered. The project will not involve any disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
02/07/2011 
Page  7
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The completion of the safeguard-related studies is expected in early February.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Carter Scales 
01/13/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter Leonard 
02/15/2011 
Comments:  Signed by the WBOB Safeguards Focal Point on behalf of Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
02/03/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
