Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/07/2010 
Report No.:  AC5643
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P117656 
Project Name:  China: Kunming Urban Rail Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 28, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);Public administration- Transportation (20%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1,453.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1,453.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to achieve compact, transit-oriented 
development in Kunming by supporting the development of high quality, integrated 
public transport on the east-west line 3 corridor.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of the construction of the 19.54 km long Line 3 of the proposed 
Kunming urban rail system. Briefly, the Bank will finance:  
 
-
Component 1. Civil Works ($ 209m): This component will cover the civil works for 
five stations including bus interchange and bike parking facilities where appropriate; the 
depot and stabling yard for the new line, and track.  
 
-
Component 2. Equipment ($ 88m): This component will finance various equipment 
systems including power supply, escalators, fare collection, and communication systems.  
 
-
Component 3. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building ($ 3m): This component 
will include:  (i) Studies to support bus/rail integration, (ii) studies on the future 
development and construction of the public transport system, (iii) project management 
capacity building, and (iv) support for operations management.   
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in Kunming city, capital city of Yunnan Province in southwest 
China. The city is in the middle of Yunnan plateau, with an altitude of ca. 2000m. The 
urban area of Kunming features a terrain composed of a flat lakeside basin and 
denudation plain and adjacent rolling hills. The 19.54 km long rail line is all within the 
urban built-up area of Kunming, of which 14.7 km is underground through the central 
urban area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As a public transport oriented project, the project will have significant positive 
environmental and social impact by promoting mass public transportation which in turn 
alleviating urban traffic, reducing environmental pollution related to vehicle emission and 
traffic congestion, and improving urban life quality.  
 
Manageable negative impacts of the project are mainly the environmental issues related 
to urban construction activities, i.e. urban utility and traffic disruption; tunnel 
construction safety; potential impact on surrounding buildings and proper disposal of 
large amount of spoil material, dust and noise nuisance during the construction stage. 
Other impacts during operation include noise/vibration impact, aesthetics integration, and 
waste management from rail operation facilities, and land use change induced from rail 
network development.  
 
The project has adverse impacts related to the need for land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement. Major impacts relate to land acquisition and demolition of residential 
Page  3
houses, enterprises/institutes and shops.  The project will require the acquisition of about 
1280 mu of land, and 330 mu is collective-owned land, which will affect 36 people from 
12 households. The project will also require demolition of 16860 m2 of housing areas 
which will affect 312 people from 61 households.  14 enterprises/institutes will be 
affected to certain degree, and the will affect 143 people. 134 small shops will be 
demolished which will affect 395 people.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed rail project is one of the Kunming urban rail network which include 6 lines. 
The future development of the rail network will have significant impact on Kunming city, 
leading to a compact and transit-oriented urban development and land use change.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Kunming Urban Rail Network Plan. Kunming city has developed a long-term urban rail 
network plan which identified a 6 rail line network. The plan has been approved by the 
State Council in 2009. The proposed No.3 line is among the first 3 lines to be constructed 
by 2016. The option of rail strategy and alignment corridors have been intensively 
studied in the overall network plan with comprehensive considerations of economic, 
technical, and environmental and social development.  
 
Project feasibility stage. During project feasibility and design stage, various alternatives 
have been considered for specific sections and station locations. Comprehensive 
comparison has been conducted for environmental, social, technical and financial factors, 
and final selection is based on overall optimum consideration. Some major alternatives 
have been carefully studied, and summarized as follows:  
 
-
Chunyulu viaduct section: Two alternatives were considered, i.e. viaduct in the 
median of Chunyulu road, or on roadside. The final recommended option (in-median) is 
selected due to its less land acquisition, less noise impact to residential areas on both 
roadsides, and urban landscape considerations.  
 
-
Majie # Shawei section:  Two alternative alignments were considered, i.e. original 
alignment in the network (along an existing rail line) and a new alignment west of 
Chunyulu road. The new alignment is finally selected due to easy connection with public 
transport network (an existing bus transfer center) and potential for surrounding urban 
development, though with increased engineering cost.  
 
-
Xichang # Wenhuagong section: Two alternative locations were considered for 
Baihuodalou station. The final location is determined due to better service to commercial 
areas and easy transfer with future No.5 rail line.  
 
-
Dashuying # Taipingcun section: Two alternative alignments were considered, i.e. 
original alignment in the network, and a new alignment along East Dongfenglu road. The 
new alignment was finally selected to accommodate the crossing of the existing 2nd Ring 
Road, and avoid massive resettlement.  
 
-
East Passenger Terminal station: Two configuration for the East Passenger 
Terminal Station were considered to accommodate the connection of No.3 and future 
Page  4
No.6 rail lines. A double-layer option is selected (vs. parallel) due to less land 
acquisition, less civil works and easy passenger transfer.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental safeguards  
 
The project is classified as a Category A due to the scale of tunnel construction, waste 
disposal and potential environmental and social impact from construction and operation 
in urban context. Kunming Urban Rail Company has retained China Railway Second 
Survey & Design Institute, a Class A environmental impact assessment consultant 
certified by Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP), for preparation of 
environmental assessment documents. The EA documents, including EIA and EMP, have 
been reviewed and commented by the Bank task team during project preparation period.  
 
The potential environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are thoroughly 
addressed in the EIA report, and necessary mitigation measures have been developed in 
the EMP. It is concluded that these adverse environmental and social impact can be 
adequately avoided, minimized and mitigated with good management practice and 
mitigation measures as developed in EIA/EMP. The main conclusions of impact and 
mitigation measures are summarized as follows:  
 
Project Feasibility Study and Design  
 
Various alternatives have been carefully studied with consideration of minimization of 
resettlement, avoidance of environmental and cultural sensitive sites, convenience of 
public transport transfer, integration with overall public transport plan. Further 
optimization is to be conducted in the following steps of preliminary design and detailed 
design to further minimize the potential environmental and social impacts.  
 
Adequate engineering measures have been designed to mitigate the expected impacts, 
including noise barriers, vibration reduction equipment, intensive greening plan, and 
landscape design for stations, via-duct and parking/depot site.  
 
Construction  
 
Social Disturbance.  Traffic and disturbance of people#s daily life will be mitigated by 
effective implementation of city procedures for traffic diversion and utility relocation, 
e.g. proper planning of road traffic diversion, coordination with police department, and 
prior notice through public media. The public utility facilities will be carefully identified 
through coordination with relevant authorities and orderly relocated without interrupting 
usual life of local community. Construction site will be properly fenced for safety 
concern. Temporary access roads with adequate safety measures (temporary bridge, 
protection net, night light etc.) will be provided for nearby residents, business, schools 
etc. to minimize impact of social disturbance. Bulletin board will be established at the 
construction site with information of construction activity, timing, channel for 
Page  5
complaints. Public consultation will be conducted throughout the construction period to 
address public concerns and improve construction activities. Pamphlet will be distributed 
in local community providing detailed information about traffic diversion plan, bus route 
change etc.  
 
Spoil waste. The project will generate large amount of spoil wastes. A portion of the 
waste soil will be reused as backfill in stations and parking/depot sites. The rest will be 
transported to two dedicated construction waste landfill as designated by Kunming Urban 
Management Comprehensive Enforcement Department. According to Kunming Urban 
Environmental Hygiene Regulation and Kunming Construction Waste Disposal 
Regulation, the contractors are required to register with city Comprehensive Enforcement 
Department for permit. Spoil material will be transported by the professional construction 
waste transportation companies licensed by the Department, and following routes jointly 
assigned by the Department.  Transportation is regulated by a four-copy manifest system, 
and supervised by the Department on a daily basis (24hours patrol and spot check).   Due 
diligence review of the landfill sites and waste management practice has been conducted 
by the task team, and confirmed the overall compliance.  
 
Noise and vibration. Noise and vibration impact on local communities will be strictly 
managed in line with local Kunming Construction Site Management Code through use of 
low noise equipment and construction technologies; limiting intensive construction 
activities in daytime 6:00-22:00; careful scheduling of construction activities near 
sensitive sites; installation of temporary noise reduction facility at sensitive sites; night-
time construction will be restricted, and prior public notice as well as night-time 
construction permit from city EPB are required for activities that need continuous 
construction over nighttime. Shield tunneling and cover-and-cut method will be used for 
the tunnel and most of the stations to minimize noise and vibration impact.  
 
Air pollution. The mitigation measures to be adopted include frequent water spraying on 
construction site and access road to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk 
materials and timely site clean up after construction; hauling trucks will be wheel-washed 
before leaving the construction site; material or waste hauling will avoid densely 
populated areas, and for densely populated areas transportation will be arranged during 
nighttime; burning of construction waste is strictly banned; no on-site cement mixing 
facility is allowed.  
 
Ecological and aesthetic impact. Detailed field survey and environmental assessment 
confirmed that, given the urban context of the project, there is no natural vegetation or 
any natural habitats being affected, except for some street trees and urban green area. 
Affected trees and green belt will be relocated with approval of city authority according 
to local regulations. In addition, intensive greening plan has been developed within the 
project to offset the loss of green area, e.g. greening for parking and depot site and the 
areas under via-duct section. The total greening plan is about 100 ha, well outweighing 
the estimated loss of 9.11 ha green area. Construction site will be properly fenced during 
construction. Special attention has been paid to aesthetic and landscape design for the 
Page  6
stations, via-duct bridges, ventilation shafts, and greening of parking/depot sites to be 
compatible with overall tourism city taste.  
 
Cultural properties. A cultural relics survey identified 8 buildings which are classified as 
protected buildings (two of them are official cultural heritage) along the street, with 
horizontal distances of 14 # 60m from the underground metro tunnel. The tunnel and 
stations were designed to avoid the officially designated construction protection buffer 
zone of these buildings, however, there is potential risk of impact from tunnel excavation 
during construction and vibration during operation. Groundwater and land subsidence 
monitoring will be conducted for these buildings during construction. Chance find 
procedures will follow the requirement of national regulations, i.e. excavation will be 
stopped immediately in case relics are found, and report should be made to Kunming 
cultural property authority. Construction will only resume after the relevant authority has 
completed survey and necessary protection, and authorizes the resumption.  
 
Wastewater. The wastewater from construction site will be properly treated (settling and 
oil separation) and discharged into the municipal sewage network as per requirement of 
construction site management regulations in Kunming city. Random discharge of 
wastewater is strictly forbidden.  
 
Groundwater. Special engineering measures (such as curtain grouting) will be adopted 
to minimize dewatering during construction, and groundwater monitoring will be 
conducted during excavation to guide proper construction.  
 
Cumulative impact. Kunming will have three urban rail lines under construction during 
similar time period, which will likely to generate substantial impact for Kunming city in 
terms of urban traffic disturbance, pedestrian safety, noise and dust, and disposal of 
significant amount of tunnel waste. The disruption of traffic can be mitigated by proper 
arrangement of traffic diversion with involvement of police departments. Nuisance of 
dust, noise and pedestrian safety will be managed through good construction management 
practice and adequate supervision, for which Kunming has strong capacity and proven 
experience from pilot rail section construction and previous urban development projects. 
For the significant amount of tunnel spoil waste, Kunming Urban Management 
Enforcement Unit has reviewed the situation and issued a special document of #Decision 
on Comprehensive Utilization of Spoil Materials from Light Rail Projects#, which 
designates two construction waste landfills (with approval from city EPB) and one new 
industrial park as backfill for land development. These places have adequate capacity to 
absorb the waste from all three rail lines, and are under management of local 
environmental authorities.    More recently, the city is initiating a citywide round-Dianchi 
Lake ecological restoration campaign, aiming at restoring the vegetation and aesthetics of 
all the bare mountain slopes, borrow pits and quarry sites around the city. Thus, five more 
abandoned quarry pits which need immediate restoration are currently selected for the 
disposal of excessive material from the three lines construction. These five sites have 
been carefully reviewed and approved by relevant city agencies (including Urban 
Planning Bureau for site location, Environmental Protection Bureau for environmental 
assessment impact, and Urban Management Comprehensive Enforcement Department for 
Page  7
operation), and have necessary management capacity and infrastructure, and have 
complete closure plans for final ecological restoration.  
 
Operation  
 
Land Use Change. The proposed project is fully in line with Kunming Urban Rail 
Transport Network Plan, and compatible with overall city master plan and specific plans 
for land use, transport, environmental protection and environmental function zoning, 
urban greening and historical cultural city preservation. Kunming city has developed an 
Adjustment Plan for Land Use along Short-term Urban Rail Network, a fine-tuning of 
#detailed control plan#. It adjusted land use within 1km corridor of the rail lines 
(including line 3), integrating transport, urban function zoning and land use model. The 
key contents are: (1) optimization of urban spatial structure to promote a development 
axial, and to lead the land use change and new development, thus achieving integration of 
urban development and transport system; (2) location of stations and land use adjustment 
around stations allowing high-density development; (3) adjustment of area road transport 
system and improvement of surface transport system and facilities to maximize the 
integration of urban transit system. In general, the city of Kunming expects the metro 
project to have significant land use impact - supporting higher density residential and 
commercial use within the vicinity of new stations. The city views this as one of the 
major positive benefits of urban rail construction, and has been proactively planning for 
its location and character well in advance of the metro#s opening for operations.  
 
As a capital city of Yunnan Province, Kunming city has mature institutions and 
procedures to manage the land development to ensure that land development induced 
from rail network is in line with urban master plan, and conducted in an orderly and legal 
process.  
 
Noise. A total of 44,380m2 noise barrier has been designed for the via-duct sections. 
Ventilation shafts will be installed with low noise equipment and silencer, and will be 
located at least 15 m from nearby residential areas. Enclosure wall and green belt 
plantation will be adopted in the parking and depot sites to ensure minimize noise impact.  
 
Vibration. Based on the modeling results, vibration-reduction facilities will be installed 
for 26 sites with total length of 5.6 km, including state-of-art steel-spring floating slab 
track bed (1,750m X 2) for all cultural building sections, flexible short sleeper track bed 
(2,550m x 2) and vibration-reduction fastener.  
 
Air quality. Adequate ventilation and filtration system is design for underground metro 
line. The surface ventilation shafts are properly sited with adequate distance from nearby 
residential areas. Waste gas emissions from parking and depot boilers and cooking 
facilities will be treated according to technical code and standards.  
 
Water Quality. The domestic sewage and wastewater from the stations and 
parking/depot sites will be discharged into municipal sewer system after septic tank 
and/or oil separation/settling tank treatment.  
 
Page  8
Solid Waste. The garbage will be covered the by existing municipal garbage collection 
and disposal system. The waste from parking and depot will be properly treated 
accordingly, including recycling, landfill, and special treatment in licensed facility for 
small amount of oil containing hazardous waste.  
 
Electro-magnetic frequency. The electro-magnetic frequency will have little impact on 
TV signals among few individual households. The power sub-stations are all within the 
subway stations, and located at least 15 m away from residential areas which presents 
negligible EMF impact according to national standards.  
 
Resettlement:  
 
A
RAP was prepared in line with relevant Chinese laws and regulations, and World 
Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. Key principles, considerations and salient 
activities in project design and RAP preparation included:  
 
-
Acquisition of land and other assets, and relocation of people, will be minimized as 
much as possible.  
 
-
Compensation for houses or other properties will be determined at full replacement 
value.  
 
-
Compensation will be provided to all project affected persons, including shop 
operators and those who lack house registration or other documents, such as business 
documents and legal documents.  
 
-
Affected persons will be consulted during planning for acquisition of land and other 
assets, and provision of rehabilitation.  
 
-
Financial and physical resources for resettlement and rehabilitation will be made 
available when required.  
 
-
Institutional arrangements will be established to ensure effective and timely design, 
planning, consultation and implementation of the RAP.  
 
-
Effective and timely supervision, monitoring and evaluation of project implementation 
will be executed.  
 
Compensation Standards. Land acquisition compensation will include land 
compensation, a resettlement subsidy, and compensation for standing crops. The land 
acquisition fund is calculated based on land output value according to local regulation. 
The compensation rates for structures are determined based on their replacement costs.  
 
Affected public infrastructure. Compensation based on replacement value will be paid to 
relevant government agencies or local governments to restore affected infrastructure and 
services.  
 
Implementation arrangements. A multi-level organization was established to implement 
the RAP. An independent monitor will be selected to monitor resettlement 
implementation and livelihood restoration. Participatory Monitoring Mechanism has been 
designed. The PMO will be responsible for internal monitoring and will provide semi-
annual internal monitoring reports to the Bank. Details of staffing and their 
responsibilities are provided in the RAP.  
Page  9
Budget and funding arrangement. RAP contains a detailed resettlement cost estimation 
that covers all the basic costs for resettlement, management, contingencies, surveys, 
design and monitoring.  The basic resettlement cost includes compensation for land, 
standing crops and trees and reconstruction of affected infrastructure. The Borrower will 
prepare a sufficient budget from counterpart funding to conduct resettlement of projects.  
 
Grievance mechanism. A grievance mechanism was established during the preparation 
of the RAP. All relevant telephone numbers were disclosed to PAPs. The PAPs can 
prosecute any resettlement aspect, if needed. All prosecuted cases will be recorded in 
paper.  
 
Borrower capacity. As a nationally famous tourism city, the city has strong commitment 
and capacity on urban environmental management, and is now striving to become a 
National Model City for Environmental Protection. The Kunming Urban Rail Company 
has been established for management of the construction and operation of the proposed 
rail system in Kunming. Environmental management is built into the overall management 
setup in the company, and the construction of a pilot section of line 2 has demonstrated 
strong and successful environmental management performance in terms of construction 
site management, traffic diversion, and provision of access to public, safety, dust control, 
spoil material disposal, information disclosure and public consultation. The PMO will 
assume the overall responsibility for the implementation of the resettlement program.  
PMO will work with the district government offices, on a contract basis, to implement the 
resettlement program. These offices had competent and experienced staffs. Their 
respective responsibilities and functions are detailed in the RAP.  Training will be 
provided to the project staff.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
EA consultation. Two rounds of public consultation were conducted during EA 
preparation. The first round was conducted in January 2010 through meetings, field 
interview and questionnaire survey among project-affected people, local village 
committees, schools and hospitals, and establishment of a telephone hotline. Project 
information and commencement of EIA preparation notice were disclosed in local 
newspaper and website of Yunnan Environmental Protection Bureau. The main concerns 
raised from public are resettlement compensation, information disclosure, disturbance of 
traffic, nighttime construction noise etc. All these concerns were addressed in the RAP 
and EIA/EMPs. The second round of public consultation was conducted in March 2010 
after the draft EIA reports had been prepared. Public meetings were held in local 
communities and total 210 questionnaires were collected. During consultation, the EA 
explained the key findings of draft EIA report and proposed mitigation measures, as well 
as the responses to the questions raised from the first round consultation. Concerns raised 
from public include proper traffic diversion, minimization of resettlement and adequate 
compensation, as well as timely information disclosure, enforcement of good 
construction management and vibration. Responses for these concerns were provided to 
the public during the meeting, and incorporated into the EIA/EMP and project design.  
Page  10
As required by Chinese EIA regulations, the first round information disclosure was 
carried out on January 1, 2010, during which brief project information and 
commencement of EIA was published in Kunming Daily. The second round of disclosure 
was conducted on February 12, 2010, when draft EIA report was disclosed through 
internet (Yunnan Environmental Protection Bureau) with announcement in Kunming 
Daily. The full final EIA report is disclosed in the website of Kunming Urban Rail 
Company in June 15, 2010.  
 
Resettlement Consultation and participation. Project-affected persons and organizations 
were informed about the project and its impacts in meetings during the preparation of the 
RAP. Key comments and recommendations received from these meetings were 
incorporated in the RAPs and feasibility studies. Public participation will continue during 
RAP implementation. Project information will be provided to affected persons through 
television, newspapers, bulletins and posters. Participatory Monitoring Mechanism has 
been designed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/18/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/15/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/03/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
10/18/2010  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/18/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/25/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/23/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  11
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shomik Raj Mehndiratta 
11/23/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Peishen Wang 
11/23/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jun Zeng 
11/23/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter Leonard 
12/06/2010 
Comments:  As a delegated project to safeguards WBOB focal point. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
12/02/2010 
Comments:   
