Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/04/2011 
Report No.:  AC6151
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P119357 
Project Name:  China Energy Efficiency Promotion in Industry 
Task Team Leader:  Alberto Ugalde Ang Co 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Borrowing 
Agency 
4.11 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
16.00
20.11 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity for both the 
management and technical aspects of rational energy use in key industrial sectors in 
China, thereby contributing to improvements in energy efficiency and the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has four components, which are briefly described below:  
 
COMPONENT 1: POLICY SUPPORT  
 
This component will support studies to strengthen the implementation of the revised 
Energy Conservation Law (EC Law) as well as related regulations and energy standards 
within the mandate of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT), 
including: (a) domestic and foreign industrial energy efficiency policies; (b) energy 
management institutions of key energy-consuming industrial enterprises; and (c) 
Page  2
industrial energy performance evaluation system. The outputs of this component may 
also provide reference for the development of training materials for capacity building of 
energy managers (see project Component 2). This will foster "institutionalization" of a 
culture of energy management and sustainable practices in industrial enterprises.  
 
COMPONENT 2: CAPACITY BUILDING FOR ENERGY MANAGERS  
 
This component will support the development of standardized training modules to meet 
the different needs of energy managerial personnel in major energy consumption 
enterprises, as prescribed in the revised EC Law, and taking into account relevant 
national laws, regulations, standards, and requirements as well as global best practices on 
advanced energy-saving techniques. In addition, this component will develop 
standardized training programs and recommend a certification scheme for energy 
managers in industries. This component will also provide sub-grants to up to four pre-
selected training centers in Beijing, Inner Mongolia, Jiangsu, and Sichuan for (a) delivery 
of training programs to energy managerial personnel, and (b) implementation of 
demonstration projects on setting up energy management programs (see project 
Component 3). This component will also train the trainers of pre-selected training centers 
in terms of training course design, delivery, evaluation, and assessment (including case 
studies). The capacity building process--that encourages "learning by doing" or putting 
into practice what is learned in principle--will enhance the in-house expertise of energy 
managers as the focal points for all activities pertaining to rational energy use in 
enterprises down to the factory-floor level.  
 
COMPONENT 3: DEMONSTRATION PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION  
 
This component will finance specialized technical assistance to enterprises participating 
in demonstration projects. This component will be implemented in two phases in 
cooperation with the training centers (selected in Component 2). The first phase will 
select energy intensive industry sectors such as iron and steel, cement, petrochemical, and 
non-ferrous metal industries. At least 20 enterprises will be recruited by the training 
centers to voluntarily participate in setting up and implementing enterprise energy 
management programs. The training centers will provide initial guidance to the 
participating enterprises, and brief them on the objectives and methodologies of the 
energy management program. During this phase, the participating enterprises will be 
encouraged to sustain the energy management program and eventually implement energy 
efficiency projects. The first phase will focus on gauging the energy management needs 
of enterprises, demonstrating the implementation issues, and assessing the strategies for 
success. The second phase of the demonstration project will further advance the 
implementation of the energy management program in eight selected enterprises. For the 
selected enterprises the training centers will provide specialized technical assistance such 
as development of comprehensive manuals, policies, procedures, and action plans or 
energy efficiency roadmaps for establishing an "umbrella framework" for industrial 
energy management, efficiency, and conservation programs that are customized to the 
needs of the participating enterprises. The demonstration project will assist the selected 
enterprises to establish the energy management program framework and procedures that 
Page  3
may include management and technical aspects of rational energy use. The end-result of 
the second phase of the demonstration project will be a well-established framework in the 
participating enterprises that can be used as an innovative approach for continual 
improvement of energy efficiency and increase compliance with the EC Law.  
 
COMPONENT 4: INFORMATION DISSEMINATION  
 
This component will support the design of promotion and awareness building 
mechanisms to send the message out to the enterprises as well as to begin the process of 
influencing government policy support to rational energy use. Both international and 
Chinese best practices and case studies will be collected and disseminated through 
educational materials or seminars targeting different groups of enterprises, with the 
intention of demonstrating financial and environmental benefits that could be achieved by 
adopting rational energy use in China. A series of workshops or annual forums will be 
organized for government officials, and energy managers and technical staff from 
industrial enterprises to promote the training programs (Component 2) and present the 
results of the demonstration projects (Component 3)--also as reference for follow-on 
projects. This component will also support the creation and maintenance of a project 
website as a platform for all relevant stakeholders to share and communicate information. 
The information and dissemination activities of the project will assist in increasing 
awareness of industries with practical approaches to improve energy performance, and 
incorporate a culture of energy management into day-to-day business operations.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The projects will be implemented in selected sectors and enterprises in China.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Youxuan Zhu (EASTS) 
Mr Feng Ji (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified as Category C project as it is expected to have minimal or no 
adverse environmental impacts.  The project will support industrial enterprises through 
training and TA to develop in-house expertise for implementing an umbrella framework 
of comprehensive energy management, conservation, and efficiency programs. The 
project is only a technical assistance which does not include any feasibility studies for 
downstream physical investments. Energy efficiency investments resulting out of the 
training programs and demonstration projects will not be financed by the project. 
Considering the project nature and its potentially negligible environmental impacts, no 
EA instrument is required for this project.  
 
As a matter of good practice, the project would integrate into its training program 
relevant safeguards policy considerations and good practices that can contribute to the 
capacity building of industries and/or improve the environmental performance of their 
energy management systems and future action plans.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project would contribute to improvements in energy efficiency and the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emission by strengthening the institutional capacity for both the 
management and technical aspects of rational energy use in key industrial sectors in 
China.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The MIIT, through its Department of Energy Conservation and Resource Utilization 
(DECRU), will be the executing agency responsible for implementation of the project. 
The MIIT has established a Project Management Office (PMO) that will undertake the 
day-to-day and overall coordination, supervision, and management of the project. An 
MIIT official and a staff member (under the DECRU) have been appointed as (a) the 
PMO Project Director who will be responsible for project coordination and 
implementation, judicious use of project resources, and timely delivery of project 
outputs; and (b) the Project Administration Assistant who will support the Project 
Director. In addition, the PMO consists of an Executive Director and two staff members. 
A
Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to play an advisory role in the 
overall governance of the project, and realization of the project's objectives.   
 
Page  5
During project implementation, training program integrating relevant safeguards policy 
considerations into the energy efficiency programs would be provided which can 
contribute to the capacity building of project beneficiaries.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
N/A 
Page  6
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alberto Ugalde Ang Co 
03/03/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Feng Ji 
03/03/2001 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Youxuan Zhu 
03/03/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter Leonard 
 
Comments:  The PAD stage review of this project has been transferred to the SD Manager of 
WBOB.  Thus, there is no need for clearance from COSU. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
03/03/2011 
Comments:   
