Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4973 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/26/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P119357 
Project Name: China Energy Efficiency Promotion in Industry 
Task Team Leader: Alberto Ugalde Ang Co 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASCS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Borrowing 
Agency 
4.11 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
16.00
20.11 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective is to improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions in key industrial sectors in China by addressing both the management and technical 
aspects of rational use of energy. Key performance indicators include increased energy or 
resource savings through operational and/or behavioral improvements that can be attributed to 
good energy management practices. Direct linkages between energy savings and capacity 
building are oftentimes difficult to establish; however, the Global Environment Facility (GEF) 
project is expected to undertake detailed cost-benefit analysis and resulting GHG emission 
reduction--using a combination of top-down and bottom-up approaches--during project 
implementation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Global Environment Facility (GEF) project would effectively implement the China 
Energy Efficiency Promotion in Industry (CEEPI) project across key industrial sectors. The 
Page  2
newly established Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT)--responsible for 
promoting industrial energy conservation and efficiency in China--would be the implementing 
state agency. While the rational use of energy is universal, sets no boundaries, and applies to any 
organization, the scope of this project would cover industries only--ranging from Small-Medium 
Enterprises (SME) to Large-Medium Enterprises (LME). However, there is a need to rank the 
small and large enterprises, e.g., with respect to their scale, type of energy used, current 
efficiencies, energy efficiency opportunities, and cost considerations, and design project 
interventions accordingly. The CEEPI project seeks to address the issues and barriers to the 
adoption of best practices on energy efficiency and reduction of GHG emissions under four 
components:  
 
Component 1: Policy Support  
 
This component would analyze the current situation in China and setup the baseline for policy 
guidelines and recommendations to strengthen the implementation of the revised Energy 
Conservation Law as well as related regulations and energy standards. Experience in many 
countries indicates that implementation of energy conservation law requires a complex private 
and public sector participation involving the government, market, and society. While the 
government's regulations and enforcement abilities are relatively strong in China, there are still 
many difficulties and challenges in the implementation of the Energy Conservation Law with 
regard to supervisory system, technological benchmarking, capacity building, and public 
awareness. The component aims to come up with policy recommendations to increase the 
adoption of energy management and conservation best practices in enterprises, reduce energy 
consumption per unit of output value, and boost investment in energy efficiency projects. The 
project is not planning to assist the government or enterprises in any policy matters related to any 
coal-fired plants, given the recent World Bank (WB) guideline on this subject.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building for Energy Managers  
 
This component would develop series of training materials to meet the different needs of the 
energy managerial personnel (or energy managers) and/or technical staff in major energy 
consumption enterprises, in the light of national laws, regulations, standards and requirements as 
well as global best practices and advanced energy saving techniques. As prescribed in the Energy 
Conservation Law, "Energy managerial personnel shall have trainings on energy conservation." 
This component would develop standardized training programs and certification scheme for 
energy managerial personnel in industries, and enhance training institution capacity building.  
 
a. Energy Management Training Program - This sub-component would provide training 
programs on basic introduction and advanced concepts pertaining to various approaches to 
energy management and conservation. Energy conservation assessment tools would be 
developed to train plant engineers or technical specialists on energy saving audit and energy 
efficiency assessment. Guidelines would be developed to analyze energy saving opportunities in 
general-purpose equipment and systems in major energy consuming enterprises. The training 
program would include study of cross-cutting technologies involving steam, motor, process 
heating, compressed-air systems, etc. The energy managerial personnel would be trained in areas 
such as, but not limited to, the following: (a) audit of facilities, equipment, processes, people, 
Page  3
and other variables that significantly affect energy uses; (b) establishment of energy performance 
indicators, baseline, and benchmarks; (c) recording, monitoring, and reviewing of the identified 
significant energy uses on a regular basis; (c) prioritization of opportunities for improving energy 
performance; (d) economic and financial evaluation of energy saving opportunities.  
 
b. Energy Manager Certification Scheme -  This sub-component would develop an examination 
procedure and certification scheme for energy managerial personnel as supplement to the 
training program described in Component 2a. The Energy Conservation Law prescribes that a 
key energy consuming entity hires energy managerial personnel (synonymous to appointment of 
an energy manager), responsible for (a) analyzing and evaluating the entity's energy consumption 
situations, (b) organizing the compilation of the entity's reports on energy utilization situations, 
(c) putting forward measures for improving the entity's energy conservation work, and (d) 
organizing the implementation of these measures. The training of energy manager provides a 
bottom-up approach to enhance the success of top-down policy initiatives of the government to 
implement energy conservation in industrial sector. Upon completion of an energy management 
training course and examination, the MIIT could issue a certification of qualification for an 
energy manager designation.  
 
c. Training Institution Capacity Building - This sub-component would also build on the current 
network of training institutions (existing capacity) to develop standardized training programs on 
energy management and administer examination for a qualified energy manager. For example, 
there are already Energy Conservation (or Supervision) Centers in each province or even big 
cities in China that are capable of implementing training programs on energy management and 
conservation. The China Energy Conservation Service Industry Association (EMCA) also offers 
a
series of training courses such as introductory and advanced Energy Performance Contracting 
(EPC), energy audit, energy management, Measurement and Verification (M&V), etc. However, 
the different training institutions across the country could have their own set of training programs 
with varying approaches to rational use of energy. There is a need to (a) streamline a 
standardized energy management and conservation training program that focuses both on the 
management and technical aspects of rational use of energy; and (b) implement such training 
program nationwide with the same quality of training materials, trainers, and resources by 
designated training institutions--that could be at par with international standards. Thus, 
enterprises or energy management personnel, regardless of their locations, could share the same 
knowledge base and facilitate collaborative interactions on best practices on energy management 
and conservation.  
 
Component 3: Demonstration Project Implementation  
 
This component would be implemented in two phases. The first phase would select energy 
intensive industries such as Iron and Steel, Oil, Chemical, Electric Power, and Construction 
Material, and etc. (including both State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) and non-SOEs). The 
objectives of the first phase are to: (a) analyze the current situation of energy management in 
various enterprises using a self-assessment tool; (b) provide step-by-step energy management 
guidance and technical assistance to the enterprises; (c) demonstrate the benefits and incentives 
as well as issues and challenges in implementing energy management principles and approaches; 
and (d) document real-life experiences of enterprises in adopting energy management in their 
Page  4
business practices. At least 20 enterprises would be recruited to voluntarily participate in setting 
up and implementing an energy management program. An initial training would be provided to 
the participating enterprises to brief them with the objectives and methodologies of the energy 
management program. Ideally, the group of enterprises for energy management implementation 
would include a good mix of small manufacturers to large multi-national corporations. This 
would demonstrate that regardless of the size and type of industry, energy management would be 
applicable to yield potential benefits and incentives. During this phase, the participating 
enterprises would be encouraged, but not required, to sustain the energy management program 
and eventually implement energy efficiency projects. The first phase would focus on gauging the 
energy management needs of enterprises, demonstrating the implementation issues, and 
assessing the strategies for success. Different enterprises would require varying amount of 
support and assistance for successful implementation of the energy management program. The 
first phase would culminate with a final assessment of the participating enterprises to (a) 
determine the level of their progress and challenges in implementing energy management, and 
(b) assess any differences in the ability of small and large enterprises to apply energy 
management principles and approaches. A forum would be conducted to share results and learn 
from the experiences of the participating enterprises.  
 
The second phase of the demonstration project would further advance the implementation of the 
energy management program in five or more selected enterprises. Due to costs constraints, 
manpower shortages, and production priorities, it is anticipated that not all enterprises selected 
during the first phase would proceed to full-scale implementation of a comprehensive energy 
management program. For the selected enterprises in the second phase of the project, customized 
technical assistance would be provided to develop comprehensive manuals, policies, procedures, 
and /or action plans for establishing an "umbrella framework" for energy management system 
that is customized to the needs of the participating enterprises. Practical methods would be 
discussed in the manual to encompass all aspects of the energy management program 
requirements: general requirements, management responsibility, energy policy, target setting, 
energy manual, documentation, purchasing, monitoring and measurement, corrective action, etc. 
The documentation, describing the core elements of the energy management program, would 
include, but not limited to: (a) energy policy statement; (b) energy objectives and targets; (c) 
plans for achieving the energy goals and targets; and (d) documented procedures to ensure the 
effective planning, operation, and control of significant energy-related processes and equipment. 
There are no feasibility studies for physical investments to be supported directly by the GEF 
project. The demonstration project could also assist the selected enterprises to establish the 
PDCA framework and procedures for (a) Planning - securing top management commitment and 
appointing energy management team, benchmarking and tracking baseline energy use, 
identifying energy-intensive equipment and processes within the facility of enterprises, setting 
energy efficiency objectives and targets, defining performance indicators to measure progress 
towards energy targets, committing to improvement in energy performance, and complying with 
applicable legal obligations and requirements; (b) Doing - building capacity and skills of energy 
management team through training and awareness programs, establishing energy management 
programs and action plans to meet energy targets, and prioritizing opportunities for improving 
energy performance; (c) Checking - monitoring and measuring performance in accordance to 
established targets, and assessing action plans and their effectiveness in achieving objectives and 
targets; and (d) Acting - documenting and communicating program's success, reviewing progress 
Page  5
periodically, and performing corrective/preventive adjustments and actions as necessary. The 
end-result of the second phase of the demonstration project is a well-established framework in 
the participating enterprises that can be used as an innovative approach for continual 
improvement to improve energy efficiency and increase compliance with the Energy 
Conservation Law.  
 
As a matter of good practice, the project would consider integrating into its training program 
relevant safeguards policy considerations and the relevant WB Environmental, Health and Safety 
(EHS) guidelines that can contribute to the capacity building of industries and/or improve the 
environmental performance of their energy management systems and future action plans.  
 
Component 4: Information Dissemination  
 
This component would design a promotion and awareness building mechanism which would 
focus heavily, though not exclusively, on appropriate government departments (particularly the 
MIIT) and industry trade associations to send the message out to the enterprises as well as to 
begin the process of influencing government policy to support the rational use of energy. Both 
international and Chinese best practices and case studies would be collected and disseminated 
through educational materials or seminars targeting different groups of enterprises, with the 
intention to demonstrate financial and environmental benefits that could be realized by adopting 
rational use of energy in China. A series of workshops could be organized for the government 
officials, and energy managers and technical staff from those industries to discuss the results of 
the demonstration projects in Component 3 and next steps for follow-up projects.  
 
The global environment benefits from the CEEPI project include increase in energy efficiency 
and reduction of GHG emissions within multiple industrial sub-sectors. The project would 
provide mechanisms for continual improvement of energy efficiency and energy performance, 
and reduction of environmental impacts. Moreover, the project would assist in equipping 
industries with practical approaches to develop energy policies; establish objectives and 
processes; take action as needed to improve its energy performance; and incorporate a culture of 
energy management into day-to-day business operations. Additional benefits for industries 
include reduced energy intensity, controlled energy costs, and improved operations and 
maintenance.  
 
Coordination with Other Related Activities  
 
The WB has been implementing other related initiatives in China. The CEEPI project would 
build on the results of these past and on-going GEF initiatives by strengthening the capabilities 
of enterprises, on the national level, to scale-up the adoption of energy efficiency projects 
through industrial energy management. Two GEF-supported projects, i.e. China Energy 
Conservation Project Phase I & II have been successfully implemented since 1998 to expand 
domestic investment in energy efficiency projects through the aggressive development of China's 
nascent Energy Management Company (EMC) industry (also called ESCO). Phase I & II of the 
project have achieved large-scale energy efficiency improvements and associated GHG 
reductions, targeting small and medium sized energy efficiency projects in China. Institutionally, 
the projects focused on policy formulation, capacity building, and information dissemination at 
Page  6
the national level. Specifically, Phase II of the project has built the capacity of EMCA both as a 
training institution and focal point for the growing ESCO industry in China. Another project, 
namely the China Energy Efficiency Financing (CHEEF) Project (also with Phase I & II), has 
been implemented to strengthen the energy efficiency lending capabilities of domestic banks and 
reduce barriers for large industries--particularly the top 1000 national enterprises--to invest in 
energy efficiency projects. It also aims to strengthen the national government's capacity to 
enforce related laws, regulations, and standards. Another project in the area of energy efficiency 
supported by the International Finance Corporation (IFC) is the China Utility-Based Energy 
Efficiency Finance program (CHUEE), which is also supported by GEF. CHUEE I, with a 
follow-up phase II, supports marketing, development and equipment financing services to energy 
users in the commercial, industrial, institutional and multi-family residential sectors to 
implement energy efficiency projects in China. CHUEE brings together financial institutions, 
utility companies, and suppliers of energy efficiency equipment. In 2008, Industrial Bank, a 
pioneer in providing energy efficiency financing in China, and IFC signed a cooperation 
agreement to deepen their collaboration in supporting energy saving and greenhouse gas 
emission reductions in China. This is the second phase of the IFC CHUEE Finance Program. 
Under the agreement, IFC will provide a $100 million risk-sharing facility to Industrial Bank that 
will help the bank extend RMB 1.5 billion ($210 million) in energy efficiency loans. The CEEPI 
project would build on the results of these past and on-going GEF initiatives by reinforcing the 
capabilities of enterprises to identify, finance, implement, and monitor energy efficiency projects 
through rational use of energy in industry.  
 
Another relevant GEF funded on-going initiative is the China End Use Energy Efficiency 
Programme (EUEEP) which has been implemented by the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP). EUEEP is designed to support the first phase of a 4-phase, 12-year 
government strategic plan aimed to significantly improve the efficiency of the major end-use 
sectors, i.e. industry and buildings. The first phase of the project started on June 2005 and is 
expected to end on July 2009. Expected achievements from EUEEP include: (a) strengthen 
energy conservation standards and regulations; (b) develop the energy conservation market and 
strengthen the roles of relevant stakeholders; (c) revise China's Energy Conservation Law; (d) 
build capacity of China's energy conservation management system, including decision-making 
and administrative capacity of energy conservation centers; and (e) reduce carbon emissions.  
 
The CEEPI project would also capitalize on existing national and/or compatible international 
energy management standards. The China Standardization Center (CSC) has been authorized by 
the Chinese government to develop a series of national energy management standards: (a) 
Management System for Energy Requirements; (b) Management System for Energy Guidelines 
for Performance; and (c) Management System for Energy Guidelines for Auditing. The 
Standardization Administration of the People's Republic of China (SAC) represents China in the 
International Working Group for developing an international standard for energy, i.e. ISO 50001 
through the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). ISO 50001 specifies the 
requirements for an energy management system, which enable an organization to take a 
systematic approach to the continual improvement of energy efficiency and energy performance. 
The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) has spearheaded a meeting 
of experts--including representatives from the ISO and nations that have adopted energy 
Page  7
management systems--to undertake work on an international energy management system 
standard.  
 
A
recent technical assistance report, "Accelerating Energy Efficiency in China's Provinces", 
which was supported by the AusAID and the WB, seeks to provide provincial agencies and 
groups in China, and those that support them, with some outside perspectives and ideas on 
further development of provincial-level energy conservation programs over the next several 
years. The CEEPI project would build upon the lessons learned and recommendations in the 
AusAID and WB report, with specific emphasis on the needs to strengthen human capacity 
(staffing and improving staff qualifications) and roll out of integrative energy management 
systems among key enterprises in China.  
 
With regard to the implementation scheme, the CEEPI project would establish a coordination 
mechanism through MIIT with other relevant initiatives, both on-going and in the pipeline. 
Firstly, the project would establish a working group under the coordination of the Energy 
Conservation and Comprehensive Utilization Department within MIIT. The working group 
would consist of initial stakeholders from relevant projects and institutions. Secondly, the project 
would create a website. Thirdly, again under the coordination of the Energy Conservation and 
Comprehensive Utilization Department within MIIT, the project would seek to develop policy 
measures to promote cross-project result dissemination.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project Management Office will be located in Beijing. The demonstration projects will be 
located in key cities and provinces in China.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed GEF project will be the first WB collaboration project with the implementing 
agency. Although no major adverse safeguard policies are associated specifically with this 
project, the WB safeguard specialists could provide technical assistance to the implementing 
agency to strengthen its capacity for environmental assessment and environmental management 
supervision. Once the project is approved and begins to be implemented, the WB will regularly 
supervise the implementation of the implementing agency's environmental management system 
to ensure that all agreed actions have been taken, and to advise on any additional safeguard 
issues that may arise during implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Feng Ji (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This proposed project would involve technical assistance, training, and capacity building. 
The project is likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts.   
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/15/2010 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/10/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alberto Ugalde Ang Co 
06/29/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
06/29/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
06/29/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
