Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/28/2011 
Report No.:  AC5978
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P120664 
Project Name:  Urumqi District Heating Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gailius J. Draugelis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 8, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (34%);Other urban 
development (33%);Climate change (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
243.20
243.20 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to connect consumers in selected 
districts of Urumqi City  to district heating services with improved energy efficiency and 
environmental performance.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project consists of three components: (A) Shuimogou District Urumqi CHP 
Power Plant Heating Network (UHN) Component; (B) Shayibake District CHP Heating 
Network (SHN) Component; and (C) Institutional Development and Project Management 
Support Component.  The total estimated project costs are RMB 2.3 billion (US$343.2 
million equivalent).  The proposed indicative financing plan includes an IBRD loan of 
US$100 million, about 30% of total estimated project costs.  
 
Component A. Shuimogou District Urumqi CHP Plant District Heating Network (UHN) 
(estimated cost US$ 196.8 million; US$ 56.14 million IBRD financing). The proposed 
component finance construction of the UHN district heating (DH) system. The base heat 
load of the UHN district heating system will be supplied by the Huadian Weihuliang 
coal-fired CHP Plant, built in 2009 with a capacity of 2x330 MWp (power output) and 
Page  2
2x350 MWth (heat output).  The peak heat load will be supplied by the coal-fired 
Hualing heat-only boiler (HOB) plant with total heat capacity of 290 MWth owned by 
Nuan Wanjia Heating Co., Ltd. The total heated floor area supplied by UHN will reach 
about 14.73 million m2 by 2015, of which about 5.93 million m2 is new planned heating 
area.  After component completion, the DH system will replace use of 14 coal fired heat-
only boiler (HOB) plants including 53 coal fired boilers with a total capacity of about 923 
MWth.  
 
The component will include construction of: (i) about 55 km of primary and secondary 
network; (ii) a pressure isolation station; (iii) about 46 new consumer heating substations 
and reconstruction of about 45 existing substations (including several building level 
substations for demonstration purposes); (vi) one heat metering station at the CHP plant; 
(vii) a dedicated monitoring and dispatch system (SCADA) and control center with 
associated equipment; (viii) maintenance vehicles and equipment; and, (ix) associated 
civil and installation works and recovery of public infrastructure damaged by installation 
(i.e. resurfacing roads).  
 
Component A will be implemented in two parts:  the 2010 investment program totaling 
US$ 44.8 million equivalent, which the municipality has completed with its own funds, 
and the 2011-2014 investment program totaling US$ 152.0 million equivalent, which will 
be supported by the World Bank loan and counterpart funds.  
 
Component B: Shayibake District CHP Heating Network (SHN) (estimated cost 
US$145.0 million; US$ 42.6 million IBRD financing). The proposed component will 
finance construction of the SHN district heating (DH) system. The base heat load of the 
SHN district heating system will be supplied by the  Hongyanchi coal-fired CHP Plant (a 
part of the Guodian Group Ltd.), built in 2010 with a capacity of 2x330 MWp (power 
output) and 2x350 MWth (heat output). The peak heat load will be supplied by two coal 
fired HOB plants, Shiyue HOB and Lanzhu HOB with a total installed heating capacity 
of 311 MWth, owned by Xinjiang Guanghui Heating Co., Ltd and Urumqi Lanzhu 
Centralized Heating Co., Ltd., respectively.  The total heated floor area supplied by SHN 
will reach about 14.74 million m2 by 2015, of which about 3.35 million m2 is new 
planned heating area. After component completion, the DH system will replace use of 31 
coal-fired heat-only boiler (HOB) plants including 87 coal fired boilers a total capacity of 
about 1,368 MWth.  
 
The component consists of construction of: (i) about 39 km channel length of primary 
and secondary network; (ii) a pressure isolation station; (iii) about 22 new consumer 
heating substations (including several building level substations for demonstration 
purposes) and reconstruction of about 28 existing substations; (v) a heat metering station 
at the CHP plant; (vi) monitoring and dispatch system (SCADA) and control center with 
associated equipment, and (viii) maintenance vehicles and equipment; and, (ix) 
associated civil and installation works and recovery of public infrastructure damaged by 
installations (i.e. resurfacing roads).  
 
Component B includes two parts: the 2010 investment program totaling US$58.6 
million equivalent), which the municipality has completed and financed with its own 
Page  3
funds, and the 2011-2014 investment program totaling US$86.4 million equivalent, 
which will be supported by the World Bank loan and counterpart funds.  
 
Component C: Institutional Development and Project Management (cost: US$ 1.27 
million; IBRD financing: US$ 1.01 million).  The institutional development and project 
management component includes technical assistance, training, study tours and project 
management support through the following activities: (i) consultancy services to support 
the UDHC project management and monitoring of environmental and social safeguards; 
(ii) consultancy services for a study on optimization of a multi-source heat network, its 
management and monitoring of environmental and energy efficiency performance; (iii) 
consultancy services to update the UHN and SHN emergency plans to enhance safety and 
reliability; (iv) international and domestic study tours for operational knowledge 
exchange (currently planned topics include energy efficient technologies, emergency 
planning, billing and collection, and use of outsourcing (i.e. energy performance 
contracting)); (v) training of UDHC staff (currently planned topics include large network 
dispatching and supervision, control system maintenance and management); (vi) training 
of UDHC staff on WB policies and project management requirements; (v) software and 
relevant parts of an IT system to strengthen billing and accounting;  (vi) office equipment 
and related software for UDHC#s WBPG to strengthen project management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Urumqi, with a population of 3 million, is the capital of the Xinjiang Uyghur 
Autonomous Region.  Urumqi is a major industrial center in Xinjiang, the westernmost 
province of China.  The Urumqi Power Plant Heating Network component is located in 
Northeast Urumqi, in the Shuimogou area. The Shayibake CHP Heating Network is 
located in Southwest Urumqi. A small part of the Shayibake District CHP Heating 
Network will also cross into the neighboring Tianshan District.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
Ms Xin Ren (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project mainly involves construction of heating pipelines and substations with 
temporary moderate impacts during construction such as dust, noise, piling and disposal 
of spoils, interruption of traffic and social life, and chance finding of cultural relics. No 
collective land acquisition and private structure requirement are anticipated. Social 
disturbance is viewed as an important concern given that a large portion of the pipelines 
will pass through roads with substantial traffic volumes in densely populated areas.  
 
No air emissions will be generated during the operation of the project#s heating 
networks. The environmental assessment (EA) analysis shows that wastewater flows, 
mainly from water softening devices in substations, are quite low and lightly polluted, 
thus can be directly discharged into the municipal sewer system.  
 
In order for the construction work carried out in 2010 to be eligible as counter-part 
funded project activities, a due diligence review was conducted by the EA team as per the 
Bank#s requirement. The review concluded that the activity in 2010 had been executed in 
a
way that meets the Bank#s environmental safeguard requirement.  Good practice and 
lessons learnt have been incorporated in the final EMP. The review report for 2010 
activities in both Chinese and English was submitted to the Bank before appraisal.  
 
The existing facilities (two CHP plants and three peak load boiler houses) that will 
supply heat to the project networks pose much larger environmental impacts than the 
project itself. A due diligence review of these heat sources was carried out during EA 
preparation and the findings are described in detail in the EA.  Major environmental 
impacts from these heat sources include flue gas emissions, solid wastes and to a lesser 
extent, wastewater. More details about these installations are provided below.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As mentioned above, the existing facilities that will supply heat to the project pose larger 
and long-term environmental impacts. For flue gas emissions from the two CHPs, 
electrostatic precipitators (ESP) are employed for de-dusting and wet lime scrubbing for 
desulphurization. Both CHPs have on-line monitoring systems, which indicate that SO2, 
NOx and Total Suspended Particulates (TSP) emissions have been compliant with 
national and Urumqi#s local emission standards as well as those of WB/IFC 
Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) guidelines.  
 
For the big peak load boilers which are coal-fired, the Urumqi Municipal Government 
issued a circular in 2010 requiring them to meet flue gas emission standards for SO2 and 
TSP. As a result, the three boiler houses have completed pollution control retrofit late 
2010 with semi-dry lime or double-alkali desulphurization and enhanced scrubbing or 
ESP for TSP removal. Recent data show that they meet the Urumqi#s local standard for 
flue gas emissions which is stricter than the national standard and comparable to WB/IFC 
EHS guidelines.  
Page  5
Most slag and ash from coal combustion and wastes from desulphurization in these 
facilities have been used as raw material for the production of building materials. 
Residues have been disposed in municipal landfill together with domestic wastes. 
Wastewater was initially treated on-site according to domestic requirements and 
eventually in municipal wastewater treatment plants. Due diligence review by the EA 
team and documented in the EAs shows that wastewater from these facilities meets 
domestic standards for discharging into the municipal sewer system.  
 
The small boilers that are to be replaced by the project will be closed according to the 
city government#s policy. Some of them will be kept as back-up for emergencies. Most 
of them will be demolished sooner or later in the future. This constitutes an indirect 
impacts induced by the project. Since these boilers belong to different owners thus are 
mostly beyond the control of the PMO, the timing for demolition is uncertain.  To deal 
with such uncertainty and indirect impacts, a boiler plant closure plan was developed and 
included in the EMP for each network which identifies all small boilers to be closed with 
inventory on their location, size, age, and whether they contain asbestos. It clarifies the 
institutional arrangements and responsibilities, and specifies procedures and mitigation 
measures for proper demolition, handling of wastes especially asbestos disposal, and site 
clean-up. Asbestos falls under the Chinese government#s hazardous waste regulations 
and must be disposed in designated hazardous waste disposal sites.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Different alternatives were identified and analyzed during the EA process, with the 
objective to avoid or minimize potential adverse environmental and social impacts. The 
EA team worked closely with the PMO and the feasibility study preparation team to 
evaluate and compare the pros and cons of different alternatives. A without -project 
scenario was also considered as an alternative to each subproject. Alternatives analyzed 
for both subprojects include: 1) locations for pressurized stations and substations; 2) 
routings for pipelines and different construction methods; 3) d types of heat sources, 
namely individual heating from small boilers, district heating with large-scale coal-fired 
boiler houses or with CHP, with the latter option recommended primarily for 
environmental considerations;and 4) type of fuel used for heat supply, i.e. coal and 
natural gas. Though natural gas could be preferred for environmental considerations, 
coal-fired CHP is the option chosen by the UMG because of energy supply security 
concerns and cost of natural gas in the region.  
 
Because the project will replace use of dispersed, heat-only boiler systems with an 
integrated district heating network in each district supplied by CHP plants and peak load 
boilers, sources that are more energy efficient and equipped with advanced emission 
control devices, a net positive environmental benefit is anticipated compared to the 
without project scenario.  Under conservative assumptions, the proposed project 
alternative would save an estimated total of 17,700 tons of TSP, 34,500 tons of SO2 and 
1,980,000 tons of CO2 by the end of the project.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The PMO hired the EA Center of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, a top-level 
certified EA institute in the region, to conduct the EA process.  Each EA report for each 
heating network includes an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) in accordance with 
the Bank#s safeguards policies. The EMP will be included in the bidding documents and 
contracts to ensure their implementation. Moreover, the EMP includes a budgeted 
monitoring plan and a training plan which are integrated in the overall implementation 
plan, monitoring and evaluation program and training plan of the project. The 
environmental training will be mandatory and should be held prior to the commencement 
of construction. Construction activities in 2010 demonstrate the PMO#s ability to ensure 
that EMP measures are followed by contractors, confirmed by the due diligence review 
report for 2010 activities prepared by the EA team.  
 
For those facilities (CHPs, network, etc.) and activities (closure of small boilers) beyond 
the PMO#s control, their environmental compliance will mostly be overseen by the 
Municipal Government#s Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB) through proper 
institutional arrangements and coordination. During project supervision, the Bank will 
also review the environmental performance of the two CHPs, the three peak load boiler 
houses as well as the closure of small boilers.  
 
The Bank financed networks will transfer heat generated by two existing plants: the 
Huadian Power Plantand the Hongyanchi Power Plant.   Since the Bank supported project 
will transfer heat from those two existing power plants and the main trunk pipelines 
financed by Urumqi in Year 2010, a due diligence review was conducted by the EA team 
and Xinjiang Social and Science Academy Institute. It showed that the two plants were 
built more than 10 years ago and that their expansions were completed respectively in 
2008 and 2010 on company-owned lands without involving any resettlement activities. 
Small scale resettlement activities occurred for the installation of the main heating 
network financed by Urumqi in 2010, such as: construction of a heat pressure regulation 
substation on a municipal hilly terrain with one hectare, and pipeline installation 
requiring compensation for state enterprise trees. Another heat pressure regulation 
substation will be built in an existing state owned boiler station. The due diligence review 
concluded that these small scale resettlement activities and practices were in compliance 
with Bank policies.  The due diligence reviews concluded the 2010 program is consistent 
with Bank safeguards policies. The Project has been approaching avoidance of any 
involuntary resettlement activities.  The pipelines will be installed along city roads and 
the road maintenance after pipeline installation will be undertaken by Urumqi 
municipality.  
 
The project design has avoided land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. It is 
anticipated that no collective land and physical resettlement will occur. A resettlement 
policy framework is prepared to address any changes to the project design.  
 
Since the Bank-financed pipelines will dispatch heat from two existing plants and be 
connected to the main heating network financed and installed by Urumqi in 2010, a due 
Page  7
diligence review was conducted on the two plants and the main heating network. It 
showed that the two plants were built more than 10 years ago and that their expansions 
were completed respectively in 2008 and 2010 on company-owned lands without 
involving any resettlement activities. Small scale resettlement activities occurred for the 
installation of the main heating network financed by Urumqi in 2010, such as: 
construction of a heat pressure regulation substation on a municipal hilly terrain and 
pipeline installation requiring compensation for state enterprise trees. The due diligence 
review concluded that these small scale resettlement activities and practices were in 
compliance with Bank policies.  
 
Urumqi has more than 50 different Chinese ethnic minorities or groups: (Uygurs, Hans, 
Kazaks, Kirgizs, Mongols, etc) totaling 637,000 people # 27% of its population. 75% of 
them live in the inner-city area and the rest in peri-urban areas. Most of these populations 
have immigrated to Urumqi since 1951. The characteristics of indigenous peoples 
described in the Bank#s OP 4.10 # Indigenous Peoples # are not found in the project area. 
In particular, they are not considered to have collective attachment to ancestral territories 
in the project area nor has there been forced severance from these ancestral lands.  This 
policy therefore does not apply to the project.  
 
A
social analysis was conducted to screen potential impacts on possible sensitive 
receptors in the project area. The analysis was done by the Xinjiang Social and Science 
Academy Institute, which has more than 10 years of experience in Bank-financed 
projects in the region. The social team was composed of 121 staff consisting of: 18 
experienced staff from the Xinjiang Social and Science Academy Institute, 34 staff from 
the Delegation of the National Census Investigation Team in Xinjiang, and 71 
representatives from the engaged 41 municipal communities. The social analysis  
involved 1,106 questionnaires received from citizens, 411 questionnaires collected from 
workers, 192 private interviews , and 5 group discussions involving different participants 
(both Chinese and minorities, male and female, etc.) in the project areas. The analysis 
identified project stakeholders: citizens, religious people, shop keepers, communities, 
schools, hospitals, local markets, mosques, heating companies (including leaders, 
administrative staff, and workers), municipal departments in charge of traffic 
management, and PMO.  
 
Through broad participation of project stakeholders, public consultations, interviews, 
group discussions, and substantial data gathering and analysis, the social analysis 
prioritized stakeholders# concerns and concluded that all communities fully supported the 
project. Their concerns focused on three major issues: traffic disturbance during 
construction, workers affected by the small boilers closure program, and impact of heat 
pricing on low-income families due to unexpected increases in input prices. Based on the 
social analysis, the PMO adopted the following instruments that have been integrated in 
to the EMP: a traffic management plan, emergency management plan (i.e. in the unlikely 
event of a cut in electricity during pipeline installation), monitoring plan of the municipal 
program addressing workers affected by the small boilers closure program, and 
monitoring plan of the municipal program of heating assistance to low-income families.   
 
Page  8
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Two rounds of Information Disclosure were undertaken. The first round took place 
during the EA preparation and investigation. The second round was carried out after the 
draft EA was made available.  Information about the project and public access to the draft 
EA (location and time) was announced in  major local newspapers, official and popular 
websites and bulletin-boards in local communities. The EA and the Executive Summary 
were also posted on the World Bank Infoshop.  
 
Public consultations of the EA were undertaken following each round of information 
disclosure. These consultations took various forms, mainly through questionnaires, 
interviews and meetings with the public and experts. About 250 people with a wide range 
of background were surveyed or consulted. The majority expressed strong support for the 
project which they believe will alleviate air pollution in Urumqi. Major concerns include 
dust and noise, disturbance of traffic, business and religious activities during construction 
and quality of heat supply during operation. The EA provided feedback and counter 
measures to address these concerns. For instance, the good practices from 2010 activities, 
such as a bi-lingual (in Chinese and Uyghur) information booklet about construction 
schedule, location and alternative paths etc developed by the PMO and distributed to 
local residents, will continue during project implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/21/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/27/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/30/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  9
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gailius J. Draugelis 
03/21/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Xin Ren 
03/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zhefu Liu 
03/21/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/23/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
03/24/2011 
Comments:   
