Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/25/2011 
Report No.:  AC5979
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P123239 
Project Name:  China Energy Efficiency Financing III 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaodong Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 10, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (90%);Banking (10%) 
Theme:  Climate change (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
200.00 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
128.00
328.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve energy efficiency of selected end 
users in key energy-consuming sectors, thereby reducing their adverse environmental 
impacts on climate, through scale-up of participating bank's lending for energy efficiency 
investments.  
 
This proposed PDO represents slight changes to the PDO under CHEEF 1/, because the 
AF intends to expand the targeted market segments from the industrial-sector-only 
market under CHEEF to the building sector and beyond, and broaden the sub-borrowers 
from large and medium-sized industrial enterprises only under CHEEF to all sizes of 
enterprises and energy service companies (ESCOs). As a result, these expanded activities 
through this AF operation aim to (a) scale up the project's impacts and development 
effectiveness; and (b) make minor restructuring to a successful operation.  
 
Page  2
1/ The PDO for CHEEF is to improve energy efficiency of medium and large-sized 
industrial enterprises in China, and thereby reduce their adverse environmental impacts 
on climate.   
 
3. Project Description 
This project consists of an energy efficiency lending program of US$100 million over 
four years.  The US$100 million IBRD loan will be on-lent by the GOC to EXIM Bank. 
EXIM Bank, in turn, will lend the funds to enterprises and/or ESCOs for eligible energy 
efficiency investment sub-projects. The size of each sub-loan will be below US$20 
million equivalent to diversify potential project risks and increase the development 
impacts of the IBRD loan. The lending rates will be determined based on market 
conditions and will adequately cover the financial and operating costs and provide for a 
reasonable profit margin for EXIM Bank.  
 
Following the recent government priorities and policies, and building on achievements 
and lessons learned from CHEEF, the AF has three improved or expanded features, 
compared to CHEEF. These include: (1) piloting innovative ESCO lending that requires 
energy savings as partial loan security, and broadening the sub-borrowers from large and 
medium-sized industrial enterprises to both all sizes of end users and ESCOs, following 
the recent government's policies for ESCOs; (2) expanding the targeted market segments 
from the industrial to the building sector to support the government's ten priority energy 
conservation programs, given the rapid growth in energy demand for buildings and new 
government's plan to expand the range of priority energy conservation programs; and (3) 
increasing the leverage ratio of the IBRD loan to EXIM Bank contribution from 1:1 in 
CHEEF to 1:2 in AF, which demonstrates EXIM Bank's increased interests and 
confidence in EE investments during CHEEF.  
 
EXIM Bank will lend, from their own resources, at least an additional US$200 million 
equivalent, for EE investments, to leverage the $100 million IBRD loan. In addition, the 
subproject beneficiary enterprises are expected to contribute about 30 percent of the 
project costs, a requirement by EXIM Bank, amounting to US$128 million in equity. The 
total project cost then would be $428 million.  
 
The IBRD loan will be on-lent to all sizes of end users and ESCOs in the industrial and 
building sectors. It is expected that the bulk of the loan will continue to be on-lent to 
large and medium sized industrial enterprises for significant emission reductions. 
However, given the recent government's favorable policies for ESCOs, EXIM Bank has 
expressed interests in ESCO lending and is willing to lead by example. This proposed AF 
operation has tentatively set a target to dedicate at least US$30 million of the total loan 
amount to ESCO lending, whereby the EE project equipment assets, contracts, and 
revenues serve as partial loan security, and building EE investments. The final target will 
be determined by a market survey to be undertaken during project preparation. The 
detailed eligibility criteria, appraisal guidelines, and risk management strategies for these 
new activities (ESCO lending and building EE investments) will be outlined in the 
project Operational Manual developed by EXIM Bank and approved by the Bank.  
 
Page  3
Sub-project investments will be limited to renovation and rehabilitation of existing 
facilities. The major types of energy efficiency sub-projects eligible for financing under 
the project include: (a) replacement of inefficient industrial technologies with energy 
saving technologies such as more efficient industrial boilers, kilns, and heat exchange 
systems; (b) recovery and utilization of by-product gas, waste heat and pressure; (c) 
installation of highly efficient mechanical and electrical equipment, including motors, 
pumps, heating and ventilation equipments; (d) industrial system optimization to reduce 
energy use; (e) building renovation energy efficiency (residential, commercial, and 
government buildings), such as lighting, HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air 
conditioning) systems, energy management, building envelope insulation (roof, walls, 
windows, and doors), and renewable energy applications in buildings (roof-top solar PV, 
solar water heaters, and heat pump); and (f) other projects agreed by the Bank and the 
GOC. The proposed project will not finance any coal-fired power plants. EXIM Bank 
will decide which particular energy efficiency subprojects it will finance, subject to the 
eligibility criteria detailed in the project Operational Manual.  
 
A
technical assistance (TA) program will be provided to EXIM Bank from the GEF 
grant under the ongoing Bank financed CHEEF project. It will assist EXIM Bank in (a) 
identifying, appraising, and conducting due diligence on EE projects for various types of 
sub-borrowers; (b) developing new financial products for ESCO lending and adapt loan 
appraisal and underwriting criteria tailored to EE investments; (c) conducting specific 
market segment studies to broaden the end-user sectors and EE technologies in the 
portfolio; (d) building partnerships for marketing development and generating deal flows; 
(e) developing market aggregation tools for small and medium-scale enterprises and 
projects; (f) focusing on several geographic areas or provinces with large energy saving 
potentials and active PFI branches; (g) strengthening its capacity to manage safeguard, 
procurement, and financial management risks of its future energy efficiency lending 
portfolio; and (h) exploring a low-carbon lending business. The TA program directly 
supports achievement of project objectives.  
 
Unlike CHEEF, this AF operation will trigger the Involuntary Resettlement Policy 
(OP/BP 4.12) so that some subprojects that might involve some limited land acquisition 
outside existing plants such as those sub-projects utilizing waste heat for district heating 
supply could be financed. The revised and updated Environmental Impact Assessment 
Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework have been approved by the Bank and 
incorporated in the Operational Manual.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide.  
 
Most of the sub-projects financed to date under the CHEEF Project are waste heat 
recovery investments.  The Team conducted  due diligence of safeguard implementation 
of the CHEEF Project through visiting three sub-projects and discussing the entire 
portfolio of the fifteen sub-projects financed to date with EXIM Bank. The due diligence 
confirmed that the three sub-projects visited have no major environmental issues and are 
Page  4
operating within existing plants' premise.  However, safeguard implementation of the 
CHEEF Project found that while the safeguard arrangements for the CHEEF Project 
implementation are acceptable, actual implementation - following the procedures in the 
Operational Manual - was marginally adequate. In particular, the sub-borrowers 
demonstrated inconsistent capacity and performance to follow the safeguard procedures.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASCS) 
Mr Youxuan Zhu (EASTS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Sub-project investments will be limited to renovation and rehabilitation. The major types 
of energy efficiency sub-projects eligible for financing under the project include: (a) 
replacement of inefficient industrial technologies with energy saving technologies such as 
more efficient industrial boilers, kilns, and heat exchange systems; (b) recovery and 
utilization of by-product gas, waste heat and pressure; (c) installation of highly efficient 
mechanical and electrical equipment, including motors, pumps, heating and ventilation 
equipments; (d) industrial system optimization to reduce energy use; (e) building energy 
efficiency (residential, commercial, and government buildings), such as lighting, HVAC 
(heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) systems, energy management, building 
envelope insulation (roof, walls, windows, and doors), and renewable energy applications 
in buildings (roof-top solar PV, solar water heaters, and heat pump); and (f) other projects 
agreed by the Bank and the GOC. The proposed project will not finance any coal-fired 
power plants. EXIM Bank will decide which particular energy efficiency subprojects it 
will finance, subject to the eligibility criteria detailed in the project Operational Manual.  
 
In general, EE sub-projects have either minor or no adverse environmental impacts and 
provide environmental benefits (reductions in local pollution such as dust and sulfur 
dioxide emissions and/or reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases such as carbon 
dioxide). EXIM Bank currently has provided loans to fifteen industrial subprojects 
Page  5
predominantly in the cement and iron and steel sectors, with the remaining balance from 
the chemicals, rubber, and metallurgy industries. Most of the sub-projects are waste heat 
recovery investments that use waste heat or gas to generate power, and the rest are 
various types of renovation of industrial processes.  
 
The due diligence of project implementation of the CHEEF Project confirmed that sub-
projects financed to date have no major environmental issues and are operating within 
existing plant's fence. The three subprojects visited as part of the due diligence effort 
have all necessary Chinese environmental approvals and operate within Chinese 
environmental standards. However, the safeguard requirements related to public 
consultation and disclosure were not consistently followed.  
 
Foreseen sub-project impacts for the AF are mainly construction aspects associated with 
the movement of men, machinery and materials (dust, noise, disposal of packaging 
wastes). There is the possibility of hazardous materials management in certain projects 
such as replacement of asbestos insulation, removal and disposal of fluorescent light 
bulbs /2 etc. The Screening Criteria in the Framework Document (Annex A of the AF 
Framework) includes hazardous materials as an issue of special concern and specific 
requirements for both Category assignment and inclusion in the EMP.  
 
In order to improve the efficiency of environmental safeguard process for both EXIM 
Bank and sub-borrowers/ESCOs, a set of generic EMPs will be prepared by EXIM Bank 
under the guidance of the Team safeguard specialist for the most typical sub-projects 
likely to be encountered.  This set of generic EMPs will be prepared prior to project 
implementation, follow the EMP format presented in Annex B of the Framework, and 
added to the AF Framework as an addendum.  Construction issues such as dust, noise, 
disposal on non-hazardous materials, worker health and safety etc. and operation issues 
such as emissions of dust, nitrogen oxides (NOx), and sulfur dioxide (SO2) will be 
addressed.  
 
Most subprojects to be financed by EXIM Bank or ESCOs are within existing premises, 
which will involve replacing old equipments within the existing plants with no land 
acquisition required. But a few subprojects might involve land requisition and 
resettlement under proposed AF, even though no such subprojects were included under 
CHEEF. The due diligence of CHEEF Project implementation also confirmed that these 
subprojects do not have any social impacts on the existing work force. On the contrary, 
these subprojects have resulted in positive social benefits by employing more workers to 
operate the energy conservation facilities, and can generate significant revenues from 
power generation in the case of waste heat recovery subprojects.  
 
/2 Fluorescent light bulbs contain mercury and may contain polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs).   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will involve energy efficiency subprojects throughout the country. The 
overall program will contribute to the long term reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in 
China.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternatives to the project were considered because it is not relevant to this project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
EXIM Bank has revised the Framework Document used under the CHEEF Project to 
reflect the changes in scope of the AF project. All the sub-projects under the AF will be 
Category B or C investments. The AF Framework Document will be an integral part of 
the overall subproject appraisal system. The AF Framework Document describes 
procedures that are consistent with environmental assessment requirements of China and 
the World Bank EA policy.  
 
A
technical assistance (TA) program will be provided to EXIM Bank from the GEF 
grant under the ongoing Bank financed CHEEF project. It will assist EXIM Bank to, inter 
alia, strengthen its' capacity to manage safeguard risks of its future energy efficiency 
lending portfolio. The TA will focus on (1) training of EXIM Bank (HQ and branches) 
and sub-borrowers on environmental and social safeguard policies, standards, and 
procedures; and (2) hiring additional qualified environmental and social safeguard 
consultants.  
 
The due diligence review of safeguard implementation of the CHEEF Project found that 
while the safeguard arrangements for the CHEEF Project implementation are acceptable, 
the actual implementation-following the procedures in the Operational Manual-was 
marginally adequate. In particular, the sub-borrowers demonstrated inconsistent capacity 
and performance to follow the safeguard procedures--one sub-borrower (with two sub-
projects) completely followed the procedures required in the Environmental Assessment 
Framework, while the other did not. EXIM Bank lacks in-house technical or 
environmental capacity. All staff backgrounds are in either finance or economics. The 
experienced external consultant was under contract with EXIM Bank to review 
environmental documentation prepared by subproject sponsors and on occasion EXIM 
Bank hired a consultant to prepare the EMP for the subproject sponsor based upon 
information presented in the approved Chinese EIA Table /3.  
 
For the AF operation, the Team has asked EXIM Bank to substantially strengthen their 
capacity -- hiring more qualified consultants and build in-house capacity - to screen 
subprojects and closely guide and supervise the sub-borrowers to follow the 
environmental and social safeguard framework procedures. Unlike the CHEEF Project, 
where sub-projects environmental screening is done by Chinese environmental 
authorities according to Chinese environmental assessment categories, in the updated 
Page  7
Environment Framework under the AF operation, EXIM Bank will be responsible for 
environmental screening to allow for greater flexibility in the system. Furthermore, the 
inclusion of ESCO lending will increase the number of sub-projects, which will 
substantially increase the work load for environmental review. EXIM Bank has agreed to 
hire more consultants and build in-house capacity to handle the new responsibilities and 
work volume, which have been included in EXIM Bank's GEF Grant procurement plan. 
Prior to Appraisal, EXIM Bank agreed to submit its plans to strengthen institutional 
arrangements and capacity.  
 
Regarding potential social impacts, most of subprojects to be financed by EXIM Bank 
or ESCOs are replacing old equipments within the existing plants with no land 
acquisition required. The only possible scenarios are those subprojects that build efficient 
equipment to replace the inefficient ones or the heating pipelines for waste heat recovery 
projects at the edge or right outside the existing plants. Because of such potential limited 
land acquisition impacts, a resettlement policy framework has been developed, which 
will apply to those subprojects that might involve with any limited land acquisition.  
 
In accordance with relevant Chinese laws and regulations, and the World Bank 
Operational Policy OP4.12, the resettlement policy framework introduces the policy 
objectives, legal framework and compensation entitlements for different categories of 
impacts; specifies the screening procedures for those subprojects that might involve with 
land acquisition and resettlement; and provides basic guidelines on preparation of 
individual resettlement plans. In addition, the requirements on consultation and disclosure 
as well as monitoring and grievance procedures have also been highlighted in the policy 
framework.  
 
To facilitate the resettlement screening, a resettlement screening table has been 
developed and included in RPF, based on which a resettlement screening will be carried 
out for all potential subprojects. Once it is determined that land acquisition is essential to 
complete any project activities, resettlement planning should begin. The overall 
responsibility for preparation and implementation of any necessary RPs rests with 
sponsors of individual subprojects. Based on accurate baseline census survey and social 
economic survey, the RAP will be prepared in accordance with the policy principles and 
planning and implementation arrangements set forth in this RPF, and established 
appropriate mitigation measures as appropriate for all categories of adverse impacts.  
 
The EXIM Bank or ESCOs will be actively involved in RAP preparation in order to 
ensure satisfactory RAPs are prepared for subprojects involved with any potential land 
acquisition and resettlement. RAPs prepared will be submitted to the World Bank for 
review. All RAPs must be cleared by the World Bank prior to awarding of contracts for 
those civil works responsible for the resettlement.  
 
/3  The Chinese environmental assessment screening system for investment projects 
requires either a full EIA for projects of high environmental risk, or an abbreviated EA 
document termed "EIA Table", for projects of moderate risk. The system is similar, in 
principle,  to the World Bank Category A or Category B screening system.   
Page  8
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultation and disclosure requirements for individual sub-projects to be 
supported are fully described in the AF Framework Document. The EAF and RPF will be 
disclosed in the InfoShop and EXIM Bank web site in January 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/05/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/14/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/19/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  9
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaodong Wang 
01/04/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
01/06/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Youxuan Zhu 
01/05/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
01/13/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
01/05/2011 
Comments:   
