Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2011 
Report No.:  AC5970
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P110661 
Project Name:  Sustainable Management and Biodiversity Conservation of the Lake Aibi 
Basin 
Task Team Leader:  Gayane Minasyan 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 18, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (34%);Water resource management (33%);Other environment and 
natural resources management (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
2.98 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9.42
9.42 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to strengthen integrated planning and 
implementation of natural resource management and mainstreaming of biodiversity 
values in Lake Aibi Basin.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will strengthen sustainable management of watersheds to ensure a better 
balance between available supply and consumption and increase environmental flows to 
Lake Aibi while strengthening management of Lake Aibi National Wetland Reserve. 
Ultimately the project will contribute to reduction of wind erosion from the dry bed of 
Lake Aibi that suspends small-sized salt dust particles in the upper atmosphere and to 
protect aquatic and saline-steppe environment of Lake Aibi # the largest terminal salt 
lake in the region.  
 
Page  2
To achieve its development objective the project will use water resource assessments to 
inform optimized allocation of water for consumptive uses (Component 1) and 
demonstrate sustainable management of watershed systems (Component 2) to ensure 
increase environmental flows to Lake Aibi.  These two components address the major 
cause of threats to sustainable biodiversity conservation in Lake Aibi.The project will 
also strengthen management of Lake Aibi National Wetland Reserve, in particular 
conserving aquatic habitats, stopping grazing by domestic animals and facilitating natural 
regeneration of native plant species (Component 3), ultimately contributing to reduction 
of wind erosion from the dry bed of Lake Aibi and conserving globally significant 
biodiversity and their supporting ecosystems.  Lake bed erosion suspends small-sized salt 
dust particles in the upper atmosphere, from where they are carried to other locations and 
can pose a threat to human health because of their small size.  The project will be 
managed and supported by Bortala Prefecture, which demonstrates commitment from 
senior leadership, as well as from XUA Region (Component 4).The components are 
introduced below:  
 
Component 1: Water Resources Assessment and Optimized Allocation. The objective of 
Component 1 is to understand water resource supply and demand in Bortala Prefecture 
and use this to optimize water allocation.  It was agreed that this Component should 
include the following 5 sub-components with the total estimated cost of RMB10.37 
million or US$1.59 million equivalent.  
 
(a) 
Water consumption balance for the entire Lake Aibi Basin (Estimated cost: 
RMB2.90 million/US$0.44million): to find out the targeted consumptive use of water for 
irrigated agriculture / economic afforestation using remote sensing (RS) evapo-
transpiration (ET) techniques to understand how to increase inflow to Aibi Lake and the 
balance between sustainable supply from surface and ground water resources and the 
targeted consumptive use.  
 
(b) 
Analysis of real water savings in Bortala Prefecture (Estimated cost: RMB0.30 
million/US$0.05 million): to find out actual amount of real water savings for different 
crops with the help of RS-based ET techniques and field experimental data and to analyze 
the maximum capacity of water savings in Lake Aibi.  
 
(c) 
Implementation of pilot programs (Estimated cost: RMB5.61 million/US$0.86 
million): to implement 4 programs that pilot reduction of consumptive use of water by 
Water User Associations (WUAs) with close monitoring by RS-based ET techniques.  
 
(d) 
Development of Dynamic Monitoring system supported by RS-based ET 
measuring technology and carrying out monitoring activities (Estimated cost: RMB0.57 
million/ US$0.09 million): to develop the operational ET production system with land 
use maps, which will be used to monitor actual consumption of water in the entire Lake 
Aibi Basin during project implementation.  
 
(e) 
Training Programs (Estimated cost: RMB0.99 million/ US$0.15 million): to carry 
out intensive training in use of the RS-based dynamic monitoring system, land use 
survey, ET data production,  consumptive use comparison for the selected areas, and 
system installation and analysis  
 
Component 2: Sustainable Land Management Practices. The objective of Component 2 
is to demonstrate sustainable management of watershed systems and to  increase the area 
Page  3
of sustainable land management practices implemented in Bortala Prefecture and. This 
Component is designed to include 3 sub-components with a total estimated cost of  
RMB26.56 million or US$ 4,09 million equivalent. Most of the funding for this 
component will come from the Government#s counterpart funding. This component 
includes the following three sub-components:  
 
(a) 
Forest Resources Management (Estimated cost: RMB17.65 million /US$2.72 
million). This sub-component includes protection of natural forests and the activities will 
include fire prevention, improved patrolling and pest control, etc. It will also include pilot 
restoration of natural forests in four forest farms through minor enrichment planting and 
re-seeding with native species. In addition, the monitoring of changes of forest resources 
will also be carried out under this component.  
 
(b) 
Sustainable Grassland Management (Estimated cost: RMB8.50 
million/US$1.31million). Under this sub-component demonstration of three sustainable 
grassland management options will be carried out on in each of the counties of the 
prefecture on total 30,000 mu, which would include rotational grazing, controlled 
grazing, and grazing ban. To complement this activity support for herder livelihoods will 
be provided through production of alfalfa, legumes, maize and other fodder crops. The 
sub-component will also include grasslands monitoring. The activity will include data 
collection, tabulation, and analysis, as well as annual monitoring reports preparation.  
 
c)Training and Capacity Building (Estimated cost: RMB0.41 million/ US$ 0.06 
million).This will include training of patrollers and herders. It will also include a 
domestic study tour to learn about sustainable forest and grassland management in similar 
social and ecological environments in other parts of China. This would also incorporate 
learning on sustainable use and potential ecotourism development in forests and 
grassland, with herders involvement.  
 
Component 3: Biodiversity Conservation and Local Livelihoods Enhancement. The 
objectives of Component 3 are to: (i) protect habitat and species of Lake Aibi NWR; (ii) 
Monitor and research key species to allow for adaptive and well informed management; 
and (iii) support nature reserve management, through staff capacity building and 
participatory development of a management plan, and build a local and regional 
constituency of support for the reserve. Total estimated cost of this component is 
RMB35.16 million or US$5.41 million equivalent and it is comprised of the following 
four sub-components and relevant activities:  
 
(a)Habitat Protection (Estimated cost: RMB25.49 million/ US$3.92 million). Activities 
are based at Lake Aibi NWR and include: patrolling; establishment and use of a data 
management system; and sign boards to disseminate NWR rules and regulations.  
 
(b)Key Species Monitoring and Research (Estimated cost: RMB5.98 million/ US$0.92 
million). This sub-component  includes (i) researching and monitoring Gazelle and Red 
Deer; (ii) researching and protecting birch trees and associated alpine plant community; 
(ii) monitoring poplar recruitment success with increased patrolling against illegal 
grazing; (iv) bird monitoring and research; (v) habitat research and habitat restoration in 
Page  4
the wetland; and (vi) assisted breeding and protection of endangered salamander at the 
Salamander Reserve.  
 
(c)Nature Reserve Management Support and Public Awareness Raising (Estimated cost: 
RMB2.18 million/ US$0.34million), and activities include: (i)Trainings (in ecosystem 
management, survey techniques, bird monitoring, and use of remote video monitoring 
equipment) and Study Tours (nationally, to learn ecosystem management from 
comparable protected areas); (ii) awareness raising, including a poster for local 
community display, a television short show, a small guide book, and a display for the 
Bole Museum; (iii)management plan development;  
 
(d)Livelihood Enhancement (Estimated cost: RMB1.51 million/US$0.23million). This 
sub-component will include alternative livelihoods for the Kekebasto community, to 
relieve grazing pressure on the reserve, including demarcating an area within the allowed 
grazing area for grass collection for pen feeding, training and hiring herders to be NWR 
staff, vocational and skills training, provision of a clinic. The project will support 
alternative livelihoods, as an incentive for herders to stop grazing in the reserve area.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Support Services Component. This component, 
comprising the following three sub-components: (a) Technical Support; (b) Monitoring 
and Evaluation; and (c) Project Management, would finance consultant services, training, 
office equipment and incremental operating costs to provide effective technical support 
and efficient project management. The total estimated cost of this component is 
RMB7.07 million or US$1.09 million equivalent.  
 
(a)Technical Support. The sub-component (Estimated cost: RMB1.71 million/US$0.27 
million) would (i) provide financial resources for Technical Advisory Group members to 
carry out their assignments; (ii) support development, testing and finalization of a 
Replication Strategy; (iii) hire a dam safety specialist to inspect and evaluate the dam 
safety, review and evaluate the OMS manuals, EPP documents, and make 
recommendations for the dams within project area on annual basis and prepare a dam 
safety assessment report towards the end of project implementation and (iv) support 
capacity building of PMO staff at county/nature reserve, Prefecture and Regional levels 
through training and study tours.  
 
(b)Monitoring and Evaluation. The sub-component (Estimated cost: RMB1.05 
million/US$0.16 million) would support effective monitoring and evaluation of changes 
brought about by the project by establishing and implementing an M&E system. The 
M&E system would include (i) physical progress monitoring; (ii) fiduciary (procurement 
and financial management) monitoring; (iii) safeguards (environmental and social) 
monitoring; and (iv) performance and impact monitoring. The establishment and 
implementation of the M&E system will be under the overall responsibility of the PPMO. 
Physical progress and fiduciary monitoring will be carried out by the RPMO, PPMO and 
county/nature reserve PMOs in the form of semi-annual progress reports. Project 
performance and impact monitoring will be carried out in accordance with the Results 
Framework by an independent monitoring institution to be selected by the PPMO. 
Safeguards (environmental and social) monitoring will be funded by the Bortala 
government and carried out by professional institutions to be selected. Technical 
Page  5
monitoring in connection with implementation of Water Resources Assessment and 
Optimized Allocation Component, Sustainable Land Management Practices Component 
and Biodiversity Conservation and Local Livelihoods Enhancement Component has been 
incorporated in Component design and will be the responsibility of relevant PMOs. 
Scope of and activities for monitoring and evaluation, relevant indicators and M&E 
arrangements have been detailed in the Project Implementation Plan reviewed by the 
Bank.  
 
(c)Project Management. The sub-component (Estimated cost: RMB4.31 
million/US$0.66 million) would support establishment and operations of the institutional 
structure including PLGs and PMOs at regional, prefecture and county/nature reserve 
levels for efficient Project management and implementation. The sub-component would 
also support compilation, publication and dissemination of project documentations. 
Budget to cover increment tal operating cost and necessary office equipments would be 
provided.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Lake Aibi is the largest saltwater lake in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region (XUAR) 
and covers two bio-geographic regions (the Eurasian Steppe and Desert as well as Steppe 
Wetland). It is in Bortala Prefecture and sits in an internally-draining, salt-rich basin 
which experiences high winds for about half the year.  Average annual precipitation is 
variable, but very low (about 40 mm) and most of its water resources (both surface and 
ground water) are derived from glacier and snow melt. Much of this is retained behind 
dams and is released according to the needs of downstream urban and agricultural areas.  
Irrigated agriculture is the major water user # more than 98% of the total water use in the 
Bortala Prefecture.  Over 95% of crops are field crops including wheat, cotton, maize, 
grassland plus some vegetables. Agricultural water productivity is very low - around 1.0 
kg/m3 for wheat compared with 1.8 kg/m3 on average in other parts of China. With the 
rapid increase in water consumption for irrigated agriculture in the upstream, wetland 
around Lake Aibi is shrinking rapidly. The water surface of the lake has been reduced to 
around 500 km2 from more than 800 km2 in 1950#s. The large area of exposed 
sediments resulting from reduced water coverage is reportedly an important source of 
wind-blown dust affecting eastern China and beyond. Furthermore, the project area is a 
variety of mountain, meadow, riverine and saline-sodic steppe ecosystems forming the 
Lake Aibi Basin in Bortala Prefecture.  It includes the watersheds of the two rivers that 
continue to contribute flows to Lake Aibi # the Jinghe and Bortala Rivers.  The Lake Aibi 
environment includes terminal wetlands of fresh to brackish water, a highly saline lake, 
an erodible saline-sodic lake bed exposed by reduced water levels and an arid steppe 
environment that supports globally significant biodiversity, including Haloxylon 
ammodendron and Populus diversifolia communities as well as populations of globally 
threatened terrestrial species listed as Vulnerable on IUCN Redlist, such as the goitered 
gazelle (Gazella subgutturosa) and red deer (Cervus elaphus).  The wetlands support a 
diverse range of bird life and form the crossover point of the Central Asian North/South 
and East/West migration flyways.  Lake Aibi is a stop-over feeding point for wildfowl 
and waders during the spring and autumn migration periods (1 # 1.2 million birds are 
estimated to pass through the site), including nine IUCN Redlisted species.  
Page  6
The main threat to the lake is water scarcity and the management of this to the point of 
re-wetting the bed of Lake Aibi will be very challenging. In order to restore the 
ecosystem of Lake Aibi, the prefecture government set water targets - the lake inflow to 
increase by 200 million m3 and lake water surface by 330 km2 by 2020. In addition, the 
industrial water consumption will increase by 60 million m3 and domestic water 
consumption by 20 million m3 for the prefecture by 2020.  In other words, the prefecture 
is now facing the water shortage of 280 million m3 in total to be filled out in order to 
meet the targets by 2020.  However, the traditional approach adopted focuses on increase 
of irrigation efficiency which could result in reduced seepages/ return flows to 
groundwater aquifers and further reduce the inflow to Lake Aibi.  
 
Bortala prefecture supports two national and two regional protected areas: the Lake Abi 
Wetland National Reserve (2,670 km2 established to preserve the terminal salt lake 
ecosystems of Lake Aibi) and the Xinjiang Ganjiahu Saxaul National Reserve 
(established to preserve Haloxylon ammodendron; a species which has concentrated 
populations on in this reserve and in Turkmenistan, and Haloxyon persicum 
communities) are supported nationally while the Xinjiang Wenquan North Salamander 
Nature Reserve (6.95 km2 established to preserve the remaining habitat of the 
endangered salamander Ranodon sibiricus) and Xinjiang Xiarexili Regional Reserve.  
Lake Aibi National Nature Reserve conforms to no less than six of the nine criteria for a 
Wetland of International Importance of the Ramsar Wetlands Convention and its 
nomination has been prepared by the regional government and submitted to the State 
Forestry Administration for further processing. In addition, Bortala Prefecture is rich for 
its cultural heritage, which together with unique ecosystems carries potential for 
developing eco- and natural heritage tourism.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
Mr Ning Yang (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  7
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Impacts. Overall, the project is anticipated to have positive benefits 
through optimization of water resource allocation and demonstration of sustainable 
management of watershed systems, both of which will help increase environmental flows 
into Lake Aibi to sustain wetland ecosystem. The project will also help conserve the 
biodiversity of the Lake Aibi NWR, in particular by conserving aquatic habitats and 
facilitating regeneration of native plant species. Meanwhile, change of water resource 
allocation and conservation of forests and nature reserves will have the potential to 
restrict local people's access to the natural resources and impact their livelihoods. If not 
well designed or implemented, the conservation efforts may cause negative ecological 
impacts such as invasive species. Due to the ecological sensitivity of certain project 
areas, some construction activities have the potential to cause social and environmental 
impacts, such as land occupation, loss of vegetation and soil erosion, noise and dust, 
social disturbance mainly associated with the project construction activities. These 
adverse impacts have been appropriately assessed and can be adequately avoided, 
minimized and/or mitigated with measures developed either in project design or included 
in the project's EMP.  
 
There are a number of nature reserves in the project area, including Lake Aibi Wetland 
Nature Reserve, Ganjiahu Forest Nature Reserve and Salamander Nature Reserve. 
Alternative analysis has been appropriately carried out to analyze potential impacts of 
various proposals on these sensitive objects. It is expected that most of the project 
activities will have ecological benefits in the long run.  
 
The project will involve natural forest protection and pilot restoration in four forest 
farms. The project will use the seeds of the existing trees to reseed the patches of 
degraded areas, or in some limited cases do replanting in those areas. There will be no 
massive reforestation/afforestation activities. There will also be no invasive species 
planted. Since the very exact location of plots of such activities will be decided during 
implementation, Environmental Protection Guidelines for forests is prepared to manage 
the potential impacts.  
 
Based on field survey, it was found that in the Salamander Nature Reserve there are 
ancient tombs and rock paintings located close to targeted protection Salamander 
habitats. As noted above, no civil works will be carried out in the nature reserve 
considering potential environmental risks. Therefore OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources 
is not triggered.  
 
Social issues: About 32 per cent of the Borala prefecture's population is ethnic 
minorities. The largest minority groups are Uygurs, Kazaks, Mongolians and Hui. The 
initial social screening of the project concluded that Kazaks are collectively attached to 
the project area and the project will have impact on the livelihood of those people.  
 
Page  8
The natural reserve area is estimated over 5,000 square km. It was established as a 
provincial level protected area in 2002, and was converted into the protected area of 
national significance in 2004. Most of the area is covered by salty water surface and 
deserts, only 37 square km are desert steppe where two groups of Kazak communities set 
up their traditional grazing yearly, one with area of 24 square km in Bortala Prefecture 
and another one with the area of 13 square km in Guertu area in Wusu County of Tachen 
Prefecture.  
 
The Kazak community, Kekbasto, sits only about 45km from Alashankou Pass, right on 
the border of the buffer zone of the Lake Aibi Nature Reserve. The settlement has one 
well which is only enough for a small amount of livestock. The amount of humans it can 
sustain is extremely small. Many of them settled here for economic opportunities since 
1998. For the most part only the 51 herder households live in Kekbasto, altogether 251 
people, 13 families rely on animal husbandry. As of May, 2009 this village had 2,500 
head of small livestock (sheep and goats) and 500 head of large livestock (cows, horses, 
and camels). Some of the residents collect wild plants or poach animals in order to make 
a
living. The seasonal pastures don#t have clear boundaries, but every year around spring, 
when the ewes are birthing, the sheep herds are brought within a 20km or so distance 
from the settlement, to the north on the mountainside.  
 
Another Kazak community is located in Guertu area in Tachen Prefecture, on the border 
of nature reserve. The Guertu area is the route of transitional grazing area with 13 square 
km during yearly animal transitional period. The pastoral village of Gurtu Township in 
Jinghe County has 230 households with 571 people, 59 households are involved in 
animal husbandry. These herders bring their livesotck from September to October of 
every year for seasonal grazing in the Aqikesu belt of the nature reserve (about 10,000 
head of livestock); neighboring Gurtu Village is the Gurtu Township Herding Unit. Every 
year from April to May and September to November, about 70 herder households herd 
their animals in the pasture near Aqikesu River and the birch forest grounds. There are 
about 15 herds, more than 20,000 head. Every year they spend about two months in the 
area.    The scale of animal husbandry here is not that large, but because the area is 
located in Lake Aibi Nature Reserve close to the core buffer area, seasonal grazing 
affects the biodiversity of the nature reserve. Also, because herders live long-term or 
seasonally settle here, production and living necessities have progressively reduced both 
timber and grasslands. Therefore annual short-term animal husbandry has had a negative 
impact on biodiversity protection in the nature reserve.  
 
There will be no physical relocation supported under this project. However, herders rely 
on the protected area for their livelihoods. Restrictions of access to resources caused by 
the project trigger the policy on involuntary resettlement.  
 
There are 9 existing reservoir dams in the project area. Among these dams, 5 are storage 
dams while the other 4 are diversion dams. The main function of the four diversion dams 
is irrigation with total reservoir capacity of 1830×104m3. As these dams do not have 
direct water links to Lake Aibi, they do not trigger the OP4.37. The storage dams 
however play irrigation and flood control functions with the total reservoir capacity of 
Page  9
7065×104m3. The dams not only make contributions to the water resources distribution 
of Lake Aibi but also have potential risk to the public and facilities in the project area. 
Therefore, the above mentioned 5 storage dams trigger the OP4.37.  Thus dam safety 
assessment has been carried out.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The major environmental issues that were identified are the current use of water for 
irrigation and the impact that has on natural flows into Lake Aibi, the present status of 
natural grasslands in the Lake Aibi Basin and adequacy of natural resources (water and 
soils) for the production of fodder and improved natural grasslands to ensure an 
environmentally and socially sustainable development project.  During implementation 
and operation phase, as long as the project enforces grassland laws and water 
management plans and does not allow any increase in the irrigated area or the number of 
animals within natural grasslands beyond their carrying capacity, it is unlikely that 
project implementation will have any negative environmental impacts in the long term. 
The development of irrigated fodder and forage crops (artificial pastures) should reduce 
the pressure on natural grasslands, allowing for the rehabilitation of the presently 
degraded and/or overgrazed grasslands.  It is anticipated that the proposed GEF activities 
would generate positive global environmental impacts.  
 
Possible negative environmental impact could come from any limitations in availability 
of irrigation water to sustain livelihoods of irrigation farmers or herders relying on 
artificial pastures within project counties.  Since the exact location for fodder production 
pilots is not identified, it is difficult at this point to determine the potential degree of 
impact.  However, the project will, in line with the water resources planning of the 
region, make sure that the available water resources are sufficient for sustainable 
implementation.  In addition, the project will encourage alternative, less water 
demanding, irrigation scheduling and management methods as well as alternative 
irrigated crops that require less water per unit of productivity.  The potential negative 
environment impacts identified in the EIA during construction and implementation phase 
of the project are of temporary nature and limited in magnitude.  
 
In the long run the project is expected to have positive social impact on local 
communities, primarily through gradual introduction of alternative livelihoods to 
compensate for giving up destructive herding activities. In a short run though the 
restriction of access to the natural resources, primarily to conserve the biodiversity in the 
nature reserve and surrounding areas, might have a negative impact on the herders of two 
above mentioned communities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The process of alternative analysis has been an important environmental tool for this 
project.  Alternative analysis has been appropriately conducted during project proposal, 
feasibility study and EA preparation. "Without project" scenario, alternate irrigation 
Page  10
technologies, biodiversity monitoring facilities and salamander water supply schemes 
have been particularly studied.  
 
Without project scenario: the project will have environmental benefits in terms of 
optimized water resource utilization in the project region, conservation of biodiversity 
and promotion of regional economic and social development. These measures and 
benefits are critical to help address the major threats to the Lake Aibi Basin. Hence from 
environmental perspective, without project scenario is not preferred.  
 
#
Alternate irrigation technologies: Compared to current flooding, normal irrigation, 
the proposed drip irrigation technologies will significantly increase water utilization 
efficiency, save water consumption, save fertilizer usage and conserve soil structure. 
Hence drip irrigation technology is preferred.  
 
#
Building of monitoring tower at Lake Aibi and Ganjiahu Nature Reserve. The 
purpose of building the monitoring facility is to provide a tool for biodiversity study and 
emergency response. Though negative impacts associated with construction are 
anticipated. They are minor or manageable give mitigation measures developed in EMP 
are well implemented.  
 
#
Water introduction and rain seeding at Salamander Nature Reserve. The purpose 
of the proposal is to supply water to drying creeks which are habitats to endangered 
salamander. Due to potential risks associated with building of water pipelines and rain 
seeding towers this proposal was declined.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address potential impacts, RPMO/PPMO has contracted the Xinjiang Institute of 
Ecology and Geography Institute (XIEG) of China Academy of Science, a class B EIA 
consultant in China, to conduct the EIA preparation, with guidance and advice from the 
Bank#s environmental team.  
 
EMP. A stand-alone Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been developed based 
on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP detailed the environmental management and 
supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, capacity training 
plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates for its implementation. EMP measures to be 
implemented by the contractors will be incorporated into bidding documents and 
contracts to ensure effective implementation. The contractors and supervision engineers 
will need to assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective 
implementation of the EMP/PMP.  
 
Social Assessment has been carried out for the project and went through several 
iterations. The main objective of the SA was to ensure that the positive benefits designed 
into the project are maximized, while at the same time forming response strategies for 
possible problems, minimize negative impacts, and ensure that the rights of people who 
are directly affected by the project's implementation are protected. In addition, combined 
Ethnic Minorities Development Plan and Process Framework were prepared by Xinjiang 
Social Science Academy Institute, an experienced institute for Bank supported projects in 
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. EMDP was documented by the project authority 
Page  11
to benefit the herders who live in the NWR area and the herders identified in the adjacent 
area, and the Process Framework was prepared to handle the issues related to restrictions 
in access to natural resources, caused by the Bank supported project, in consultation with 
beneficiaries and potentially affected peopleThe document establishes implementation 
arrangements, eligibility criteria, mitigation measures, public participation and 
consultations mechanisms, as well as grievance redress and M&E arrangements. Specific 
activities have also been costed and budget assigned.  
 
Safety of Dams: Dam Safety Assessment has been conducted in August 2010 and report 
has been prepared. TORs for Dam Safety Panel has been prepared. The panel/specialist is 
expected to regularly inspect and evaluate the dam safety, to review and evaluate the OM 
manuals, EPP documents, and to make recommendations for those 5 dams related to the 
project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Several rounds of free, prior and informed consultations resulting in broad community 
support to the project were undertaken by both the local consultant and project authority, 
with the focus on Kekebasto village and Guertu village of Tacheng Prefecture. Public 
consultations with potentially affected people have been conducted according to Bank's 
OP4.01 during the preparation of the environmental assessment and social assessment. A 
combination of surveys and public meetings in the project area of influence has been 
implemented during public consultation: November 2008, May 2009, and then again in 
November and December 2010, particularly in Kekebasto village and Guertu village in 
Tuoli county. In addition to free, prior and informed culturally appropriate consultations 
with herders which were in the form of informal and formal village meetings, individual 
interviews, focus groups, etc, extensive consultations were also carried out with the staff 
of Lake Aibi Natural Wetland Reserve, Forestry Bureau, Water Resources Bureau, staff 
of grassland stations, as well as prefecture governments of Bortala and Tachen. Most of 
the public concerns have been incorporated either in the project design or in the EMP and 
PF/EMDP. Three rounds of information disclosure related to the environmental 
assessment has been carried out by posting posters and bulletins in townships and 
villages, using a local newspaper (the Bortala Newspaper) and through the internet. The 
draft Environmental Impact Assessment document was disclosed on October 25, 2010 
through the Bortala, Jinghe, Bole and Wenquan Environmental Protection Bureau and 
Forestry Bureaus and on internet on March 3, 201. EMDP/PF was disclosed in February 
2011. Relevant project documents have been translated into Kazak language(in addition 
to Chinese) to ensure that those most affected have full understanding of the project, 
intended activities and impacts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/18/2010 
 
Page  12
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/25/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/10/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/27/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/09/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/27/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/09/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  13
Manager review the plan? 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  14
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Gayane Minasyan 
03/24/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ning Yang 
03/24/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zhefu Liu 
03/24/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter Leonard 
03/30/2011 
Comments:  As a delegated project to the World Bank Beijing Office Safeguards Focal Point 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
03/25/2011 
Comments:   
