Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/04/2011 
Report No.:  AC6055
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P121263 
Project Name:  China GEF City Cluster Eco-Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Zhi Liu 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (40%);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(30%);Municipal governance and institution building (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.80 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.25
20.25 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To support the Government of China in enhancing transport efficiency, saving energy, 
and reducing CO2 emissions through multi-modal transport integration in city clusters.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: China City Cluster Eco-Transport Development Strategy and Planning 
(proposed GEF grant allocation US$2.25 million and counterpart fund US$0.35 million).  
This component will support consultant services to help MOT analyze the emerging 
transport patterns and issues of city clusters, propose multi-modal integrated transport 
strategies, policies, regulations, institutional framework and coordination mechanism, and 
develop technical guidelines for city cluster integrated transport planning and design. The 
component will be based on the in-depth analytical works on CZT and other selected city 
clusters in China.  It is envisaged that three consultancies are required:  
 
a) 
Technical assistance for policy analysis of emerging issues in transport 
development of city clusters and for developing integrated transport development 
strategies for city clusters;  
Page  2
b) 
Technical assistance for developing technical guidelines for city cluster integrated 
transport planning and multi-modal passenger terminal design, including guidelines for 
Strategic Environment Assessment (SEA);  
 
c) 
Technical assistance for establishing an M&E system to measure and monitor 
transport energy consumption and CO2 emissions in city clusters.  
 
Component 2: Pilot Demonstration in CZT City Cluster (proposed GEF grant allocation 
US$1.3 million, counterpart co-financing US$27.27 million).  This component will 
support the following activities, which will be carried out in parallel and in coordination 
with the implementation of Component 1:  
 
a) 
Technical assistance for transport integration planning and implementation plan in 
CZT City Cluster, including the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) at the 
planning level;  
 
b)
Technical assistance for (i) design of integrated multi-modal transport terminals in 
CZT City Cluster, including two that will be constructed under the project (see sub-
component below), and (ii) design and supervision of customer satisfaction survey;  
 
c) 
Construction of two multi-modal passenger terminals for pilot demonstration: (i) 
the Southern Changsha High Speed Rail Line Station cum Bus and Urban Rail Terminal 
Complex located at Lituo (also called in short Lituo Terminal) and (ii) the Western 
Changsha Terminal.  This will be financed 100% by counterpart fund of USD 27.27 
million.  
 
Component 3: Capacity Building (proposed GEF grant allocation US$0.95 million and 
counterpart fund US$1.20 million).  This component supports the following training and 
capacity building activities.  
 
a) 
Development of a website for dissemination of project design and implementation 
experience;  
 
b)
Passenger demand model development and dissemination;  
 
c) 
Workshops for knowledge and idea exchange and CZT experience dissemination 
on the following topics: (i) eco-transport development planning for city clusters; (ii) 
integrated transport terminal design; and (iii) intelligent transport systems.  
 
d)
International training for the following topics: (i) multi-modal integrated transport 
planning; (ii) planning and design of integrated multi-modal passenger terminals; (iii) 
institutional development for integrated transport management; and (vi) ITS for multi-
modal passenger terminals.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (proposed GEF grant allocation US$0.3 million and 
counterpart fund US$0.5 million).  This component will support the Project Management 
Office to implement, supervise and manage the project components.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Located in Hunan Province, the CZT City Cluster comprises three major cities (i.e. 
Changsha, Zhuzhou and Xiangtan), four county-level cities, eight rural counties and 184 
small towns, with a total population of 40.7 million and an area of 96,800 square km.  
The three major cities, all within 40 km to each other have a total population of 13.2 
million and a land area of 28,000 square km.  The individual modes of inter-city transport 
are quite developed there.  The CZT cluster lies at the junction of several national 
expressways and railways including two new high-speed rails (Wuhan-Guangzhou and 
Page  3
Shanghai-Kunming).  Two integrated terminals will be included in the project, as 
described in below.  
 
Western Changsha Terminal is located in the core area of modern service industry 
inside Changsha Great Hexi Pilot District, east of West 2nd Ring Road, north of Fenglin 
Road, west of Yulin Road, south of Youyuan East Road. The area is surrounded by built-
up residential areas, shops and a school. The project is to dismantle the existing Western 
Changsha Bus Station and reconstruct a transit hub which integrates passenger transport, 
rail transport, urban public transport, and other transport modes.  
 
Lituo Bus Terminal designed as an integral part of the multimodal Railway-Urban Rail-
Bus passenger terminal, is an annex to the Southern Changsha High Speed Railway 
Staion. It is located on the south of East Laodong Road and east of XInhuahou Road of 
Lituo sub-district, Yuhua District of Changsha city. The foundation and underground 
structure have been built.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall the project is anticipated to have positive socio-economic and environmental 
benefits in terms of enhancing transport efficiency, saving energy and reducing CO2 
emissions. Due to the civil works under construction of the two terminals, the project has 
the potential to cause social and environmental impacts, especially during construction 
stage, which have been appropriately assessed and can be adequately avoided, minimized 
and/or mitigated with engineering measures developed either in project design or 
included in the project#s EMP and RAP. Manageable adverse impacts are primarily 
related to: (i) social disturbance, dust and noise, site cleanup and waste disposal during 
construction; and (ii) wastewater, vehicle emission and noise, safety, transport emission 
during operation etc.  
 
Page  4
The Western Changsha Terminal will be built after demolition of the existing bus 
station. The area is totally built-up, with no natural habitats or physical cultural resources 
identified. Proper disposal of spoils, noise and dust control during construction, 
disturbance to local transport are given particular attention during environmental 
assessment process.  Mitigation measures have been developed to avoid or minimize 
these impacts.  
 
Lituo Bus Terminal, with its foundation and underground structure in place, is 
anticipated to have less construction associated impacts. Due diligence review of the 
original EIA report shows it complies with Chinese national EIA law and regulations. 
The environmental management performance during previous construction is considered 
meeting the standards set forth in the EIA report. For the next stage construction, an 
Environmental Management Plan has been developed to provide mitigation measures, 
institutional arrangement, supervision and budget for the implementation.  
 
The implementation of  Western Changsha Terminal for pilot demonstration would 
involve certain amount of land acquisition and resettlement. The construction the will 
involve occupation  of 175 mu of land areas, including 157 mu of the existing bus 
terminal site owned by the state, and 18 mu of collectively owned land. Along with land 
acquisition a total of 11,398 square meters of houses will be removed and 20,266 square 
meters of existing bus terminal buildings will be demolished. The house demolition will 
affect a total of 110 households and 387 persons, with 64 households being physically 
relocated, including 56 urban households and 8 rural households. The demolition of 
existing bus terminal building will affect a total of 11 shops with 1348 square meters, and 
a
total of 23 persons will be affected.  
 
The Lituo Terminal occupies 20 mu of land within the newly constructed Changsha 
South Station along the High Speed Railway Line between Wuhan and Guangzhou. The 
construction of Changsha South Station involved permanent land acquisition of 1492 mu 
of land from 5 villages in the Lituo Sub-District, affecting 322 households and 1068 
persons, including 275 households who were relocated. Since both land acquisition and 
resettlement for construction of Changsha South Station were implemented between 2007 
and 2008,prior to the official involvement of the project,  a due diligence review on 
resettlement has been carried out by an independent consultant to see whether the 
resettlement process has followed national laws and regulations and whether there are 
any remaining problems. The Bank#s team reviewed the due diligence report and 
concluded the resettlement practices were in line with the Chinese domestic requirement 
and no legacy issues remained.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In long term, the project will have positive socio-economic and environmental benefits in 
terms of enhancing transport efficiency, saving energy and reducing CO2 emissions. The 
integrated transport hub will help improve the efficiency urban transport and give it a 
priority position in the regional transport system, thus reduce energy consumption, saving 
interchange time between different transport modes, improving land use pattern, 
Page  5
upgrading local service sector. All these would contribute to the overall environmental 
benefits in terms of resource saving and pollution reduction.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The two terminals will be built in the original locations of two bus stations; therefore 
alternative analysis focuses on the layout design, transportation arrangement during 
transition period  construction techniques that would minimize construction related 
impacts, including low noise machinery, etc.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In summary, MOT through the project owner has implemented a two-fold approach to 
minimize environmental and social impacts. There are:  
 
#
Sound engineering. The project has been designed compatible with relevant urban 
and land use plans.  The Western Changsha Terminal will be reconstructed on the site of 
existent Western Changsha Bus Station. The overall layout of the Terminal design has 
well taken into account the integration with local urban roads system. As an integrated 
transport terminal, the Western Changsha Terminal will help cut the total wastewater 
discharge, vehicle and small restaurant air pollutants emission and solid waste that have 
to meet the current demand of the bus station currently.  
 
#
Mitigation Plans. Detailed environmental design plans such as landscaping, 
environmental management plans, resettlement action plans have been prepared in order 
to minimize and/or compensate unavoidable impacts from the project.  
 
Environmental Management Plan (EMPs). Two stand-alone Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs) have been developed based on the findings of the EIA report 
of the two terminals each. The EMPs detailed the environmental management and 
supervision originations and responsibilities, mitigation plans, capacity training plan, 
monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP implementation.  
 
EMP implementation will be managed by MOT. A Project Management Office (PMO) 
will be created by the MOT, and staffed by officials from the MOT and Hunan 
Department of Transport (HDOT), as well as domestic consultants. HDOT has years of 
experiences in managing ADB and World Bank-funded transport projects in Hunan and 
is familiar with the Bank operational procedures and safeguards policies. Environmental 
management responsibility will be built into the project management structure within the 
PMO, with dedicated environmental management staff. The contractors and supervision 
engineers will need to assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure 
effective implementation of the EMP. Environmental mitigation measures developed in 
EMP will be fully incorporated into the bidding documents and contracts of Contractors. 
Environmental supervision responsibility will be included in contracts with Supervision 
Engineer firms as an integral part of the project supervision.  
 
Monitoring. The PMO will recruit an Independent Environmental Consultant (IEC) to 
conduct independent monitoring on performance of both the contractors and the 
supervision engineer firms in terms of EMP implementation. The PMO will also engage 
qualified environmental quality monitoring institute(s) to conduct environmental 
monitoring according to the monitoring plan set forth in the EMP. The IEC will assist the 
Page  6
PMO to prepare semi-annual EMP implementation monitoring report to be submitted to 
the Bank.  
 
An external resettlement consultant will be engaged prior to commencement of land 
acquisition and resettlement by PMO. The monitor will conduct two rounds of field visits 
and monitoring in year during the project implementation, with a report of each half year 
to the Bank.  
 
Capacity Building. MOT and HDOT has years of experiences in managing ADB and 
World Bank-funded transport projects in Hunan and are familiar with the Bank 
operational procedures and safeguards policies. They have developed good capacity to 
implement, supervise and monitor both the EMP and RAP. They will be trained to 
enhance their implementation capacity in accordance with the RAP and EMP. 
Independent Environmental Consultant and External Resettlement Consultant will be 
hired to provide training and monitor the implementation of the EMP and RAP by all 
parties involved and provide advice to the MOT and HDOT accordingly.  
 
Grievance handling. Prior to the project appraisal, contact information for the grievance 
channel will be disclosed, including contact agencies/persons, telephone numbers. The 
RP indicates that any grievance should be rapidly handled through the PG resettlement 
management system, external monitor, local government system, or even court system.  
 
For the potential resettlement impacts due to construction of Western Changsha 
Terminal, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared by the project sponsor 
based on a detailed survey. According to the RAP, the land acquisition and resettlement 
will be carried out by the Yuelu District Land Resources Bureau and Yuelu District Real 
Estate Bureau with support from Wangchengpo Sub-district. All these agencies have rich 
experience in implementation of similar resettlement projects in the project areas.  
 
Following the relevant laws and regulations, a set of compensation policies and 
rehabilitation measures will be provided for the affected people. For demolition of urban 
houses, based on real estate appraisal, the final compensation rate is CNY3800 plus 
various subsidies and incentives. In comparison, the price of resettlement housing in the 
project area is around CNY2700 per square meter. Most affected urban residents appear 
to be pleased with such arrangement. For affected rural households, generous 
compensations and rehabilitation will be provided for those 8 households who still hold 
original rural status. Each person would get at least 80 square meters of resettlement 
housing with price set at CNY1200 per square meter. For those temporary structures, 
based on consultation with affected households a lump sum of compensation will be 
provided to the affected households. The draft RAP was developed based on 
consultations with affected villages and individuals. The content of the RAP will be 
disclosed in the project area prior to the implementation, and a qualified external 
monitoring agency or consultant will be selected under Terms of Reference acceptable by 
the Bank, to carry out resettlement monitoring and evaluation during resettlement 
implementation.  
 
For the construction of Lituo Terminal, since both land acquisition and resettlement had 
been completed within the past three years, following the World Bank policies, a due 
diligence review has been carried out by an independent consultant. According to the 
review, which was based on interviews with relevant officials from Changsha Railway 
Page  7
Company and local district and sub-district governments, as well as representatives from 
the affected villages, the land acquisition process was in line with domestic regulations 
with no problems remaining; all compensations and rehabilitation measures had been 
delivered to the affected villages and individuals; and the income and livelihood of 
affected villagers have been restored or improved.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the EIA preparation and RAP preparation, public consultations were conducted in 
accordance with the Bank#s OP4.01 and OP4.12. The EIA and RAP have been disclosed 
locally in accordance with the Bank#s policy and have been sent to the Infoshop prior to 
project appraisal. Information disclosure of EIA preparation has been carried out by 
posting posters and bulletins in the project area and through the internet 
(www.eiacn.com) during October 2010-February 2011, and the which are accessible to 
general public. The revised draft EIA document has been disclosed in local transportation 
bureaus, environmental protection bureaus, and internet on February 15, 2011.  
Information disclosure on project land acquisition and resettlement was distributed in the 
affected communities during the resettlement impact investigation and planning process.  
These were supplemented by a combination of opinion surveys and public meetings in 
the project areas and communities.  Stakeholders such as local authorities, civil society, 
and the affected population were consulted through diverse ways such as internet, 
questionnaires, meetings, and focus groups on land acquisition matters.  The local 
governments were consulted on the alignment and location of stations.  All the affected 
communities are informed, investigated and consulted.  Specific public concerns have 
been incorporated in project design, EIA and RAP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/24/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/24/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  8
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Zhi Liu 
02/19/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ning Yang 
02/24/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jun Zeng 
02/24/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
02/24/2011 
Comments:   
