Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/13/2011 
Report No.:  AC6119
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P122321 
Project Name:  JiTuHun Railway 
Task Team Leader:  John Carter Scales 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 9, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Railways (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
6,103.00
6,103.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to respond to existing and 
anticipated transport demand along the Jilin-Hunchun corridor by providing increased 
capacity for freight and passengers and faster travel time and increased frequency of 
services for passengers.   
 
3. Project Description 
A
new double-tracked electrified 360 km long passenger dedicated rail line and related 
railway stations will be constructed by the project. The northeastern city of Jilin will be 
connected by the line with the far eastern cities of Yanji, Tumen and Hunchun located in 
the Yanbian Korean Autonomous prefecture, close to the international border with Russia 
and North Korea.  The entire line is within Jilin Province.  
 
The project will construct a double-track, electrified, passenger-dedicated high-speed 
rail line capable of a maximum speed of 250 km/h of about 360 kms between the cities of 
Jilin and Hunchun in Jilin province. In addition it will construct two links between West 
Tumen station and Qushui (2.1 km) and between Tumen-Hunchun Railway and Qushui 
(0.83km) as also a double line track between Jilin station and South Terminal of 
Longtanshan station. Nine new railway stations will be constructed.  
Page  2
The total construction period is estimated as four years. Project construction is planned 
to begin in early 2011 and the line is planned to be commissioned by December 2014.  As 
of early March 2011 (appraisal), the JiTuHun Railway Company had not yet received 
approval to begin physical works and as such resettlement and construction had not yet 
begun.  However preparation for land acquisition and resettlement, a small amount of 
land acquisition (approximately 1.2 ha or 18 mu and approximately 0.1% of the total 
planned land acquisition), and procurement of civil works contractors had begun.   As 
confirmed by the Bank#s task team at appraisal, early project activities have been 
undertaken in accordance with the project documents and relevant Bank policies and 
procedures   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The JiTuHun Railway Project will connect the cities of Jilin, Tumen and Hunchun 
passing through eight counties and districts in Jilin City and the Yanbian Autonomy 
Prefecture. The project will include nine new stations: West Jiaohe City, South Weihu 
Mountain, Dunhua, South Dashitou, West Antu County, West Yanji City, West Tumen 
City, North Liangshui and North Hunchun City.  
 
The proposed alignment is within a developed transport corridor with an existing 
railway line (Changchun-Tumen Railway), an expressway (Changchun-Tumen-Hunchun 
Expressway), two national highways (G302 and 301), and numerous local roads. The 
alignment area consists of alluvial plain, urban areas, rolling hills, valleys and mountains. 
Given the presence of a number of sensitive areas in the vicinity of the project corridor, 
and, in the east part of the project area, good vegetation cover and a dense water system, 
the project presents moderate to high ecological sensitivity.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Songling Yao (EASCS) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASCS) 
Mr Ning Yang (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Impacts. There will be environmental impacts due to the project, 
especially during construction. The impact mitigation approach employs three primary 
principles, namely, avoidance, sound engineering and comprehensive mitigation plans. 
An alternative analysis methodology was used to avoid sensitive areas to the maximum 
extent possible, including natural reserves, forest parks, cultural relics and water 
resources protection areas.  The remaining adverse impacts after avoidance are assessed 
in the Environmental Impact Assessment and measures to mitigate and minimize these 
impacts are included in the Environmental Management Plan. Remaining adverse 
impacts related to: (i) crossing sensitive sites such as nature reserves, cultural resources, 
and water resource protection areas; (ii) the use of excavated earth (approximately 3 
billion m3); (iii) the construction activities such as blasting, building access roads, and 
earth works in sensitive areas; (iv) construction-related nuisance such as noise, dust, and 
soil erosion; and (iv) noise, safety and community connectivity during operation are 
considered manageable.  
 
There are a number of environmentally sensitive sites identified in the vicinity of the 
project corridor during EA preparation, including nature reserves, cultural relics sites and 
water resource protection areas. Alternatives have been studied and carefully selected to 
avoid most of these sensitive sites. Nonetheless, the final alignment will impact the 
sensitive sites of: i) Songhuajiang Three-Lake nature reserve; ii) Antu Mingyue Pine-
mushroom Protection Area; iii) Minjiang Salmon Resources Protection Area; iv) Jilin 
City Water Source Protection Area; v) Jiaohe Water Source Protection Area; vi) 
Longtanshan relic site; and vii) Maorshan Cemetery.  
 
Baseline surveys, including an ecological and biodiversity study and an impact 
assessment, have been conducted along the project corridor.  Special attention has been 
paid to protected areas.  Reduced-impact engineering, environmentally sound 
construction practices and restrictions on the construction of access roads, camps, and 
disposal sites will be adopted in protected areas. The design of the railway adopted 
bridge-tunnel scheme to maintain wildlife activities and minimize disturbance to 
surrounding ecosystems. A dedicated Water and Soil Conservation Plan will control soil 
erosion and rehabilitate vegetation at sites impacted by the railway construction.  
 
The EA pays special attention to address the following sensitive sites providing site-
specific actions to avoid or reduce impact:  
 
-
The alignment passes along the edge of the Songhuajiang Three-lake nature 
reserve, 15 km from the core three lakes area. The portion of the reserve where the 
alignment passes consists of agricultural farmlands and planted and secondary trees, and 
active human development (existing railway, national road G302 and provincial/county 
roads). There is no endemic or protected wildlife natural habitat.  
 
-
The alignment within Antu Mingyue Pine-mushroom Reserve follows a transport 
corridor along the Buerhadong river valley maintaining a minimum distance of 5-10 km 
Page  4
from the protected red-pine forests.  Also within the same transport corridor is the 
existing Chang-Tu railway, national road G302, provincial/county roads and Antu City. 
This portion of the alignment area consists of farmland and residential areas.  
 
-
In order to minimize construction within the river, the alignment will bridge 
across the Mi River, within the Mijiang Salmon Resource Protection Area (an important 
salmon migratory channel), on specially designed 48m spans (instead of the regular 32 m 
span).  In addition, construction will be suspended during the salmon migratory season.  
 
-
In the Jilin city center, the alignment will cross the Songhuajiang River within the 
Jinlin City Water Source Protection Area (classified as Class II protection zone) adjacent 
to an existing railway bridge.  A crossing as far from the downstream water intake (about 
2
km) was selected.  
 
-
The alignment crosses the semi-protected terrestrial area Jiaohe City Water 
Source Protection Area outside of the buffer zone and 5 km away from the water source.  
 
-
The alignment will traverse through the outer buffer-zone (construction control 
zone) of the Longtanshan relic site and Maorshan Cemetery. A tunnel and long bridge 
crossing, far away from the core protected zones, was selected to reduce impact. The 
alignment will not affect any known cultural relics and chance-find procedures have been 
included in the EMP.  
 
During the preparation of the environmental assessment, special attention was paid to 
understanding the impact on tiger habitat. Initial data collection, surveys, and 
consultation with relevant authorities indicated that several areas in northeast China have 
the potential to be tiger habitats and, in some cases, designated as priority protected areas. 
Further field investigation and literature research (Technical Report on the Identification 
of Potential Tiger Habitat in the Changbaishan Ecosystem, Northeast China  ,  January 
2010, a joint research by WWF, WCS, Northeast Normal University, KORA and the 
University of Montana) concluded that: (i) the railway alignment is within a well 
developed transportation corridor with an existing railway, an expressway, and local 
roads; (ii) the delineated areas of tiger presence identified in the late 1990s survey are far 
from the proposed alignment; (iii) given the intensive existing transport infrastructure, 
human activity and farming as the dominant use of land, the current transport corridor has 
a
near zero possibility of being potential tiger habitat, as supported by three model 
simulations in the WWF report; and (iv) the project will cause no further fragmentation 
of potential tiger habitats as there habitats are all already fragmented by transportation 
corridor which the project will share.  
 
In summary, the project impact on sensitive sites has been avoided, minimized and 
otherwise mitigated through analysis, consultation with relevant authorities, project 
design, and development of environmental mitigation measures.  
 
Social Impacts. A Resettlement Plan (RP) has been prepared including a Resettlement 
Plan Framework (RPF) for resettlement related activities which are not clear at 
preparation stage such as camp sites and access roads. The project will require land 
acquisition and resettlement.  Impacts are greater in the more densely populated urban 
areas than in rural areas.  The alignment, including station locations, has been selected to 
mitigate, minimize, or avoid both environmental and social impacts to the greatest extent 
Page  5
possible.  The tunnel-bridge scheme (approximately 66% of the alignment) was adopted 
in part to avoid adverse social impact.  
 
Approximately 17,000 mu of land (approximately 47 mu per km) will be permanently 
acquired of which 98% is rural collective land. In addition, about 800 ha (about 12,000 
mu) of land is to be temporarily acquired.  Approximately 638 thousand m2 buildings 
(1,750 m2 per km) are expected to be demolished of which 39% is rural housing, 49% is 
urban housing, and the remainder is enterprises combined with residential, enterprises, 
and schools. This project does not involve demolition of illegal structures.  
 
The project is estimated to affect approximately 19,588 persons, 45% in rural areas, 
48% in urban areas and 7% from enterprises and a school. Approximately 12,913 people 
(33% rural, 67% urban) from 4,221 households (24% rural, 76% urban) will be resettled.  
The total rural affected consists of 9,475 people from 2,644 households including 4,252 
people from 1,029 households to be resettled. The total urban affected consists of 8,661 
people from 3,192 households who will be resettled.  In addition, the project will affect 
1,167 people from 35 factories, mines, and enterprises; 220 people from one school; and 
65 persons from 30 single family businesses.  
 
The task team#s social development specialist conducted an indigenous peoples 
screening, supported by a social assessment, conducted by the Central Minority 
University, and concluded a few Korean minority villages in Jiaohe County and some 
villages with Man minorities in Yanji City are located along the project line.The two 
Korean villages in Jiaohe County are located 3.8 km and 4.8 km away from the 
alignment. In accordance with OP 4.10 an Indigenous Peoples Plan was prepared by the 
Central Minority University.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The railway will provide excellent opportunities for local and regional economic 
development such as enhancing local business trade, improving transport links, and 
providing construction related job opportunity.  The most dramatic and directly related 
induced economic development will be in the vicinity of the railway stations. Alignment 
and station selection has been decided together with local governments in accordance 
with municipal development plans, transport plans, and urban master plans in order to 
ensure benefits are maximized through appropriate land use and transport connectivity.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The process of alignment selection has been an important social and environmental tool 
for this project. Alternative analysis has been extensively conducted during the 
preparation of the project proposal, pre-feasibility study, feasibility study, environmental 
impact assessment, land use plan, and resettlement plan. A number of alternatives have 
been studied considering economic, technical, environmental and social factors. Among 
these alternative analyses was the consideration of alternatives for Jinlin hub connection 
(3 options), Jinlin-Jiaohe section (K7-K70, 2 options); Jiaohe-Weihuling section (K76-
Page  6
131, 2 options), and Tumen terminal connection (3 options). The final alignment has been 
selected based many factors including avoidance of sensitive sites, land acquisition and 
resettlement; accessibility of city and county population centers, consistency with the 
various development plans, and cost-effective engineering.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Safeguards  
 
MOR retained the China Railway Science Institute, a Class A licensed EIA consultant in 
China, to conduct the EIA preparation, with guidance and advice from the Bank#s 
environmental team.  
 
Mitigation Measures.  Extensive assessment has been conducted for all the potential 
impacts, based on which a set of mitigation measures have been developed in the project 
design and EMP. In summary, MOR implemented a three-fold approach to minimize 
environmental and social impacts. These are:  
 
#
Avoidance. Environmental and socially sensitive areas were avoided to the 
greatest extent possible.  The final alignment was selected, in part, to avoid nature 
reserves and cultural heritage sites and reduce impact on households and enterprises.  
 
#
Sound Engineering. The project has been designed with state-of-the art 
engineering. More than 66% of the length of the alignment will adopt a bridge-tunnel 
scheme greatly reducing land acquisition and ecological footprint.  
 
#
Comprehensive Mitigation Plans. Detailed environmental design plans (green 
corridors and landscaping), environmental management plans, resettlement action plans 
have been prepared in order to minimize and compensate for unavoidable impacts.  
 
EMP. A stand-alone Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been developed based 
on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP describes the environmental management and 
supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, capacity training 
plan, monitoring plan, and environmental management related implementation budget 
estimates. EMP measures to be implemented by the contractors will be incorporated into 
bidding documents and contracts. EMP implementation will be managed by MOR 
through the JTH Railway Company. An environmental management unit will be 
established in the Company and will include dedicated environmental staff. Qualified 
environmental staff are required to be part of the contractor#s and supervision 
engineering#s team and will be responsible for implementing the EMP.  
 
Social Safeguards  
 
Significant resettlement will be required adjacent to rail stations particularly at the urban 
stations: Jilin, Dunhua, Antu, Tumen and Yanji. Impact assessment, compensation rate 
justification, and restoration schemes are addressed in the RP.  
 
Land compensation rates provided in the RP follow the latest regulation of land 
compensation. Rural house will be compensated according to replacement cost while 
Page  7
urban structure will be paid based on professional evaluation of market prices. All 
households will also obtain resettlement allowance and relocation subsidies. 
Compensation for enterprises and shops will be based on professional evaluation 
including taking into account the economic loss due to the relocation. School 
compensation will be based on the cost of replacing the school and will be substantiated 
though a design process.  Infrastructure replacement will be paid according to restoration 
plan conducted by contractors under consultation with the affected villages/communities.  
 
Rural houses will be restored near the original villages with residential land and public 
facilities provided by villages.  Two of the new resettlement sites will be prepared for 73 
relocated households while other households chose scattered relocation. Urban 
households can decide to be compensated, independently purchase their replacement 
houses, or be allocated a replacement house. Only 639 households chose the provision of 
a
replacement house.  
 
There are two villages losing more than 10 percent of their total land for which the RAP 
tabulated detailed resettlement strategies.  For the other villages, the main restoration 
measures rely on cash compensation, with other assistance measures like land 
readjustment within village group and employment training. Enterprises, shops and 
school can be restored with compensation equivalent to the replacement cost.  
 
During the RP preparation, extensive consultative meetings were held at provincial, 
county, township and village levels, and questionnaires completed by affected persons 
along the line. This consultative process affected the ultimate project realignment, station 
location, and resettlement arrangements.  The RP also addresses the establishment of 
appropriate resettlement institutions, capacity building, monitoring and reporting.  
 
Resettlement will be financed by the provincial government, and in turn will reflect the 
resettlement cost as equity and shares in the project company. Local governments below 
the provincial level will not be required to finance resettlement activities.  On the other 
hand, they will be responsible for implementing the resettlement.  
 
The RP includes a compliant handling mechanism involving government, court, and 
project management systems, World Bank and external monitors, arrangement for 
internal and external monitoring, implementation strategies, as well as resettlement 
funding source and fund flow. JTHC will bolster its resettlement office and provide 
training for its resettlement staff in accordance with the RP.  
 
IP  
 
The project covers two sections, one is Yanbian and the other is Jilin. As described in 
the SA, Yanbian is a Korean autonomous prefecture and, as such, there is no need to 
prepare an IPP for the Yanbian section but rather to integrate IP related measures directly 
into design and implementation. On the other hand, an IPP was prepared for the two 
Korean minority villages in Jilin section outside the Korean autonomous area. These two 
villages broadly support the project and The IPP will provide these villages with: i) water 
Page  8
facilities, ii) special assistance to the aged persons in the villages, iii) promotion of the 
development of cultural and tourism resources, and iv) additional employee training in 
the villages.  
 
Borrower Capacity  
 
MOR has a long (more than 30 years) and extensive experience with the implementation 
of World Bank safeguards policies. Previous experience indicates a commitment by 
MOR to effectively implement Bank's safeguards policies and a good record on 
implementation. MOR has developed adequate capacity to implement, supervise and 
monitor both the environmental management plan and the resettlement action plan. In 
recent years, MOR#s commitment to environmental practices has been robust.  On the 
other hand, because land acquisition and resettlement, in line with national policy, 
remains the responsibility of provincial and local government, the implantation 
performance for implementing the associated World Bank safeguard policies has varied. 
Training on the implementation of the EMP and RP will be provided to JTH Railway 
Company staff, contractors, supervision engineers and local governments.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the EA, RP, SA, and IPP preparation, public consultations were conducted in 
accordance with the Bank#s OP4.01 and OP4.12, through a combination of opinion 
surveys and public meetings in the city, townships and villages. Stakeholders such as 
local authorities, civil society, and the affected population were consulted on land 
acquisition matters through the newspaper, meetings, and focus groups. Local 
governments were consulted on the alignment of the railway line and location of stations. 
Management authorities for affected nature reserves, cultural resources and water source 
protection areas were consulted for agreement and proper mitigation measures. All the 
affected villages were informed, investigated and consulted. Public concerns raised 
during the consultation have been incorporated in project design, the EMP, RP and IPP.  
 
The EMP, RP and IPP will be disclosed in accordance with the Bank#s policy. The 
public has been given notice of EA preparation by posting posters and bulletins in 
townships and villages, disclosure in local newspapers (Yanbian Daily, Jiangcheng Daily, 
Jinlin Daily Newspaper) and through the internet (www.rails.com.cn) during July 2010 ~ 
February 2011. The draft EIA document was disclosed in local environmental protection 
bureaus, railway administrative offices in October, and a publically accessible internet 
website (www.cec-cn.com.cn) on February 11, 2011.  Information disclosure on project 
land acquisition and resettlement was distributed in the affected villages and communities 
during the resettlement impact investigation and planning process.  The EA Summary 
and EMP were disclosed on Infoshop on March 7, 2011.  The RAP and IPP were 
disclosed to Infoshop on March 16, 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  9
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/13/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/11/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/11/2011  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/11/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/22/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/16/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/22/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/16/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Page  10
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Carter Scales 
03/09/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ning Yang 
03/09/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Songling Yao 
03/09/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter Leonard 
03/23/2011 
Comments:  signed as a delegated project to the WBOB Safeguards Focal Point 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
03/10/2011 
Comments:   
