Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/21/2011 
Report No.:  AC5581
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P115695 
Project Name:  Bayannaoer Water Reclamation and Environment Protection Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shunong Hu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 29, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: April 28, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%);Water supply (40%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (58%);Water resource 
management (40%);Municipal governance and institution building (2%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
84.50
84.50 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to support Bayannaoer Municipal Government to: 
(i) better utilize water resources to develop higher income activities to local residents 
without compromising the water use for irrigation, which would adversely affect the rural 
poor; and (ii) improve the water environment by reducing water pollution entering 
Wuliangsuhai Lake.  
 
These objectives will be achieved through: i) supplying reclaimed water, reclaimed from 
irrigation drainage and wastewater, to selected industrial development estates; ii) 
extending the wastewater service to selected industrial development estates, iii) piloting 
non-point pollution control measures in selected drainage catchments and developing 
artificial wetlands at the discharge points of the drainage canals to the Wuliangsuhai Lake 
thus reducing the discharge of pollutants into the lake; and iv) providing technical 
assistance to enhance the capacity of the Implementation Agency in project design, 
management and operation and in developing adequate safeguards to handle all toxic 
substances and a practical business development plan for the BWAG as well as the 
training activities.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project consists of four components, with a total project investment cost of US$170.2 
million including financial costs of US$ 7.0 million, as detailed below:  
 
Component 1. Reclaimed Water Supply (US$73.2 million): Construction of water 
reclamation and distribution facilities, which will source their raw water from agricultural 
drainage and treated domestic and industrial wastewaters, including four (4) water 
reclamation plants, raw water transmission mains, and distribution networks in the 
Wulatehouqi, Ganqimaodu, Hanjinhouqi and Wuyuan Industrial Estates.  
 
Component 2. Wastewater Management (US$52.5 million): Construction of three 
wastewater treatment, including primary, secondary and tertiary treatment, facilities in 
Wulateqianqi, Ganqimaodu, and Wulatehouqi Industrial Estates, and distribution 
networks for recycled water in Ganqimaodu and Wulateqianqi Industrial Estates. The 
required sewer collection networks already exist or will be built by the industrial estate 
authorities.  
 
Component 3. Constructed Wetlands, Pilot Non-point Pollution Control and 
Channelization of Wuliangsuhai Lake (US$34.8 million): i) Establishment of constructed 
wetlands to contribute to the natural reduction of pollutants from point and non-point 
sources entering Wuliangsuhai Lake; ii) Construction of canals in Wuliangsuhai Lake to 
improve the water circulation of the lake; and iii) Implementation of a pilot program to 
support and scale up non-point control pollution control measures on optimized 
application of chemical fertilizers to reduce nutrients discharge.  
 
Component 4. Technical Assistance (US$2.7 million): Provision of technical assistance 
to support BWAG in: i) reviewing designs and bidding documents, managing contracts, 
and preparing project progress and monitoring reports; ii) developing an adequate 
industrial clean production mechanism for pollution control in industrial processes; iii) 
preparing a strategic business development plan for BWAG; and iv) training BWAG staff 
on corporate governance, strategic development, and operation and maintenance of 
facilities of facilities and wetland built under the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project is located in Bayanaoer Municipality, one of the municipalities 
located in mid west of Inner Mongolia. Within Bayanaoer Municipality, the proposed 
components are located in the counties of Wulatehouqi, Hangjinhouqi, Ganqimaodu, 
Wuyuan County and Wulateqianqi, mostly in rural areas.  
 
The river system in Bayannaoer is divided into two river systems by the watershed 
formed by the Yinshan Mountain, the Yellow River system in the south and the inland 
river system in the north. Average annual runoff in the city is 331 million m3 and 237 
million m3 in Yellow River system accounts for 71.6% of total runoff, while 94 million 
m3 in inland river system accounting for 28.4% of the total.  
 
Page  3
Wuliangsuhai Lake is a large shallow lake. Based on satellite images of June 7 of 2008, 
the lake is 35 - 40km long from south to north and 5 - 10km wide from east to west, with 
surface area of 316.41 km2, water depth of 0.5 - 3.2m, surface elevation of 1,018.58 m 
and storage capacity of 322 million m3. The water comes mainly from the drainage 
canals of the irrigation districts well as the mountain streams from the south of Wolf 
Mountain and the north of Ural Mountain. Wuliangsuhai Lake is the sole surface water 
body receiving the return water from the irrigation district. Each year, about 0.5 billion 
m3 of wastewater from agricultural irrigation and 33 million m3 industrial & domestic 
wastewater in the Hetao area are discharged into the Wuliangsuhai Lake, which also 
bring 288,000 t of chemical fertilizers and other nutrients. As a result, the lake has 
become eutrophic with Total Phosphorous and Total Nitrogen being the primary concern.  
Wuliangsuhai Lake has many functions and provides many services, including climate 
regulation, maintenance of biodiversity, bird habitat, development of aquaculture and 
tourism. In addition, it is an important part of the irrigation and drainage system for the 
Hetao Irrigation District. It also plays an important role in flood prevention, ice flood 
prevention and water resource management of the Yellow River. Wuliangsuhai Lake has 
been designated by the State Forestry Ministry as a waterfowl conservation 
demonstration wetland and a nature reserve protected at provincial level. It is also listed 
in the Inventory of International Important Wetlands.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
Mr Ximing Zhang (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01: The project as a whole is substantially positive 
in environmental terms, with the benefits greatly outweighing the negative impacts. 
Nevertheless some negative impacts have been identified in the EA process. The 
principal impacts and their appropriate mitigation measures are described below.  
Page  4
In the construction phase, the adverse impacts include wastewater discharge from 
construction camps, airborne dust, noise, traffic disruption and disposal of spoiled 
materials. An environmental management plan (EMP) has been developed as part of 
environmental safeguard document for each component. In the EMP, mitigation 
measures, monitoring plans, institutional arrangements, capacity building and estimated 
budget of the mitigation measures and monitoring programs for both the construction and 
operation phases have been included. In the EMPs, contractors are required to water 
construction sites during dry and windy seasons, develop careful plans to mitigate noisy 
construction activities and avoid/ban night time construction, maintain equipment in good 
operating conditions, develop temporary traffic plans to detour traffic around 
construction sites, etc.  
 
With regard to 145 km canals in the Lake, construction activities will be carried out in 
winter time (temperature is from -200 to -300 C). Before construction starts, main 
preparation is to release the water from the construction site to ensure the site is dried up, 
so that environmental disruption will be controlled and limited.  
 
In operation phase, the key environmental issue is sludge management.  At the project 
preparation, monitoring data for hazardous pollutants for the past years was collected; 
and lab test for toxic elements in wastewater samples from existing industries was carried 
out in EA process. Thus far, there were no any data and information exceeded applicable 
standards.  Since most industrial parks are at early planning and development stage, it is 
important to prevent polluting industries to move in. According to the selection criteria of 
industrial park entry, industries that produce the toxic material will not be allowed to 
enter the project related industrial parks to ensure no hazardous and toxic pollution in 
future.  It is obvious that in WWTP operation in future sludge will be generated. The EA 
assessed the quality and quantity of sludge generation and disposal.  According to the 
EA, sludge will be sent to the city landfill for disposal by the WWTP operators. During 
project preparation, Bank task team conducted due diligence review on the landfill, 
including site selection, design, compliance of national environmental policies and 
regulations, etc. There were no outstanding issues to be found. Monitoring program 
including the landfill management and environmental requirement has been proposed as 
part of the EA and EMP. In case there is any sample exceeding the applicable standards, 
the sludge will be sent to the hazardous and toxic material management and disposal 
center in Baotou as stated in the EA and EMP.  
 
OP4.04 Natural Habitats: Component 3 will support the construction of artificial 
wetlands at the end of each drainage canal to further reduce the pollutants from point and 
non-point sources entering Wuliangsuhai Lake, located downstream of the Hetao 
Irrigation District. It is expected that the proposed component will improve the water 
quality of the Lake thus improving its ecological conditions as well. As mentioned above, 
Wuliangsuhai Lake is a provincial level nature reserve. All proposed activities # canal 
construction will be carried out in the experimental area of the determined natural reserve 
in accordance of national policy and requirement, where is far away from the core area of 
Page  5
the Reserve and to ensure no or very limited impacts to the core area of the nature 
reserve.  According to the assessment, there was no negative impact to the core areas of 
the Reserve. As a long term, there would be positive impacts to improve water quality 
because of increase of water circulation after the project.  
 
Resettlement: Construction of four reclaimed water and three wastewater treatment 
plants requires permanently a total land area of 758 mu (50.5 hectares), including 38 mu 
of collective farming land (2.5 hectares), 232.5 collective unused land (15.5 hectares) and 
487.5 state owned land (32.5 hectares). To minimize the negative impacts on rural 
families, the BWAG and design consultants made their efforts to select the sites of 
reclaimed water and wastewater treatment plants with due considerations to avoid any 
demolition of structures and use of cultivated lands. As per designed, all reclaimed water 
and wastewater treatment plants will be built on state owned land and unused collective 
land so that the negative impacts to the collective cultivated land could be minimized. As 
a
result, only a total 5 rural households will be affected by permanent land acquisition. 
The project will provide assistance to their livelihood rehabilitation.  Civil works will not 
start before the current crop harvest.  Assistance will be provided to help restore 
livelihoods.  
 
In addition, the construction of pipelines transferring source water to four reclaimed 
water treatment plants and three wastewater treatment plants will request temporary lands 
with total 18 ha of lands, including 4 ha of cultivated land and 14 ha unused land. The 
civil works of pipelines will be undertaken during winter seasons and negative impact 
will be minimal.  
 
Safety of Dams: Two small sized reservoirs, i.e. Yongming and Wangba Dams (with the 
height of 2.5 m and 1.5 m respectively), will service as the back-up water sources during 
winters when there is insufficient water available in the drainage canals. Remedial works 
of these two dams will be completed by the BWAG by the end of 2010. The dam safety 
specialist of the Task Team had reviewed the design and construction and found 
acceptable during the project appraisal. During the project implementation, the Task 
Team will monitor the safety status of the two dams and supervise any remedial works if 
needed to ensure the OP/BP4.37 is observed accordingly.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect negative long term impacts are expected from the proposed project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During project development and preparation, various alternatives have been screened and 
compared against technical, economic and environmental criteria. In terms of the 
environmental assessment of alternatives, the primary objective was to identify and adopt 
options with the least adverse environmental impacts.  
 
Page  6
Since the population density in the project area is low, there were re many options 
available for wastewater treatment plants. As the result, most of the waste water 
treatment plants are located on state owned land and unused collective land in order to 
minimize the negative impacts to collectively cultivated land.  
 
With regard to the alternatives for wastewater treatment technologies and wetland 
treatment technology, the design teams and EA consultants conducted analysis to 
compare different technologies from technical, economic, financial and environmental 
considerations.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has engaged EA consultants to prepare the EA reports for all proposed 
components, which satisfy the Bank#s requirements for OP.4.01 and Chinese policies and 
regulations. The EA & EMP specified appropriate mitigation measures, environmental 
monitoring plans, institutional arrangements, training and equipment requirements 
together with budget estimates for implementation of the mitigation measures and 
monitoring plans.  
 
The proposed mitigation measures are described as follows: the adverse impacts during 
the construction of the proposed water distribution network, wastewater collection 
system, and water works include airborne dust, noise, traffic disruption and disposal of 
spoiled materials. These impacts are short-term and manageable. Contractors will manage 
the construction site properly, through watering construction sites during dry and windy 
seasons, develop plans to mitigate noisy construction activities and avoid/ban night time 
construction, maintaining equipment in good operating conditions, and develop 
temporary traffic plans to detour traffic around construction sites.  
 
In operation stage, sludge generated from WWTPs will be sent to the Bayanaoer landfill 
by the operator. An agreement of receiving sludge has been signed between WWTP 
operators and the landfill management agency.  
 
In operation stage, the environmental monitoring program, as part of EMP, will be 
carried out to monitor the parameter and elements in influence and effluence, including 
the toxic elements such as heavy metals, to ensure that the specified environment 
standards are met.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP4.37): The project does not finance constructing dams, but some of 
the water supply systems to be constructed under the project would draw directly from 
reservoirs controlled by existing dams. There are two existing upstream dams which 
provide emergency water sources for the water reclamation component:  Yongming and 
Wangba Dams in Bayannaoer City. The Bank#s dam safety expert has visited the two 
dams and reviewed the documents concerning safety of dams. These two dams are to be 
remedied. The Task team has reviewed the remedy designs and found they are 
acceptable. The task team also reviewed the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of the 
two dams and found they are acceptable. Emergency Preparedness Plans (EPP) for the 
Page  7
dams are under preparation. During project implementation the construction of remedial 
works, O&M and safety status of the dams will be monitored.  
 
The Bank task team includes a dam safety expert. The dam safety expert will (a) inspect 
and evaluate the safety status of existing dams, their appurtenance, and performance 
history; (b) review and evaluate the owner#s operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(c) provide written reports of findings and recommendations for any remedial work or 
safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an acceptable standard 
of safety. The dam safety experts would also inspect the design and implementation of 
the dams which need to be strengthened.  
 
Chinese Government has issued guidelines and regulations for dam safety management 
including Reservoir Dam Safety Management Regulation, Regulations on Reservoir Dam 
Safety Review, Guidelines for Dam Safety Review, Guidelines for Emergency 
Preparedness Plan, and Guidelines for Operation, Maintenance and Surveillance of 
Dams. During Project implementation, the Borrower will provide information concerning 
safety of the two dams to the Bank, and provide necessary arrangement for site visit to 
the dams; the Bank and the project implementing agent will monitor the dam safety status 
and supervise implementation of remedial works to ensure that the Project complies with 
OP4.37.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The borrower has engaged EA consultants to prepare the EA reports for all proposed 
components, which satisfy the Bank#s requirements for OP.4.01 and Chinese policies and 
regulations. The EA & EMP specified appropriate mitigation measures, environmental 
monitoring plans, institutional arrangements, training and equipment requirements 
together with budget estimates for implementation of the mitigation measures and 
monitoring plans.  
 
The proposed mitigation measures are described as follows: the adverse impacts during 
the construction of the proposed water distribution network, wastewater collection 
system, and water works include airborne dust, noise, traffic disruption and disposal of 
spoiled materials. These impacts are short-term and manageable. Contractors will manage 
the construction site properly, through watering construction sites during dry and windy 
seasons, develop plans to mitigate noisy construction activities and avoid/ban night time 
construction, maintaining equipment in good operating conditions, and develop 
temporary traffic plans to detour traffic around construction sites.  
 
In operation stage, sludge generated from WWTPs will be sent to the Bayanaoer landfill 
by the operator. An agreement of receiving sludge has been signed between WWTP 
operators and the landfill management agency.  
 
In operation stage, the environmental monitoring program, as part of EMP, will be 
carried out to monitor the parameter and elements in influence and effluence, including 
Page  8
the toxic elements such as heavy metals, to ensure that the specified environment 
standards are met.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP4.37): The project does not finance constructing dams, but some of 
the water supply systems to be constructed under the project would draw directly from 
reservoirs controlled by existing dams. There are two existing upstream dams which 
provide emergency water sources for the water reclamation component:  Yongming and 
Wangba Dams in Bayannaoer City. The Bank#s dam safety expert has visited the two 
dams and reviewed the documents concerning safety of dams. These two dams are to be 
remedied. The Task team has reviewed the remedy designs and found they are 
acceptable. The task team also reviewed the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of the 
two dams and found they are acceptable. Emergency Preparedness Plans (EPP) for the 
dams are under preparation. During project implementation the construction of remedial 
works, O&M and safety status of the dams will be monitored.  
 
The Bank task team includes a dam safety expert. The dam safety expert will (a) inspect 
and evaluate the safety status of existing dams, their appurtenance, and performance 
history; (b) review and evaluate the owner#s operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(c) provide written reports of findings and recommendations for any remedial work or 
safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an acceptable standard 
of safety. The dam safety experts would also inspect the design and implementation of 
the dams which need to be strengthened.  
 
Chinese Government has issued guidelines and regulations for dam safety management 
including Reservoir Dam Safety Management Regulation, Regulations on Reservoir Dam 
Safety Review, Guidelines for Dam Safety Review, Guidelines for Emergency 
Preparedness Plan, and Guidelines for Operation, Maintenance and Surveillance of 
Dams. During Project implementation, the Borrower will provide information concerning 
safety of the two dams to the Bank, and provide necessary arrangement for site visit to 
the dams; the Bank and the project implementing agent will monitor the dam safety status 
and supervise implementation of remedial works to ensure that the Project complies with 
OP4.37.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/30/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/02/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/08/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/30/2010 
 
Page  9
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/27/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/08/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
Page  10
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shunong Hu 
11/10/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
11/05/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zhefu Liu 
11/08/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Ximing Zhang 
12/06/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter Leonard 
01/21/2011 
Comments:  Signed by WBBO COSU Safeguard Focal Point as a delegated project 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
12/06/2010 
Comments:   
