Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/31/2011 
Report No.:  AC5892
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P120234 
Project Name:  China: Shandong Confucius and Mencius Culture Heritage Protection and 
Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shenhua Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 22, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (50%);Public 
administration- Other social services (40%);Sub-national government administration 
(10%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
80.78
80.78 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to assist Shandong Province to enhance cultural 
heritage conservation and tourism management in Qufu and Zoucheng.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A. Cultural Heritage Conservation and Presentation (20.2% of total project 
cost)  
 
Conservation of cultural heritage assets, including temples, mansions, cemeteries, 
ancient buildings, courtyards, watchtowers, gates, archways, stele pavilions, wood, color 
paintings, stone tablets, inscriptions, and ancient trees; improvements to signage, 
interpretation and display; and adaptive reuse of heritage assets in the following sites:  
 
A1- Conservation of Cultural Heritage Assets in Qufu and Nishan Mountain.  
 
Page  2
A2- Conservation of Cultural Heritage Assets in the Qufu Ming Old City including: the 
No.10 Old Mansion, No. 4 Old Mansion, County Yamen Building, archways, ancient 
well, ancient trees in the Confucius Temple, Mansion and Yanhui Temple, and stone 
tablets and inscriptions.  
 
A3- Conservation, Management and Display of Cultural Heritage Assets in the Lu Old 
City including: roads, historic paved roads, walkways, protection and display: historic 
main and small roads, and a new wooden walkway in Lu Old City.  
 
A4- Conservation of Cultural Heritage Assets in the Zoucheng Old City including: the  
Mencius Temple and Mansion, Xiang Palace (Mencius Cemetery), Xiang Temple; wood, 
color paintings, stone tablets and inscriptions; Mencius Cemetery roads, boundary wall; 
smoke detectors, surveillance equipment, fire fighting facilities; and a visitor center and 
parking.  
 
A5-Signage, Interpretation and Digital Display in Qufu and Zoucheng: Signage and 
display improvements, including: sound guiding systems, roads and street signs, 
descriptions and explanations of significance of cultural heritage assets, directions to 
other assets and resting areas, brochures and promotional material; and an interactive 
digital display system to depict Chinese history and Confucius# teachings.  
 
Component B. Historic City Regeneration and Infrastructure Upgrading (77.8% of total 
project cost)  
 
B1-Historic City Regeneration in the Ming Old City in Qufu: (i) urban redevelopment 
of Block A of Ming Old City (ii) renewal of all trunk infrastructure in the eastern zone of 
Ming Old City, secondary infrastructure in Block A and the Gupan Pond block, including 
fire fighting facilities.  
 
B2- Rehabilitation in the Lu Old City and Ming City in Qufu : Restoration of the water 
system to supply the city moat and Gupan Pond, through water distribution in the moat 
(stage two), water distribution to the Gupan Pond (stage three) and landscaping and river 
course rehabilitation.  
 
B2.1: Si River Water Diversion (stage 1): Diversion of water from the Si River to the 
city moat and Gupan Pond, through construction of a rubber dam on Si River and a 
transmission pipeline or channel to the Ming Old City moat.  
 
B3-Historic City Regeneration in Zoucheng: (i) urban redevelopment in three street 
blocks; (ii) urban redevelopment of Block A of Zoucheng Old City including housing 
(non Bank-financed), infrastructure facilities and fire fighting facilities; and (iii) 
construction of four archways compatible with the historic city yet in simplified modern 
Chinese style.  
 
.
B3.2: Mencius Primary School: Reconstruction of the primary school.  
 
Page  3
B4-Rehabilitation of Yinli River in Zoucheng: (i) river dredging for removal of garbage 
and regulation, river bank rehabilitation including footpaths, roads, lighting and bridge; 
(ii) weirs for water retention; (iii) wastewater interceptors on river banks, including six 
river crossing siphons; and (iv) public sanitation facilities and landscaping.  
 
For B1 and B3, copying of old architectural styles in new reconstruction in the heritage 
sites is a major issue addressed in the project. Heritage practitioners believe that new 
buildings should sympathize with the historic built environment, their masses and 
materials should be compatible with the historic cities, but their appearance and 
decorations should not copy ancient architecture. The same concept applies to gateways, 
pavilions, and any other built structures that will be built in the historic cities and project 
sites. New buildings that look like ancient architecture will only jeopardize the value of 
existing ancient buildings. Ordinary visitors and residents should be able to recognize the 
difference between existing ancient buildings and those that will be built. The guidelines 
for development control in Qufu and Zoucheng should feature such design principles and 
technical details to ensure that new buildings follow the #Modern Chinese style.#  This 
style is compatible with the historic built environment yet recognizable as modern, as it 
blends traditional and modern features, i.e., masses and heights of new constructions 
should be close to those of the existing buildings, while elevations, facades, decorations, 
and interiors should combine traditional and modern features, so that a common visitor 
would be able to easily distinguish these new buildings from existing ancient ones.  
 
Component C: Community Participatory Heritage Protection and Cultural Tourism 
Development in Qufu and Zoucheng: Activities to support and encourage local residents 
to participate in sustainable tourism development through heritage conservation and 
income generating activities:  
 
C1. Awareness-raising on cultural heritage conservation and management.  
 
C2. Training and support for heritage-related small business development, and 
improving quality of services, and design of marketable products.  
 
C3. Rehabilitation of Xishantou village (Zoucheng) including: (i) rehabilitation of 
buildings and courtyard renovation (one house depth) along eastern side, and upgrading 
of buildings on eastern side of Sacred Way; (ii) water supply, appropriate technology 
sanitation solutions, drainage, solid waste management; (iii) paving of road and provision 
of street lighting.  
 
Component D: Conservation Techniques; Guidelines, Manuals, Conservation Plans, 
etc.; Infrastructure Network Modeling; and Management Plan for World Heritage Sites 
(1.0% of total project cost)  
 
D1: Conservation techniques for wood, color paintings and stone tablets and 
inscriptions: developed with the assistance of leading experts/institutions and on-site 
guidance for conservation works.  
 
Page  4
D2: Preparation of Guidelines, Manuals, and Ming City Infrastructure Design, 
including: (i) infrastructure network modeling for Ming Old City; (ii) detailed 
development plan for Qufu Ming Old City#; (iii) updating the Ming Old City 
conservation plan; (iv) guidelines for historic city regeneration, planning and 
development control; (v) a manual on community participation and sustainable tourism 
development; and (vi) a management plan for the World Heritage Site and other assets on 
its tentative list.  
 
Component E: Training and Project Implementation Support (1.0% of total project cost)  
 
E1. Training program for cultural heritage conservation for Cultural Relics Bureaus and 
relevant Qufu and Zoucheng staff.  
 
E2. Training in sustainable tourism development, marketing and tourism management.  
 
E3. Training for capacity building of PMO staff at provincial, municipal and city levels.  
 
E4. Design review, project management and monitoring; and experts to guide 
conservation works.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Qufu and Zoucheng City of Jining Municipality, Shandong Province   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASCS) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project resettlement impacts mainly include residential house demolition, shop 
closing, permanent land acquisition and temporary land taking during project 
construction.  Within the two cities, 688 residential houses will be demolished, which 
will affect 2409 people and 146 shops will be demolished, which will affect 492 people. 
The project will cause 1 mu (666 m2) of collective land acquisition, which will affect 2 
people in Qufu city.  
 
Environmental safeguards: The project as a whole is substantially positive in 
environmental terms, with the benefits greatly outweighing the negative impacts. 
Nevertheless some negative impacts have been identified in the EA process, especially 
during construction stage, and these require mitigation measures. The principal impacts 
and their appropriate mitigation measures are described below.  
 
As one of the project components, B4 - Yinli River rehabilitation component in 
Zoucheng comprises river bed dredging (40000 m3), regulation of the river bed slope, 
construction of new embankments walls (incorporating interceptor sewers behind them), 
and construction of short weirs (walls) across the river bed, at approximately 500 m 
spacing, to create a waterfront using the available flow. Interceptors will be constructed 
along the river banks, along with the construction of the embankment wall; at depths of 
up to about two meters max. Dredging is necessary to remove accumulated garbage. As 
part of the dredging activity, regulation of the river bed slope will be done to create the 
slopes for the construction of the short weirs (05m to 1.m high) to have a continuous 
water surface. And there are additional technical details: (i) there will be one rubber dam 
(up to 1.5m high) on the Si River (near Qufu) to divert a small quantity of water (about 2 
m3/S) to the city moat and the Gupan pond; (ii) interceptors are new and are not 
constructed on old infrastructure; the interceptors will be located behind the embankment 
walls and are not in deep trenches; the main interceptor will be on the left bank of Yinli 
River, and sections of interceptors on the right bank will be connected to the main 
interceptor at intervals using river crossing pipes (siphons); (iii) estimated volume of 
dredging from Qufu's city moat and Gupan Pond is about 15000 m3 and 40000 m3 from 
Yinli River in Zoucheng. And dredged materials from the rivers will be disposed in the 
city landfill that is now in operation according to national policy and regulation. 
Therefore, in the construction phase, the adverse impacts include wastewater discharge 
from construction camps, airborne dust, noise, traffic disruption and disposal of spoiled 
materials. An environmental management plan (EMP) has been developed as part of 
environmental safeguard document for each component. In the EMP, mitigation 
measures, monitoring plans, institutional arrangements, capacity building and estimated 
budget of the mitigation measures and monitoring programs for both the construction and 
operation phases have been included. In the EMPs, contractors are required to water 
construction sites during dry and windy seasons, develop careful plans to mitigate noisy 
construction activities and avoid/ban night time construction, maintain equipment in good 
Page  6
operating conditions, develop temporary traffic plans to detour traffic around 
construction sites, etc.  
 
The below table summarizes some common environmental impacts that could be 
appeared in construction such as river dredging, small rubber dams, interceptors, and 
river crossing siphons, etc., and the proposed mitigation measures.  
 
Environmental impacts:  
 
1)
Waste gas, dust, odor of oil generated from construction activities;  
 
2)
Noise from onstruction equipment and machines;  
 
3)
Solid waste and wastewater from construction and workers;  
 
4)
Traffic interruption and safety and landscape interruption. Earth generated from 
slope work and stone cut-and-cover and possible soil erosion;  
 
5)
Trees protect the process, if the improper use of pesticides or fertilizers, will the 
local soil and atmospheric pollution;  
 
6)
About 15000 m3 sediments and garbage from Qufu's city moat and Gupan Pond 
and 40000 m3 from Yinli River in Zoucheng City would be dredged and removed.  
 
Proposed mitigation measures:  
 
1)
Construction materials should be compacted and covered. The construction site 
should be watered regularly. And the construction equipment and machines should be 
maintained periodically.  
 
2)
Low-noise equipment and machinery are used, or minimize the use of 
construction machinery to reduce the mechanical noise. The construction site is within 
300m of residential, construction work producing noise should cease from 22:00 to 
06:00. At the construction sites closing to the sensitive areas, nighttime construction 
should be banned.  
 
3)
Waste generated from road pavement and wall construction will be reused after 
the simple sedimentation. Wastewater will be collected from the septic tank connected to 
public toilets. Building materials should be reused as far as possible and solid wastes will 
be collected by city environmental sanitation department and be sent to the landfill that is 
in operation.  
 
4)
Construction sited should be fenced with clear sign to alert people for safety 
purpose. Retaining walls and slope protection works should be designed as part of the 
work. Good balance of earth and stone work, temporary spoil shall be compacted and try 
to avoid construction during the rainy season to reduce soil erosion.  
 
5)
Protection and rejuvenation of old trees requires the use of eco-green manure, 
reducing and banning fertilizer use, prohibited the use of highly toxic pesticides.  
 
6)
The sediments were sampled and tested in EA stage and there was no toxic item 
to be found. In construction, the contractor is requested to store the dredged materials 
properly on site and transport them to the city#s landfill that is in operation according to 
national polity and regulation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect and long term negative impacts are expected from the proposed project.  
Page  7
The impacts caused by the application of OP 4.01 will be localized to the respective 
project locations and for are expected to be positive from long term perspective.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During project development and preparation, three types of alternatives have been 
screened and compared, i.e., with and without project option, different environmental and 
technical options to be considered for mitigation measures, and location selection for the 
proposed service facilities. In terms of the environmental assessment of alternatives, the 
primary objective was to identify and adopt options with the least adverse environmental 
impacts. The details of the alternative analysis have been presented in the Chapter 7 of 
the EA report.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Resettlement:  
 
In accordance with local laws and the requirements of the Bank, the individual RAPs for 
the Qufu and Zoucheng subcomponents were prepared in both Chinese and English by 
the clients assisted by the local house demolition offices, local land bureaus, affected 
villages and communities, and potential displaced persons.  
 
#
Compensation Standards.  The land acquisition compensation included land 
compensation, resettlement subsidy and standing crop compensation.  The land 
acquisition fund is calculated based on average annual output value (AAOV) according to 
the Law of Land Administration of the People#s Republic of China.  The compensation 
rates for structures have been determined based on their replacement cost.Different 
indicators, such as the prices of newly constructed houses, second houses in better 
condition, the prices of construction materials and labor costs, are used as reference to 
determine the replacement cost.  
 
#
Affected Shops.  Shops will be also compensated on their replacement cost and 
subsidy for business losses will be provided.  
 
#
Affected public infrastructure:  Compensation based on replacement value will be 
paid to relevant government agencies or local governments to restore the affected 
infrastructure and services.  
 
#
Implementation arrangements:  A multi-level organization has been established 
for the implementation of the RAPs.  An independent monitor will be selected for 
resettlement implementation and livelihood restoration.  The PIUs will be responsible for 
internal monitoring and will provide semi-annual internal monitoring reports to the 
PPMO and the Bank.  Details of staffing and their responsibilities are provided in the 
RAPs.  
 
Page  8
#
Budget and funding arrangement.  Both Qufu and Zoucheng will prepare 
sufficient budget from their counterpart funding to conduct the resettlement of the 
projects.  
 
#
Public participation.  Project-affected persons and organizations have been 
informed about the project and its impact through meetings during the preparation of the 
RAPs.  Comments and recommendations received from these meetings have been 
incorporated as appropriate in the RAPs and the FSRs.  Public participation will continue 
during RAP implementation.  Project information will be provided to the affected persons 
through TV, newspapers, bulletins and posters.  The RAPs will be summarized into a 
resettlement information booklet and distributed to affected households.  
 
#
Participatory Monitoring. A participatory monitoring mechanism will be 
established during project implementation. Advisory committees for participatory 
monitoring will be established and such committees will be consist of representatives 
from PAPs, woman#s organizations, communities and publics who care about the project. 
Advisory committees will organize public to be involved in participatory monitoring of 
the project. Technical assistance will be provided by the external monitor and reports 
from participatory monitoring will be included in the project external monitoring reports.  
 
#
Gender issues.  Gender issues have been considered and a gender sensitive 
approach has been applied in resettlement planning and social assessment.  Both men and 
women have been consulted in the RAPs preparation and social assessment process.  It 
has been found that there are no discrepancies between the expected resettlement impacts 
on men and women.  Both men and women will benefit equally from the proposed 
project.  
 
#
Grievance redressing mechanism.  A grievance mechanism was established 
during the preparation of the RAPs. All relevant telephone numbers were disclosed to 
PAPs.  The PAPs can, therefore, prosecute any resettlement aspect, if needed.  All 
prosecuted cases will be recorded in writing.  
 
Borrower capacity.  The PIUs will assume the overall responsibility for the 
implementation of the resettlement program. Resettlement offices in Qufu nd Zoucheng 
had experienced staffs on domestic resettlement program.  Technical trainings on Bank#s 
OP 4.12 and the implementation of RAPs will be provided to project staffs. Their 
respective responsibilities and functions are detailed in the RAPs.  
 
Environmental safeguards: The borrower has engaged EA consultant to prepare the EA 
report for the components, which satisfy the Bank#s requirements for OP.4.01 and 
Chinese policies and regulations. The EA & EMP specified appropriate mitigation 
measures, environmental monitoring plans, institutional arrangements, training and 
equipment requirements together with budget estimates for implementation of the 
mitigation measures and monitoring plans.  
 
Page  9
The proposed mitigation measures are described as follows: the adverse impacts during 
the construction include airborne dust, noise, traffic disruption and disposal of spoiled 
materials. These impacts are short-term and manageable. Contractors will manage the 
construction site properly, through watering construction sites during dry and windy 
seasons, develop plans to mitigate noisy construction activities and avoid/ban night time 
construction, maintaining equipment in good operating conditions, and develop 
temporary traffic plans to detour traffic around construction sites.  
 
In operation stage, the environmental monitoring program, as part of EMP, will be 
carried out to monitor the parameter and elements in influence and effluence to ensure 
that the specified environment standards are met.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources: One of the key objectives of the project is to protect the 
cultural heritage. In the EA process, related information has been checked and assessed, 
and an appropriate mitigation and management plan will be proposed as part of the EA. 
At the same time, a freestanding chapter of the physical cultural resource management 
plan has been prepared in the EMP. In the process, the Culture authorities at various 
levels of government participated and provided all required information and the guidance.  
 
Designs and bidding documents for conservation works will be prepared by qualified 
institutes under the direction of the PMO, and, as required under Chinese law, approval 
of the designs by the appropriate cultural bureau will be a prerequisite for the 
implementation of conservation works.  Certification of contractors will be required, and 
will be assessed during pre-qualification. In addition, all contracts under the project will 
include and mitigation measures proposed in the EMP as well as provisions for chance-
finds procedure.  Training on China#s cultural relic protection laws and their 
implementation is included in the project for site managers and government officials.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Resettlement Consultation and participation. Project-affected persons and organizations 
were informed about the project and its impacts in meetings during the preparation of the 
RAPs. Key comments and recommendations received from these meetings were 
incorporated in the RAPs and feasibility studies. Public participation will continue during 
RAP implementation. Project information will be provided to affected persons through 
television, newspapers, bulletins, posters and information booklets.   Participatory 
Monitoring Mechanism has been designed.  
 
Public consultations have been carried out during the EA process. The techniques used 
for the public consultations include surveys using public opinion questionnaires, focused 
group discussions, public meetings with key stakeholders and interviews with some 
project affected persons.  The issues raised during these consultations have been 
incorporated in the EA and EMP. Furthermore, feedbacks to the concerns collected in 
public consultation have been provided to the concerned groups and documented in the 
EA documents. The EIA documents and other project related documents have been 
Page  10
disclosed locally through various means (e.g., websites, information board of local 
community, local libraries, etc.), as required by national and Bank's policies.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/03/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/04/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/18/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/02/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/04/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/18/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Page  11
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shenhua Wang 
01/21/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
01/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jun Zeng 
01/21/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
01/26/2011 
Comments:   
