Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/06/2010 
Report No.:  AC5834
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P119654 
Project Name:  GEF Guangdong Green Freight Demonstration Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ke Fang 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 22, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: February 25, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (50%);General energy sector (40%);Other industry 
(10%) 
Theme:  Climate change (50%);Pollution management and environmental health 
(25%);Other urban development (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.20 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
17.40
17.40 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives (PDO) of the Guangdong Green Freight 
Demonstration Project are to: (a) demonstrate the global and local environmental benefits 
of the application of energy-efficient vehicle technologies and operating techniques, and 
(b) promote the development of sustainable measures for improving energy efficiency in 
the road freight transport sector in Guangdong Province.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Green Truck Technology Demonstration: Under this component, 
participating trucking companies will receive incentive packages, training and other 
assistance to support the procurement and installation of energy-efficient technologies on 
their vehicles.  
 
Page  2
Component 2: Green Freight Logistics Demonstration: This component includes market 
studies for logistics operational methods and a proposed provincial logistics brokerage 
platform, and support to the preparation and implementation of pilot schemes.  
 
Component 3: Capacity Building: This component will support a research program on 
green freight policies, training curriculum/materials for government officials and 
enterprise managers, and project promotion and information dissemination, including 
maintenance and upgrading of the Guangdong Green Freight website.  
 
Component 4: Program Management and Monitoring & Evaluation:  This component 
includes technical assistance to the PMO for managing the project implementation 
(including monitoring and evaluation).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Guangdong Province   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yiren Feng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified as Category C for its minimal adverse environmental impacts 
associated with inadequate practices on installation of truck equipment during project 
implementation During preparation, an environmental screening procedure has been 
included in the project preparation (preparation is repeated; confusing) process to help 
identify areas for improvement/strengthening.  Standard and practical environmental 
protection/management measures on waste gas, waste water, noise, and solid waste have 
been incorporated into the project design, with special emphasis on truck maintenance 
and installation facilities, and an Environmental Management Manual (EMM) was 
Page  3
prepared based on the environmental screening to provide guidance to PIUs for managing 
environmental issues during installation and operation phase.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The implementation of the project will bring measurable environmental and social 
benefits, e.g., reductions of air pollutants and GHG emissions in the project areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Department of Transport (DoT) of the Guangdong Provincial Government is the 
leading agency for preparation and implementation of the Project. A Project Management 
Office (PMO) has been established at the Comprehensive Transport Division of the DoT 
and staffed with nine officers responsible for different aspects of the project. The officers 
in charge of environmental management are transferred from the PMO for the Bank-
funded Inland Waterway Project II and IV and have rich knowledge and experience in 
applications of Bank#s safeguard policies. Similar to other Bank projects in China, a 
Provincial Coordination Group has also been established to oversee and coordinate the 
project. The group consists of senior officials from various departments/agencies, 
including the Provincial Environment Protection Bureau.  In addition, a detail training 
plan for government officials, and truck drivers and operation managers in participating 
shipping and trucking companies, and monitoring plan was prepared by PMO to be 
implemented during the implementation phase.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultation, including expert consultations, questionnaires, symposia, and 
interviews, was extensively conducted by PMO with the different stakeholders of the 
proposed project as follow:  
 
1) Paper questionnaire. Questionnaire survey was conducted in 21 prefecture-level cities 
throughout the province, it includes the following items: the current situation of the road 
freight industry, problems in promotion of green freight, relevant suggestions and the 
environmental conditions in different regions. Through timely collecting and sorting out 
the questionnaires and forms, the reasonable views and suggestions was fully taken into 
project design.  
 
2) Symposium. The Project Management Office and the Design Unit of the project hold 
special symposiums for the personnel from the Project Coordination Group, the 
Department of Finance of Guangdong Province, Guangdong Economy and Information 
Technology Commission, Department of Environmental Protection of Guangdong 
Province, and other units as well as China Minsheng Banking Corp, Ltd. in order to make 
Page  4
in-depth discussion with them on the matters concerning the governmental supportive 
policies, information construction of the road freight industry, the environmental 
conditions in Guangdong Province, the environmental protection policies and the 
corresponding measures.  
 
3) Expert consultation. Experts from the World Bank, CAI-Asia, colleges and 
universities in China and the Trade Association, etc. were extensively consulted to carry 
out special technical consultation, study and discussion on the key points, difficult points, 
and issues need special attentions.  
 
The EMM has been disclosed at the website of PMO and relevant government agencies 
on Oct 27 2010. It was also disclosed at the Bank Beijing Office website and at the 
Infoshop in Washington, D.C. on Oct 28 2010.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/18/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/27/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/28/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ke Fang 
11/18/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yiren Feng 
11/18/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
12/07/2010 
Comments:   
