Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/11/2011 
Report No.:  AC6192
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P112106 
Project Name:  CO (AF)Nat. Protected areas 
Task Team Leader:  Richard Damania 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 10, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (20%);Environmental policies and institutions (20%);Land 
administration and management (20%);Participation and civic engagement (20%);Rural 
non-farm income generation (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) (as in the Grant Agreement) is to launch a 
conservation trust fund that will: (a) support the consolidation of Colombia's National 
Protected Areas System and (b) contribute to arresting and reversing trends in 
biodiversity loss. For the Additional Financing (AF), the PDO would remain unchanged 
and continues to be relevant and worthy of expansion to cover 5 additional National 
Protected Areas (NPAs) and their surrounding territories in the Macizo Regional 
Protected Area System (SIRAPM).  
 
The original project is on track to meet its development objectives and outcome 
indicators. The Project has been evaluated through desk and field reviews and 
supervision missions, interviews with Project staff and consultants and consultations both 
at a local and a national level. The Project has not caused any negative environmental 
impact, nor imposed natural resource use restrictions. All the activities have been based 
on voluntary agreements, social awareness and commitment to sustainable management 
of natural resources. As a result, Implementation Performance Ratings, PDO achievement 
Page  2
and compliance with applicable safeguards policies have been consistently rated 
satisfactory.  
 
A
Safeguards Compliance Assessment has been prepared for the AF, describing how 
safeguards have been addressed during the implementation of the original Project and 
how safeguards issues will be addressed under the AF phase of the Project.   
 
3. Project Description 
Original Project  
 
The Project has three components: (i) Capitalization of an Endowment Fund; (ii) 
Conservation Mosaics Program, and (iii) Project Management and Institutional 
Coordination.  The original project is on track to meet its development objectives and 
outcome indicators.  
 
The objectives of Component 1 are to establish and capitalize an endowment fund.  
 
The objective of Component 2 in the original project is to support the consolidation of 
14 conservation mosaics  (9 of which are being financed by GEF), to include National 
Parks (NPs), other Protected Areas (PAs), buffer zones and surrounding landscapes. 
Project areas wereselected using biological criteria and socio-institutional criteria.  The 
Project's work is predicated on shifting economic interests in ways that promote 
sustainable management of natural resources and improved conservation of the NPs. By 
focusing on this intersection of mutual interests the Project has been able to develop 
agreements between the NP and local communities. The agreements are diverse and 
include plans for biodiversity conservation, sustainable natural resources management 
including management plans for private reserves, conservation agreements, soil 
conservation, fisheries management, and agro-ecological production.  
 
The main objectives of Component 3 are improved institutional capacity to support PAs, 
Project Management and Dissemination.  This component  supports the operation of 
Patrimonio Natural and its various functional units to undertake key project functions.  
 
Project performance to date appears to have been exemplary - the project has met and in 
some cases exceeded its interim targets and indicators.  As examples in some of the 
mosaics, communities have voluntary allocated their lands as biological corridors and 
reserves.  This not only generates global environmental benefits but also confers 
productivity gains through improved soil and water conservation (and retention) on 
farms.  In other cases community managed natural resources are being harvested and 
utilized at more sustainable rates - once more based on voluntary agreements.  The 
guiding philosophy of the project is that it builds social capital to leverage improvements 
in natural capital (through local plans and subprojects).  The project provides the 
resources to catalyze and finance these interventions. (See Annex for safeguard details).  
 
By way of other examples:  The mosaics approach has led to 93 agreements that have 
been voluntarily signed by local stakeholders and National Parks (NPs) to implement the 
Page  3
community determined subprojects. The Local Working Groups (LWGs) have met 
regularly and all relevant institutions (Patrimonio Natural, as well as the National Parks 
Unit and other environmental institutions and organizations (Regional Autonomous 
Corporations-CARs, environmental NGOs)) have participated in these meetings to assure 
inclusion, support local institutions and supervise potential impacts.  The project's results 
thus far suggest a not inconsiderable measure of success in reducing and mitigating 
threats and pressures on protected areas and natural resources. For instance, as a 
consequence of the safeguards and mosaics approach in  Consaca-Yancuanquer and the 
Peak, the project has helped local organizations reintroduce native species, establish 
biodiversity corridors, and develop water supply and distribution schemes as central 
components of water conservation strategies. In the Consacá-Yacuanquer Conservation 
Mosaic, it haspromoted the establishment of 134 private natural reserves in its 
surrounding territory. These reserves represent 504 hectares, of which 40% are 
designated for conservation. In the ethnic territorial mosaic of the Gulf of Tribuga 
biologists are monitoring the catch rate of the main fish species and identifying species 
under risk of extinction due to overfishing. The data collected has served as the starting 
point for developing agreements on sustainable use of fisheries with local fishermen and 
with community counsels in the territory. In the end, the environment and the fishermen 
will benefit when fisheries are sustainably used.The project has also supported the 
implementation of key management issues addressed in Management Plans of the 
Project's National Parks. As a result of this, 9 conservation mosaic's core areas are 
implementing conservation practices that have improved scores of management 
effectiveness.  
 
Additional Financing  
 
The AF is intended to finance activities to scale-up two of the original Project's 
components: Component 2 (Conservation Mosaics Program) and Component 3 (Project 
Management and Institutional Coordination). Component 1 which involved the creation 
of a fund is being implemented satisfactorily and will be completed under the original 
Project as scheduled and therefore requires no additional support.  
 
The focus of the AF instead is on the utilization of resources to directly address 
problems of greater and immediate environmental urgency. The proposed investments in 
the Macizo would allow for the long-term conservation of this region of outstanding 
cultural and global natural biodiversity and will support the consolidation of Colombia's 
National Protected Areas System.  
 
Component 2 (Conservation Mosaics Program) would apply the conservation mosaics 
approach to the Macizo - a region of global biodiversity significance.  It will promote the 
consolidation of Local Working Groups (LWGs) within 5 new conservation mosaics. 
This Component will: support:  (i) establishment of 5 LWGs; (ii) baseline assessments, 
including environmental analysis as well as identification of environmental threats and 
opportunities; (iii) formulation of an environmental subproject for each conservation 
mosaic; and (iv) subproject implementation.  
Page  4
While it is impossible to predict with certainty what kinds of activities may be 
undertaken in the subprojects, it is conjectured that these would include agriculture and 
landscape activities such as habitat rejuvenation, soil conservation measures  (through for 
example tree planting), small scale (on farm) water conservation interventions, the 
creation of new biodiversity corridors, more sustainable cropping techniques and so on 
are all possible but cannot be known ahead of project planning (see Annex).  While the 
project completely excludes any possibility of large scale infrastructure (that could be 
environmentally intrusive), it is impossible to create a comprehensive negative list of all 
activities that would not be allowed under the project.  Instead the environmental 
framework introduces an environmental filter that would ensure that activities confer a 
positive environmental benefit and (partly because of the voluntary nature of 
interventions) the filter would ensure that interventions are socially beneficial or benign.  
Importantly benefits will be measured through project indicators, which are sensitive 
enough to capture changes.  
 
Component 3 (Project Management and Institutional Coordination). Through this 
component the AF will contribute to further strengthen institutions and capacity.  
 
The original project cost is US$42.41M. The cost of the Additional Finance is 
US$12.6M, of which the GEF grant will provide US$4M.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project currently operates in nine conservation mosaics comprised of national parks 
(NPs), their buffer zones, and surrounding landscapes, whereby protected areas are 
managed to achieve their conservation objectives while land-use and management actions 
taken outside the park's borders are aligned with sustainable environmental practices and 
conservation goals. The AF will include 5 new NPs and their surrounding territories 
located in the SIRAPM region. Each conservation mosaic includes a NP that was selected 
because of its importance for global biodiversity conservation and for its strategic role in 
the provision of environmental services. The new project areas are: 1) Nevado del Huila 
C
ORTOLIMA; 2) Puracé-CRC; 3) Cueva de los Guacharos-CAM, 4) Hermosas -CVC 
and 5)  Complejo Volcánico Doña Juana Cascabel-CORPONARIÑO. There is some 
overlap with an indigenous territory in the Nevado del Huila NP.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN) 
Mr Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Original Project  
 
The Project has a Category "B" environmental classification, requiring some type of 
Environmental Analysis (EA) but not a full scale Environmental Impact Assessment. The 
World Bank safeguard policies triggered in the original project are: Environmental 
Assessment (OP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Forests (OP 4.36), 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10), Pest Management (OP 4.09) and Involuntary Resettlement 
(OP 4.12).  
 
The Project has been complying  with all applicable safeguard policies, as explained 
below and has always had satisfactory or better performance with respect to them as 
documented in Implementation Status Reports.  
 
To celebrate the International Year of Biodiversity the GEF highlighted this project as 
an example of good practice in conservation noting that the project "is employing a novel 
approach to strengthen the management of protected areas from the outside-in." Success 
on the ground has prompted the Government of Colombia to draft a policy document on 
utilizing the mosaics approach more widely across the SINAP system.  
 
Detailed procedures and mitigation measures for all Safeguard policies are in the Project 
Operational Manual.  
 
Additional Financing  
 
The AF would continue to apply the original project's conservation mosaics approach to 
5
areas in the Macizo. An integrated and targeted planning and implementation process 
will be undertaken in each conservation mosaic, with one subproject in each mosaic 
which includes both the core protected area and the surrounding territory.  Activities 
under this component will support: (i) the establishment of 5 Local Working Groups 
Page  6
(LWGs); (ii) baseline assessments, including environmental analysis as well as 
identification of environmental threats and opportunities; (iii) formulation of a subproject 
for each conservation mosaic (in a participatory and consensual manner) that contains 
conservation and sustainable use strategies, working schemes, and execution 
responsibilities for subproject implementation all designed to enhance conservation 
outcomes, mitigation measures to any safeguard issues; and (iv) subproject 
implementation (through voluntary signed agreements).  
 
Project activities under the AF remain consistent with the original project's Category 
"B" environmental classification, requiring a broad Environmental Analysis but not a full 
scale Environmental Impact Assessment.  
 
The Environmental Analysis and Social Assessment carried out for this AF grant, 
highlighted the environmental and social benefits of scaling-up project activities to a new 
area. The AF support of biodiversity-friendly production systems and improved 
management systems is expected to increase their social and economic sustainability. As 
a
result, the AF will improve ecological connectivity of the conservation mosaics, by 
restoring habitats and reducing pressures that are leading to fragmentation of habitats in 
protected areas. Thus, adverse environmental consequences from the AF implementation 
are highly unlikely. The AF completely excludes any possibility of large scale 
infrastructure that could be environmentally intrusive.  
 
Nevertheless, in case there are any minor environmental impacts associated with 
sustainable production systems, then several of the Project's safeguard mechanisms will 
continue to be used in the AF to avoid negative environmental effects. The same 
Safeguard policies of the original project have been triggered in the AF: Environmental 
Assessment (OP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Forests (OP 4.36), 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10), Pest Management (OP4.09) and Involuntary Resettlement 
(OP 4.12). Also, since the landscape approach to conservation could raise concerns about 
natural habitats the Natural Habitats safeguard policy (OP 4.04) has been triggered for the 
AF to be highly cautious but will not raise the classification of the AF relating to its 
environmental categorization.  
 
It is important to note that issues of physical cultural resources have not arisen during 
Project implementation and are not likely to emerge.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None of the previewed negative impacts have been observed in the project to date for any 
of the safeguards. The Project has not caused any negative environmental impact, nor 
imposed natural resource use restrictions. The activities have been based on voluntary 
agreements, social awareness and commitment to sustainable management of natural 
resources.  The Project implementing agency, Patrimonio Natural-Biodiversity and 
Protected Areas Fund (formerly known as the Biodiversity and Protected Areas 
Conservation Trust Fund-FUNBAP), has demonstrated its commitment to achieving the 
Page  7
objective of contributing to arrest and reverse trends in biodiversity loss for sustainable 
results.  
 
Project activities under the AF remain consistent with the original project's 
environmental classification. The AF triggers all of the same Safeguard policies as the 
Parent Project and is also triggering Natural Habitats (OP 4.04). It is important to note 
that impacts on physical cultural resources have not occurred  during the Parent Project's 
implementation but will continue to be managed under the AF through the Project's EMF 
and IPP.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Additional Financing  
 
The AF will support the same activities as under the original project. Given the track 
record of success, the environmental and social safeguard instruments that were prepared 
for the original project, have been updated and new instruments have been prepared in 
order to appropriately manage environmental and social impacts in the new areas of 
project intervention.  
 
(i) Environmental Analysis  
 
The AF will promote strategies that are sustainable, will contribute to the strengthening 
of conservation initiatives, and will generate a positive impact in the protection of species 
and ecosystems.  The mitigation measures outlined in the safeguard policy chapter, 
address the possible environmental impacts that might arise as a result of the AF 
implementation.  
 
Maintenance and the restoration of existing infrastructure. The AF will not invest in new 
architectural constructions, nor in any infrastructure.  
 
Investments in conservation and sustainable use. Investments will be undertaken 
according to management strategies predefined within the selected NP management 
plans. These plans have been formally adopted by the National Parks Unit and were 
developed with participation from local communities and institutions.  The strategies are 
mainly focused on minimizing adverse pressures on the protected areas, improving the 
management of "core" conservation areas (NP), and promoting a better relationship with 
the communities and other local actors located in the NP surrounding territories. In the 
surrounding areas, the AF will promote sustainable use of natural resources and 
environmental recovery in degraded areas.  In the application of sustainable production 
practices in buffer zones, the AF will support the use of biological or environmental 
control methods and reduce reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides within conservation 
mosaics, as part of its biodiversity conservation strategy. The National Parks Unit has 
managed to avoid the use of pesticides to eradicate illicit cultures in parks and financing 
will be reoriented in case the National Government uses them in any of the selected 
parks.  
Page  8
In order to ensure that the AF's activities do not generate negative environmental 
impact, the following indicators will be tracked during AF's implementation (among 
others noted in the project papers):  
 
a. 
At least 5 (i.e. one in each mosaic) signed and /or implemented sustainable 
practices agreements with stakeholders in conservation mosaics.  
 
b.
Strengthening of participatory and cooperative processes, with at least 30% of all 
surveyed families adopting sustainable natural resource practices.  
 
c. 
Hectares within productive farms under environmental ordering and conservation 
processes.  
 
d.
Implementation of social mechanisms to address conflicts over the use of natural 
resources.  
 
(ii) Social Assessment  
 
A
Social Assessment (SA), evaluated the project's potential effects on indigenous 
peoples, examined project alternatives and ensured the indigenous peoples free, prior, and 
informed consultation. The Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) based on this SA ensures that 
all project activities are undertaking the legally recognized rights to territories that 
indigenous peoples customarily used and occupied (resguardos). The IPP accounts for the 
historical, social, and legal context of the region. It defines the activities based on the 
summary of the social assessment incorporating lessons learned of the Project's first 
phase and the results of consultations on resources management planning in the SIRAMP 
area.  Moreover, it defines the project mechanisms for monitoring, evaluating, and 
reporting on the implementation of the IPP.  Patrimonio Natural will be directly 
responsible for ensuring compliance with safeguards policies.  
 
The investments in NP will be made in accordance with the NP management plans, 
which embrace safeguards policies as an integral part of management.  The AF process 
framework has been designed taking into account lessons learned from previous 
environmental projects in the Macizo area and the experience gained with the Project's 
implementation of the conservation mosaics program.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Original Project: Borrower's experience with safeguards management to date.  
 
The Project has addressed all relevant safeguard policy issues.  The following is a 
summary (see Annex for a more detailed description of safeguards compliance under the 
original project):  
 
-
Forests (OP 4.36): The project has not caused nor induced any loss or degradation 
of forests but rather promoted conservation and management activities that both reduce 
the threats and pressures to natural forests areas and contribute to the conservation of 
existing ones.  
Page  9
-
Pest management (OP 4.09): The project is promoting the establishment of 
agroecological and silvopastoral systems in the conservation mosaics surrounding areas, 
therefore encourages the use of biological or environmental control methods and 
reducing reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides.  The Project therefore does not 
promote the use of chemical pesticides.  
 
-
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) . During subproject formulation, LWGs 
have committed to avoiding any negative effect on cultural-sites.  
 
-
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/ 4.12). The project has not caused any voluntary or 
involuntary resettlement of people and is not expected to ever do so. Conservation and 
natural resources sustainable management required, in some cases, changing both 
patterns of extractive use and unsustainable productive practices.  In these cases, the 
project's sub-executing organizations, supported by LGW promoted the establishment of 
voluntary conservation agreements. These agreements were reached in a participatory 
and consensual manner whereby the subproject's users proposed the restrictions as well 
as the mitigation measures, following the Project's Resettlement Process Framework.  
 
-
Indigenous Peoples (OP/ BP 4.10).  Three of the Project's national parks overlap 
or adjoin indigenous territories, known as resguardos. An Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) was prepared and included in the Project's Operational Manual, 
describing the measures taken to ensure: (i) that Indigenous peoples were not adversely 
affected by the Project, and (ii)  that the Project's methodologies and benefits were socio-
culturally appropriate and fully incorporated traditional governance and decision making 
processes. In subprojects' carried out in or near Indigenous areas, the direct beneficiaries 
were overwhelmingly indigenous. Given this, the subprojects' designs incorporated the 
elements of Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) and separate IPPs were not developed (for 
further information see Annex). The Project has not caused any adverse effects on 
Indigenous Peoples residing in or near project areas, but instead has strengthened the 
ethnic territorial governance and management capacity within conservation mosaics 
through wide participation in the LWG.  
 
-
Borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: The 
implementation performance of the Project, including compliance with applicable 
safeguards policies and legal covenants, has been exemplary and deemed satisfactory on 
all Project indicators.  
 
Additional Financing  
 
Environmental Safeguard Instrument. An Environmental Analysis has been prepared, 
with an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to properly identify any potential 
impact on natural habitats, to redesign the activities and, if necessary, mitigate minor 
environmental impacts from the AF. This EMF includes screening procedures that 
requires that all subproject generate environmental benefits in the project area (mosaic) as 
measured and indicated by at least one of the project's environmental indicators; that 
actions and plans are based on voluntary participation and are part of the elaborate 
consultative process (described in the Project documents and summarized below) and are 
in compliance with all project safeguards.  
 
Page  10
Social Safeguard Instruments. While there were no modifications made to the social 
safeguard instruments prepared for the original project, the Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework (IPPF) was updated to include the five new areas that will be supported with 
the AF. The AF, its SA and the process for Indigenous participation in the AF, as 
outlined in the IPPF, have been consulted with the Indigenous peoples present in the 
Project area and  a letter has been received confirming  community support and interest to 
participate in the AF.  An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) has also been drafted to 
synthesize and describe: (i) the Project, (ii) the Indigenous peoples potentially affected 
that are within the Project area, (iii) the social assessment, (iv) results of the free prior 
and informed consultation with the Indigenous Peoples within the project area, (v) agreed 
upon actions to ensure the delivery of culturally appropriate benefits and mitigation of 
adverse impacts, (vi) cost estimates and a financing plan for the IPP, (vii) the Project's 
grievance mechanism and any necessary tailoring to ensure its accessibility for 
Indigenous peoples, and (viii) mechanisms for monitoring the IPP.  
 
The original project has not promoted any voluntary or involuntary resettlement of 
people. Since the AF will continue to use the Project's methodology based on voluntary 
work groups that propose environmental management projects.  This therefore rules out 
the possibility that these plans will result in involuntary physical dislocation of people or 
assets for the AF.  Therefore the AF will rely on the original project's Resettlement 
Process Framework (RPF) which has been updated.  
 
The EA, SA, IPP, IPPF, RPF and ISDS will be disclosed under the AF phase of the 
project prior to the appraisal of the AF Grant. It is envisaged that this will occur on or 
before March 15, 2011.  
 
Procedures and mitigation measures for all Safeguard policies for the AF are presented 
below:  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
The AF is classified as Category B, requiring some type of Environmental Analysis but 
not a full-scale Environmental Impact Assessment.  Adverse environmental consequences 
from the AF implementation are highly unlikely. Nevertheless, aspects of the AF could 
have minor environmental impacts associated with sustainable production systems. In 
such cases, several of the Project's foreseen mechanisms will continue to be used in the 
AF to avoid negative environmental effects:  
 
Patrimonio Natural, together with the technical committee of the SIRAPM will continue 
to operate the mechanisms implemented in the first phase, to identify possible impacts 
with regards to the agreed baseline.  The Unidad de Parques and the respective CARs, 
which are part of the LWG, in their role as environmental authorities, will supervise the 
environmental impact analysis and whenever required, the implementation of mitigation 
measures.  
 
Page  11
-
LWG in each conservation mosaic will be responsible for planning execution of 
each of the conservation mosaics management proposals and also environmental impact 
identification and for proposing mitigation measures, at the planning stage of each 
subproject, to minimize risks.  
 
-
These processes will be reviewed by SIRAPM's technical committee.  
 
-
Where necessary, LWG will implement specific mitigation measures.  
 
-
The process of planning the surrounding productive landscapes will rely on a high 
level of consultation with each of the landowners and their family groups, so that the 
environmental planning may effectively allow the reversal of unsustainable farming 
practices and thus contribute to reduce environmental threats.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Forests (OP/BP 4.36)  
 
The AF is fully consistent with Bank policies for natural habitats and forests. It would 
not promote any loss of remnant forest or other natural habitats but rather help arrest 
current levels of biodiversity and natural cover vegetation loss by improving the 
restoration and conservation of ecosystems and endangered species while supporting 
sustainable livelihoods within AF areas. However, there is a minimal likelihood that the 
projects will lead directly or indirectly to the conversion of natural areas. To minimize 
these risks, the following mitigation measures are proposed:  
 
-
LWG in each conservation mosaic, which will include UAESPNN and CARs 
representatives, will be responsible for potential environmental impact identification 
during the subproject formulation. The subprojects will include indicators to monitor 
progress towards the proposed goals and the risk of potential impacts, so as to respond to 
such risks in a timely manner. These processes will be supervised by Patrimonio Natural 
and delegates from the SIRAPM's Technical Committee.  
 
-
If measures or mitigation strategies are required, a mitigation plan will be set up 
to include: specific activities, costs and arrangements for their implementation, 
supervision and monitoring. Patrimonio Natural will review and approve the mitigation 
plan.  
 
-
LWG will include the mitigation plan in the Project's POA, including required 
financial resources for its implementation.  
 
-
The POA and, when required, the mitigation plan will be reviewed and approved 
by Patrimonio Natural and the SIRAPM's technical committee. Prior to the annual 
approval of the POAs, the carrying out of activities and proposed mitigation measures 
will be verified.  
 
-
If necessary, the implementation of specific mitigation measures will be 
undertaken by LWG under the supervision of Patrimonio Natural.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09)  
 
The AF is fully consistent with the Bank's Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Policy 
and does not contemplate the use of pesticides as part of its implementation.  Specifically 
the AF will support controlling pests within conservation mosaics primarily through the 
adoption of biological or environmental control methods which will reduce reliance on 
Page  12
synthetic chemical pesticides. When working with indigenous groups, the AF will 
support the use of cultural practices.  In principle, all activities contemplating the use of 
chemical pesticides will be excluded. The following procedures are to be used:  
 
-
The identification of potential risks in the use of pesticides will be the 
responsibility of the LWG during the analysis of possible environmental impacts. This 
identification process will be supervised by Patrimonio Natural.  
 
-
A
Pest Management Plan will be drawn up by qualified experts certifying that: (a) 
no pesticides on the UN prohibited list will be used, (b) the project would promote 
integrated pest management and (c) special care will be taken to avoid contamination of 
protected areas by prohibiting aerial spraying, proper disposal of receptacles, and careful 
management to avoid contamination of watersheds.  
 
-
Patrimonio Natural will be responsible for the application of the Bank's IPM, 
which will include training in pest management for agricultural producers in AF areas.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11)  
 
The preservation of archaeological, historical or other cultural patrimony is considered a 
crucial element in NP management plans. The following procedures will be applied:  
 
-
Chance finds or cultural sites in the AF conservation mosaics which might be 
affected by the project will be referred to the appropriate government agency that deals 
with relics and cultural heritage (ICAN).  
 
-
Measures to protect Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) proposed by ICAN 
should be incorporated into the AF subproject activities through the POA.  
 
-
Patrimonio Natural, with the support of SIRAPM's technical committee, will 
review and approve the POA after previously verifying compliance with ICAN and other 
entities. Prior to the annual approval of POAs, compliance with mitigation measures will 
be verified.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)  
 
National legislation allows for the overlapping of national parks and indigenous reserves 
in which there is established a need to agree on Special Management Regimes (REM). In 
the AF, only one NP (the Nevado de Huila NP) presents an overlapping of indigenous 
people of the Nasa ethnia (the Gaitania Reserve).  In addition, the Mercedes Reserve and 
the Indigenous community in Barbacoas are located within the Nevado de Huila NP's 
surrounding areas and have a direct relationship with the territory and with the area 
connecting up with the Las Hermosas NP, which forms part of the mosaic. Contact has 
been made and agreements reached with the organisations representing these indigenous 
communities, for their participation in the REM process. These communities have 
expressed their interest and intention to participate in this AF and have granted their 
broad community support for this Project.  
 
The AF will not cause any foreseeable adverse effects on indigenous peoples living in 
the project's zones nor in surrounding areas. The AF initial phase (planning of the 
subproject) will be undertaken in accordance with UAESPNN'S social participation 
policy on overlapping reserves. This planning process seeks consensus to define specific 
Page  13
actions aimed at the welfare of communities and the conservation of protected areas. The 
project will support co-management agreements and their implementation in the National 
Park-overlapping territories, only performing project activities if indigenous communities 
request and approve of these activities through their traditional governance and decision 
making mechanisms.  
 
The Project's IPP will be used to avoid any possible negative impact on indigenous 
communities and to ensure that benefits are delivered in socio-culturally appropriate 
manner via the guarantee of their effective participation and consent.  In summary, the 
following principles are outlined in the IPP:  
 
a) 
The ongoing consultation process will be led by the PNN of Nevado del Huila 
with the support of Patrimonio Natural.  
 
b)
Sustainable use of natural resources activities will seek to restore traditional 
practices and to generate sustainable incomes for the communities.  
 
c) 
Representatives of the reserve will voluntarily take part in the LWG.  
 
d)
Patrimonio Natural will ensure that the respective Indigenous authorities provide 
their full consent to participate in the Project and that this consent is based on their own 
internal consultation and governance processes.  will draw up a cooperation agreement 
and define the mosaic's subproject. Wherever indigenous peoples are related to the 
project's implementation in a particular area, the cooperation agreement regarding the 
subproject will define specific activities related to territories and indigenous 
communities, in the context of their autonomy.  
 
e) 
The following measures will be promoted: (i) support for existing intercultural 
tools that facilitate participation and coordination among Indigenous participants, other 
project stakeholders, and the Project's executing agencies; (ii) contribute to the 
strengthening and consolidation of traditional organizations and experiences of control 
and environmental management within the reserve and traditional territories; (iii) 
consolidate the coordination of the Indigenous reserve with the protected areas and 
processes of conservation within the mosaics by means of agreements and the 
implementation of strategies for intercultural environmental management; (iv) design and 
implement jointly with the indigenous communities by means of participatory 
methodologies, schemes for monitoring which will enable those involved to obtain 
information on the state of natural resources.  
 
f) 
Wherever there is a restriction on the use of natural resources by the indigenous 
communities, as in any other situation, the project should contemplate mitigation 
measures and define who will be responsible for their execution.  
 
g) 
The LWG should record this progress and certify the participation of communities 
in the execution of the project's activities, as well as the participation of the Indigenous 
authorities in decision making.  
 
h)
Patrimonio Natural, supported by SIRAPM's technical committee, will supervise 
the subproject's execution and will verify that the activities and work plans contemplated 
in the Project's Safeguard Instruments are in fact being carried out.  
 
i) 
The monitoring of the Indigenous People Plan's execution will be done primarily 
through regular reports presented by the local working groups of each Conservation 
Mosaics CM to Patrimonio Natural. Other measures to document and track compliance 
with the IPP will include: meeting records, advance assessments of local agendas, 
Page  14
participative assessments of the implementation of management plans, compliance with 
the subproject agreements, survey with the community authorities and community 
members, tools which feed the monitoring and assessment system visual and audio files.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
No involuntary resettlement of any people will take place under the project. Restriction 
of use of natural resources is only likely to occur in the event that the management plan 
for a protected area requires it.  The participation mechanisms envisaged in the AF will 
ensure that communities can: (a) decide on their involvement in the project and they are 
free to not participate in the agreement; (b) participate in defining activities; (c) wherever 
adverse impacts are detected, participate in the design of the necessary measures to 
mitigate the impacts or the restrictions on access to natural resources, and (d) participate 
in the implementation and monitoring of the project's activities.  
 
Unilateral restrictions will never be imposed. On the contrary, the project seeks to build 
management proposals based on voluntary agreements.  A major aim of the conservation 
mosaics is to increase social control of the territory, increasing also legitimacy and 
governability to the extent that the use of natural resources becomes more sustainable.  
 
A
Resettlement Process Framework (RPF) was updated for the AF to better reflect the 
SIRAPM context, and built off the Parent Project#s Resettlement Process Framework 
(RPF). This RPF describes the process by which those members of the communities 
potentially affected by restriction of access to natural resources, will participate in the 
design of the subproject#s activities, as well as in the design of the necessary measures to 
mitigate those impacts, and in the implementation and monitoring of the project's 
activities. The RPF also describes the AF mechanisms for addressing grievances by 
affected individuals, describing the responsibilities of government and communities in 
case impacts arise. The RPF is a synthesis of the long consultative process and the social 
assessments that were conducted as part of project preparation (see below for some 
details). The primary procedures required by the RPF for addressing restrictions of access 
include:  
 
-
During the first six months, SIRAPM's technical committee with support from 
Patrimonio Natural, will promote a participative process to define the limits of the 
conservation mosaics and the management guidelines.  
 
-
Once the mosaics' limits have been established, LWG will be set up to include 
representatives of the communities and organizations which inhabit the area, or use the 
resources within the mosaic's area. Representatives from National Parks and the 
Autonomous Regional Corporation will also be part of these LWGs.  
 
-
LWG will be in charge of defining a subproject for each mosaic and establishing 
conservation agreements. Thus participation by communities in the planning and 
implementation of the subproject activities will be guaranteed.  
 
-
No activities will be carried without being agreed upon in the context of the 
LWG.  
Page  15
-
During the process of defining the subprojects, those strategies and activities 
which imply restrictions in the use of natural resources will be defined.  
 
-
Wherever there are restrictions of access to resources, actions and responsibilities 
of government and communities will be defined to mitigate or compensate for this 
restriction. These measures, their costs, and their implementation and monitoring 
procedures will be included as part of the subproject's activities.  
 
-
Patrimonio Natural will supervise compliance with the agreed activities and 
mitigation measures or compensations.  
 
-
POA's approval will be subject to compliance with the agreed activities and 
mitigation measures or compensations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders in the Conservation Mosaics  include indigenous communities (Gaitania, las 
Mercedes and Barbacoas Resguardos in the Nevado del Huila CM), small landowners, 
campesinos, local institutions and organizations as well as national and local 
governmental entities such as the National Parks and the CARs.  
 
Key Stakeholders preliminary identified during AF formulation phase for each 
Conservation Mosaic:  
 
Mosaic  
 
Las Hermosas NNP - CVC  
 
Actors  
 
National Parks     Pronima  
 
Asoamaime      Proamaime  
 
CVC  Fund. A. Colombia  
 
Palmira Municipality 
EPSA  
 
El Cerrito Municipality 
Asoagrigan  
 
National U. /IDEA 
Cattle ranching landowners  
 
Nevado del Huila NNP - CORTOLIMA  
 
National Parks 
Barbacoas I.C.  
 
Cortolima 
Planadas Municipality  
 
Gaitania I.C. Rioblanco Municipality  
 
Las Mercedes I.C.  
 
Puracé NNP - CRC  
 
National Parks 
CAM  
 
CRC AMEFMC  
 
Santa Rosa Municipality 
JAC  
 
Cueva de los Guácharos NNP - CAM 
National Parks JAC  
 
Acevedo Municipality 
CAM  
 
Palestina Municipality  
 
Dona Juana Cascabel Volcanic Complex NNP- CORPONARIÑO  
 
National Parks 
Albán Municipality  
 
Corponariño Belén Municipality  
 
La Cruz Municipality 
Government  
Page  16
San Bernardo Municipality  Community  
 
Tablón Municipality  
 
AF execution phase  
 
During AF formulation, several meetings, workshops and consultations were held in 
order to assess the Project's environmental and social impacts and define the project's 
logical framework, main activities and institutional arrangements.  
 
Consultations on the AF's environmental impacts  
 
Seven meetings and workshops were held with the SIRAPM institutions from December 
2008- March 2009. The SIRAPM institutions comprise the 7 environmental authorities of 
the Colombian Macizo (6 CARs) and the National Parks Authorities. SIRAPM 
institutions participated actively during the AF formulation phase to align AF activities 
both with SIRAPM's mission and its Management Plan's objectives.  
 
During project implementation, the SIRAPM technical committee will be responsible 
for assessing the annual operating plans and supervising the implementation in order to 
guarantee: i) the contribution to conservation and sustainable natural resource 
management, ii) support to SIRAPM conservation goals; and iii) safeguards compliance.  
 
Important feedback includes:  
 
-
Sustainable productive and management practices to be promoted through project 
activities must contribute to conservation and sustainable management of natural 
resources in the SIRAPM.  
 
-
The project implementation must contribute to the implementation of the 
SIRAPM Strategic Plan.  
 
-
The establishment of conservation mosaics should respond to the SIRAPM 
conservation priorities and promote biological connectivity.  
 
Consultations on the AF's Social Impacts  
 
As part of the social assessment, consultations were held with key stakeholders of each 
conservation mosaic comprising community leaders, indigenous organizations, and 
territorial entities representatives, in addition to the SIRAPM institutions.  
 
The process of consultation, participation, and collection of baseline information for the 
preparation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was achieved through the analysis of 
technical documents (such as the National Parks' Management Plans), focal groups, semi-
structured interviews with the technical specialists, indigenous leaders, local communities 
representatives, non-governmental organizations, and local government representatives.  
 
Only one of the proposed conservation mosaics includes indigenous territories or 
resguardos (Nevado del Huila National Park). Indigenous communities of Gaitania, Las 
Page  17
Mercedes and Barbacoas (Rioblanco) agreed to participate in the project and 
acknowledged support for the proposed activities under the AF.  
 
The IPP has been made available to indigenous communities in appropriate form, 
manner, and language and will be disclosed in the Infoshop under the AF phase of the 
project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/01/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/10/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/11/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/01/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/09/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/11/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/01/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/09/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/11/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  18
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  19
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Damania 
03/10/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ricardo Hernandez Murillo 
03/10/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto 
03/10/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Francis V. Fragano 
03/10/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
02/22/2011 
Comments:   
