Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/01/2011 
Report No.:  AC5821
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P106693 
Project Name:  CO Education System Modernization 
Task Team Leader:  Raja Bentaouet Kattan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (50%);Secondary education (50%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
21.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDO is to improve the design, administration, analysis and reporting of the 
Colombian national test of student achievement levels in grades 5 and 9 (SABER), and 
increase use of the results by different stakeholder groups.   
 
3. Project Description 
The PDO will be achieved through three components: (i) enhancing the design of 
SABER test instruments to ensure reliability and comparability of results over time; (ii) 
ensuring timely application of the test and technically sound analysis and reporting of its 
results; and (iii) strengthening the capacity of different stakeholder groups to use SABER 
data.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHE) 
 
Page  2
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified as category C. The OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is 
triggered by this operation. To this effect, the Colombian Institute for the Evaluation of 
Education (ICFES) and the Ministry of Education (MEN) prepared an Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), which was approved by the Sector Manager on 
January 4, 2011.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
ICFES and MEN, particularly the Department of Ethnoeducation at MEN, prepared the 
IPPF, which includes:  
 
(a) Permanent built-in consultations with the education commissions representing ethnic 
groups;  
 
(b) Innovative studies to account for cultural and linguistic biases;  
 
(c) Sensitivity training, promotion and dissemination of results;  
 
(d) Piloting and validation of new test items;  
 
(e) Studies of associated/determining factors;  
 
(f) Application of SABER tests, measurement and analysis; and  
 
(g) Monitoring and Evaluation.   
 
Page  3
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations were carried out between 2006 and 2009. Eleven virtual forums, 1,675 
sessions, and a platform for submission of proposals and a National Assembly took place 
for the formulation of the 10-year National Education Plan (2006-2016). Some 1,544 
people participated, 80 of whom were representatives of ethnic groups. MEN 
systematized consultations' results and the recommendations have informed the Project 
design, and the IPPF. The purpose of the IPPF is to contribute to reducing biases in 
standardized tests administered to Indigenous and Afro-Colombian peoples whose native 
language is not Spanish and whose culture is different from that of the mainstream. It 
aims at ensuring Indigenous and Afro-Colombian students are not inhibited by the 
mechanics of test taking, and that the teachers and administrators are well prepared to 
administer tests to ethnic students. The IPPF will be reflected in the Operational Manual.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/04/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/26/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Raja Bentaouet Kattan 
01/28/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
01/31/2011 
Comments:   
