Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/28/2011 
Report No.:  AC6142
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P117947 
Project Name:  Support to the National Urban Transport Program Project 
Task Team Leader:  Mauricio Cuellar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 25, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (25%);Pollution management and environmental health 
(25%);Municipal governance and institution building (25%);Other urban development 
(25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
350.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
120.00
120.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDO for the NUTP is to enhance the efficiency, affordability, safety, and 
environmental sustainability of the provision of public transit services in selected 
Colombian cities participating in the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
In 2002 the Government of Colombia (Government) adopted the National Urban 
Transport Program  (NUTP) as a national policy to provide competitive, efficient, 
affordable, safe, and environmentally sustainable mobility options for the urban 
population. The NUTP calls for the implementation of Integrated Mass Transit Systems 
(IMTS) and Strategic Public Transport Systems (SPTSs) respectively for large cities 
(more than 600,000 inhabitants) and medium-sized cities (between 250,000 and 600,000 
inhabitants).The Bank has supported the NUTP since 2004, through three loans totaling 
US$757 million aimed at the implementation of the Bank-financed Integrated Mass 
Transit System (IMTS) Project in large cities.  These loans have financed a time slice of 
the Government#s earmarked yearly fiscal transfers to large cities participating in the 
Page  2
NUTP. Although the IMTS approach targets nine large cities including Barranquilla, 
Bogotá, Bucaramanga, Cali, Cartagena, Cucuta, Medellin-Valle de Aburrá, Pereira and 
Soacha, the Bank has so far financed six out of the nine municipalities # Barranquilla, 
Bogotá, Bucaramanga, Cartagena, Medellin-Valle de Aburrá, and Pereira. Currently Cali 
is being financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), and Cucuta has 
partnered with the CAF to implement the project.  
 
The SPTS approach anticipates support for twelve medium-sized cities including 
Armenia, Buenaventura, Ibague, Manizales, Monteria, Neiva, Pasto, Popayan, Santa 
Marta, Sincelejo, Valledupar and Villavicencio, which are all at the planning stage.  To 
date, seven cities have formalized the support from the Government through the approval 
of National Economic and Social Council (CONPES) and CONFIS documents. The 
Government has decided that it wishes the Bank to finance two of the new medium-sized 
cities (Sincelejo and Valledupar) through the proposed project. The Government will 
seek support from other Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) to finance the other 
medium-sized cities.  
 
Hence, the proposed Support for the NUTP Project will continue to finance the 
Government#s commitments to the large cities (except Bogotá for which Government 
commitments have already finalized) that were previously supported by the IMTS 
Project, and the three medium-sized cities requested by the Government. In this sense, the 
Bank will finance a definite number of cities that are part of the NUTP, while other 
MDBs may finance other cities that are part of the national program. There will be no co-
financing of cities between different MDBs, which clearly delineates the proposed 
project#s fiduciary and safeguards requirements and accountability, as had been done 
with the previous IMTS projects.  
 
The project components proposed for this new operation are:  
 
Component A: Capacity Building (US$10 million). This component consists of 
technical assistance and policy advice to the Government and the local municipal 
authorities participating in the NUTP. This component will finance the strengthening of 
institutional capacity, at the national level, through the provision of technical assistance 
in support of the Government#s efforts to formulate national urban transport programs 
and strategies pursuant to the NUTP, including among others: (i) the definition and 
implementation of a national urban transport institutional map, including the formulation 
of an urban transport sector policy; (ii) the definition of operational, regulatory, 
institutional, environmental, and social strategies within the urban transport and urban 
development context; (iii) the identification of appropriate mass transit solutions to 
improve public transport and to improve traffic management, including intelligent 
transportation systems (ITS) solutions; and (v) the development of policy guidance in a 
series of strategic areas, including among others: development of performance indicators 
and monitoring mechanisms, regulatory and institutional frameworks related to the 
NUTP, the formulation of a road safety policy and institutional framework for its 
implementation and the design and implementation of communication and public 
outreach strategies.  
 
Also, this component will target the improvement of the institutional and operational 
capacity of cities participating in the NUTP, as well as the project Implementing Entities 
(local corporate transportation entities) or municipal Transit Secretariats (Secretarías de 
Tránsito)  to ensure adequate implementation of projects, through, among others: (i) the 
Page  3
provision of equipment and training; (ii) the setup and maintenance of an operational 
structure able to program, monitor and administer public transportation services; (iii) the 
implementation of twinning arrangements and knowledge transfer between Implementing 
Entities and/or municipal Transit Secretariats; (iv) the strengthening of the institutional 
capabilities of cities participating in the NUTP and its Implementing Entities or 
municipal Transit Secretariats, through the provision of technical assistance in issues 
such as environmental and social matters, bus operation and fare collection concessions, 
tariff-setting and tariff integration with other entities and communication and public 
outreach strategies.  
 
Finally, Component A will also finance the provision of support to the Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU), overseen by the Deputy Minister of Transport, to conduct 
overall project coordination, evaluation, supervision and implementation, including: (i) 
the strengthening of the capacity of the PCU to comply with its responsibilities as set 
forth  in the Operational Manual, including the hiring of specialized staff, such as urban 
transport engineers, economists, and legal, financial, social and environmental specialists; 
(ii) the carrying out of project audits; (iii) the carrying out of project studies, including 
performance reviews and impact evaluations; and (iv) the design and implementation of a 
program to monitor and evaluate the carrying out of the project.  
 
Component B: BRTs Development in Large Cities (US$252 million). This component 
entails the carrying out of the following activities in cities participating in the NUTP: (i) 
construction of BRTs segregated busways; (ii) construction of terminals and transfer 
centers; (iii) construction of mixed-traffic lanes adjacent to busways corridors; (iv) 
construction of sidewalks; (v) rehabilitation of feeder routes; (vi) construction of 
pedestrian ways along busways corridors;  (vii) construction or adaptation of 
complementary transport corridors to the segregated busways;  (viii) carrying out of the 
required interventions or upgrading of public service networks adjacent to the 
construction areas;  (ix) carrying out of the supervision of construction works referred to 
in this paragraph; and (x) construction of bus workshops and parking. This component 
will continue to finance works related to the activities mentioned above, and can be 
considered an extension of the Bank-financed Integrated Mass Transit Systems (IMTS) 
Project. As explained in the IMTS Project, works will take place in consolidated urban 
transport corridors, all of them paved and in operation for decades. Works undertaken in 
large cities  mostly involve segregation of bus lanes (to separate buses and mixed traffic), 
reinforcement of current   structures for supporting heavier buses on the bus stops, 
construction and enlargement of pedestrian areas, and road widening at the bus stops in 
some corridors to allow for bus surpassing. No green-field construction work will be 
financed. The project will also finance demolishment of some dwellings to allow for the 
construction of patios and transfer stations.  
 
The GoC has also requested financing of up to US$25 million for the acquisition of land 
required for the carrying out of the aforementioned activities, and financing of the 
resettlement and the provision of compensation to Affected Persons pursuant to the 
provisions of the project#s Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). In accordance with Bank 
policy related to financing for the purchase of land, the team prepared a proposal for 
financing the cost of land in this Loan to be presented for the Bank#s Land Committee 
for review and authorization. Lastly, the Loan will also finance the design and 
Page  4
implementation of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for the carrying out of the 
aforementioned activities.  
 
Component C:  Optimization of Urban Transit Services and Urban Renewal in Medium-
sized Cities (US$88 million). This component entails the carrying out of the following 
activities in medium-sized cities participating in the NUTP: (i) development of detailed 
project engineering designs and supervision (interventorias) of said designs; (ii) 
construction and rehabilitation of road network; (iii) construction and rehabilitation of 
sidewalks, pedestrian ways along bus corridors and bicycle paths; (iv) construction of 
pedestrian bridges (v) construction of bus stops, terminals and transfer centers; (vi) 
construction of  bus patios and maintenance/repair centers; (vii) acquisition of control 
centers for the SPTS, including fleet control, traffic lights and traffic signaling; (viii) 
carrying out of the required interventions or upgrading of public space adjacent to the 
construction areas; and (ix) rehabilitation and renewal of historic centers.  
 
Similar to Component B, this component will finance works related to the activities 
mentioned in the paragraph above for medium-sized cities. Works will take place on 
consolidated urban transport corridors, where some corridors are still unpaved. Works 
mostly involve road rehabilitation and maintenance, and reinforcing structures for 
supporting heavier buses on the bus stops, and construction and enlargement of 
pedestrian areas. The project will also finance demolishing of some dwellings to allow 
for the construction of patios and transfer stations. Works on this component are 
somewhat lighter than in Component B, as no BRT systems will be built. This means that 
no segregated lanes will be needed, reducing the need to enlarge corridors, nor to utilize 
dwelling areas for the purpose. Works are mostly concentrated on the road asphalt and 
concrete carpet, with minor intervention on pedestrian areas and urban space. No green-
field construction work will be financed.  
 
As in the case of the larger cities, the GoC has requests financing of up to US$20 
million for the acquisition of land required for the carrying out of the aforementioned 
activities, and financing for the costs associated with resettlement and the provision of 
compensation to Affected Persons pursuant to the provisions of the project#s RAPs. 
Finally, the Loan will also finance the design and implementation of Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs) for the carrying out of the aforementioned activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance works on urban areas related to road-based transit operation. 
Works include road maintenance and rehabilitation, segregation of lanes, pedestrian areas 
around the bus corridors, bus stations, bridges and patios. Large cities with Bus Rapid 
Transit systems include the urban areas of Bucaramanga, Cartagena, Medellin-Valle de 
Aburrá and Pereira. These cities have been developing their BRT systems through a 
series of Bank-financed operations (Integrated Mass Transit System Project, and two 
subsequent Additional Financings) and some of them are already operating (i.e., 
Barranquilla, Bucaramanga and Pereira). With respect to medium-sized cities, the 
proposed project will finance urban road related works in Sincelejo and Valledupar.  All 
in all, the infrastructure works will be implemented in consolidated urban areas, where 
Page  5
traditional urban transport systems are already operating. No green-field construction 
works will be financed.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (LCSSO) 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva (LCSTR) 
Mr Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is expected to generate long-term benefits for public transport users of cities 
participating in the NUTP. As most of this public transport constituency is from the lower 
and middle income strata, the Project will improve their access to services, markets and 
economic opportunities by generating travel time and travel cost savings, improved safety 
and environmental conditions, and better managed public spaces, among others. Through 
a
more efficient urban transport system, public transport demand will be met with fewer 
larger vehicles, reducing the traveled km per transported passenger. Overlap routes will 
also be reduced. This efficiency gains will represent less fuel consumption and therefore 
less emissions. In addition, the urban areas will reorganize, improving public space, and 
facilitating non-motorized transport and pedestrian circulation and access to the bus 
transit system. Moreover, accessibility and road safety get improved as a result of project 
implementation.  
 
Environmental Assessment OP4.01: This policy is triggered due to potential 
environmental effects linked to the infrastructure works, and to the land acquisition and 
involuntary resettlements required for the road realigning and construction of patios and 
public space. The overall impacts on the environment are expected to be minor and 
confined to the construction period, and are associated to the: (a) management of 
materials and waste; (b) restriction of traffic flows and access to homes and businesses; 
(c) increased noise and emissions; (d) management of work camp sites; (e) removal of 
Page  6
trees and impact on green areas; (f) industrial safety and occupational health, and (g) 
interference with urban infrastructure (phone lines, piping, electricity wires, sewage).  
 
Since there are no unprecedented, irreversible or significant environmental impacts, and 
considering that the potential environmental risks can be avoided or mitigated, the Project 
has been assigned a category #B#. This categorization also reflects the fact that there are 
a
number of safeguard risks, including: (i) complex management of safeguard issues due 
to the large scale and multi-city nature of investments; (ii) the sensitive social context of 
working in dense urban areas; and (iii) the integration of new medium-sized cities to the 
project, which have limited experience with Bank safeguard requirements.  
 
Proper environmental management of the project relies on the development and 
implementation of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for the infrastructure 
works. To ensure that all the above referenced environmental impacts and nuisances do 
not take place, or are properly mitigated, Environmental Management Plans (EMP) will 
have to be in place for all infrastructure works to be contracted. EMPs will have to abide 
by the guidelines included in the EMF (#Guidelines for Developing, Implementing and 
Monitoring EMPs for Urban Transport Works#), which have been developed by the Bank 
in coordination with the Ministries of Environment and Transport, the National Planning 
Department, and the local Implementing Entities in large cities that were financed under 
the prior IMTS Projects. Also, the EMF has been revised to better detail the processes 
and guidelines that will be used in medium-sized cities to prepare the required EMPs, 
since the infrastructure works will be less intensive and more geared toward the 
rehabilitation of the existing road network. The revised EMF has been re disclosed on 
February 15th, 2011). Also, all EMPs prepared to date have been re-disclosed as of 
February 16th, 2011.  
 
EMPs are required for each of the works to be contracted as part of the Project and are 
approved by the Bank, before becoming part of the bidding documents and contract 
obligations. Compliance is ensured through contractual arrangements, conditioning 
payment to proper EMP implementation, and levying fines for continued lack of 
compliance with the required EMP standards. EMP implementation is monitored by the 
works supervising contractors, in addition to the weekly monitoring of the 
Implementation Entities, and the overall supervision of the Ministry of Transport, and of 
the Bank.  
 
Experience to date with the Bank's financing of the NUTP over the last seven years 
through three IMTS operations, has proven satisfactory in term of EMP implementation 
with performance ratings averaging over 80 percent. Nevertheless, there have been cases 
in specific locations where additional work has been needed to correct problems found 
during implementation. In those cases, however, the environmental impact has still been 
very low, as the problems generally refer to: (i) inadequate closing of the area being built; 
(ii) deficiencies in the coordination with the public service contractors (i.e., water, 
electricity, and communication providers); (iii) inadequate management of construction 
waste in specific areas; and (iv) lack of respect for the construction area in communities 
living in central, dense areas. In these cases, corrective measures have been identified, 
Page  7
and are being pursued by the works# supervising contractors and the respective 
Implementing Entities (i.e. Bucaramanga- Metrolinea, Cartagena- Transcaribe, Medellin-
Metroplus, and Pereira- Megabus).  
 
For new infrastructure works to be financed by the Project, new EMPs will be required, 
which will in all cases, need to follow the guidelines that are included in the EMF. The 
Environmental Management Framework has already been consulted with medium-size 
cities, and has been disclosed at the local Implementing Entity´s websites.  
 
Involuntary Resettlements (OP 4.12): In terms of social impacts, OP 4.12 is triggered 
and the social impacts are mainly of two types: (i) beneficial impacts; and (ii) adverse 
impacts. The beneficial social impacts include among others, improved transport service 
provision, especially for the poor; increased road safety and security for bus passengers, 
especially for women; and improved working and living conditions for bus drivers and 
their families. In addition to positive impacts and benefits, the project also generates 
adverse social impacts mainly associated with the necessary acquiring of land (i.e. 
temporary or permanent land acquisition) for civil works construction. These works cause 
limitation in the access to residential housing and businesses, as well as the actual 
necessary removal of existing structures. The structures therefore need to be bought and 
the occupants of these structures will need to be either economically or physically 
resettled, or both. When an affected social unit needs to be resettled, the project provides 
sufficient compensation and support so that the social unit can restore their livelihoods or 
standards of living to pre-resettlement levels.  
 
When the original IMTS project (2004) was being prepared, it was not possible to 
determine the exact location (and road alignment) for project activities, so in compliance 
with Bank safeguard procedures, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared, 
approved by the Bank, and disclosed. Large cities participating in the program have used 
the resettlement approach outlined in the RPF to prepare Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs), which have been subjected to Bank review, disclosure, and have been closely 
supervised by the Bank team over the last seven years. These same RAPs will apply to 
the investments financed for large cities under this Project, and the task team will 
continue to supervise them. To date, 27 RAPs have been prepared in these large cities. 
The proposed Support to the NUTP project resources will finance investments for the 
remaining civil works associated with these RAPs. If designs change or if additional 
investments, not financed under previous phases of the Bank's support, are at some point 
included under this Project, new  RAPs would be prepared and subject to review and 
disclosure in accordance with Bank policy. Otherwise, for large cities under this project, 
no additional RAP would be prepared and the existing documents would continue to be 
used. The existing EMPs and RAPs for large cities financed under this Project have been 
re-disclosed.  The Government has also committed to a large post-resettlement evaluation 
to generate quantitative and qualitative indicators as to the wellbeing of affected peoples. 
At the outset of the NUTP, the Government deemed it most appropriate to undertake such 
an evaluation at the completion of the overall program, and such an assessment will be an 
important input into this Project#s ICR.  
 
Page  8
For the medium-sized cities, the NUTP project would operate under a similar approach. 
Since at this point in time it is not possible to determine the exact alignment of project 
investments in medium-sized cities, a resettlement framework approach will be used. The 
Resettlement Policy Framework (which is closely based on the original framework 
prepared for large cities) has been revised to adjust for a slightly different orientation of 
the activities in the medium-sized cities (for example, this project expects less impacts on 
properties but more impact on informal vendors), and  was disclosed on February 10, 
2011. During Project implementation, medium-sized cities will use this framework to 
prepare RAPs once the detailed designs of civil works and other interventions are known. 
Project resources will only finance such investments once RAPs are prepared, approved, 
and disclosed.  
 
As part of the IMTS Second Additional Financing, an independent evaluation was 
commissioned to assess implementation of RAPs in large cities (RAPs that have been 
concluded (13) and RAPs which are under implementation (14)). Although the study is 
not yet finalized, the major conclusions so far are as follows [Final Deliverable of Study 
under revision by task team; to be included in Project Files]:  
 
(i) 
The Project fully satisfies the requirements and guidelines as set forth by OP 4.12 
(Involuntary Resettlement). For example, in the local Implementing Entities teams have 
developed effective consultation and participation strategies, which have allowed the 
public and the affected people to efficiently communicate concerns about the Project. 
Teams in local Implementing Entities can also demonstrate how they have successfully 
managed to reduce impacts of resettlement the teams. The Ministry of Transport (MT) 
has created subsidies to assist particularly vulnerable affected people, and has designed 
specific measures to ensure a fast and effective compensation program. In general, the 
Project is conceived and implemented as a sustainable development program.  
 
(ii) 
The development of an RPF has guaranteed a systematic planning and 
implementation of the Project#s social management issues. The development of a 
Resettlement Policy Framework has helped implement a more consistent and systematic 
application of the Bank#s safeguard requirements, despite the complexities associated 
with carrying out a Project in numerous cities.  
 
(iii) 
The cost of resettlement in the IMTS Project is lower than the cost which has 
been recorded in other projects in Colombia. The cost of resettlement in the IMTS Project 
ranges from 8 to 12 percent of the total cost of each sub-project.  
 
(iv) 
The resettlement components of the Project stand out for their efficiency, 
transparency and absence of conflicts. Delays and required additional investments have 
been observed in the implementation of other Project components (i.e. civil work 
contracts); however this does not apply to implementation of the RAPs, which has been 
carried out in an efficient, timely and transparent manner. .  
 
(v) 
Administrative expropriations have been registered in only one of the sub-
projects. The social and legal studies showed that many properties had several constraints 
and charges attached to the property titles. As a solution, the property owners were 
offered financial assistance (which they otherwise would not have been entitled to), if 
they agreed to resettle within the time period required by the Project.  
Page  9
(vi) 
Multi-disciplinary teams have improved resettlement process. The creation of 
multi-disciplinary teams (social, legal and technical specialists) has allowed for a more 
comprehensive approach to managing social and resettlement issues, and for a better 
interaction with the community.  
 
(vii) 
The successful implementation of RAPs in the IMTS Project has favorably 
changed the public#s opinion of the civil work and has created important local capacity in 
social management practices.  
 
The evaluation study also identified a number of difficulties and areas for improvement. 
For example, frequent changes in the design of works resulted in changes in the 
resettlement process and cause anxiety from the social units involved; delays in the 
constructions may result in insufficient compensation (i.e. lease, rent, loss of economic 
activity) and jeopardize economic recovery; and the difficulty to ensure sustainable 
solutions to occupation of public space (street vendors). The city of Pereira is cited as an 
outstanding example where the inter-agency coordination was led by the manager at the 
local Implementing Entity and where resettlement implementation was successful.  
 
The evaluation study identifies lessons learned and recommendations. For example, 
evaluation of impacts must include the analysis of vulnerable people and communities; 
disclosure should focus more on users of transportation and include their views; the 
compassionate relationship between project affected people and the resettlement teams in 
local Implementing Entities has allowed for faster agreements. In terms of 
recommendations, the assessment suggests including subsidies and additional economic 
compensation in the resettlement process and allowing for recognition of impacts due to 
civil work delays.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP4.04): The project is not crossing or affecting any critical natural 
habitats. OP4.04 is triggered due to potential impact on nearby wetlands in Cartagena, in 
particular during the construction period. The policy is triggered on a precautionary basis, 
as the actual works will take place on highly consolidated urban corridor areas where 
ecosystems have already been affected. Under the IMTS Project, EMPs include measures 
to ensure that all sewage and drainage sinks on the roads are properly covered, to prevent 
dirt and sand pouring and potential spills of oils or fuels on the ground EMPs also have 
programs for the proper management and containment of fuels and lubricants. There are 
measures to ensure proper management of asphalt and cement, and for adequate 
management of materials and construction waste.  In the proposed Project, these 
measures will remain and ensure that natural habitats in the neighborhood do not get 
additional impacts.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11). OP/BP4.11 is triggered due to potential impact 
on cultural heritage, as there is potential for chance finds when upgrading and 
rehabilitating some of the roads in any of the cities. The project does not involve 
significant excavations, demolition, and movement of earth, flooding or other 
environmental changes. Rather, the project is taking place on highly consolidated urban 
transport corridors, and involves just the required removal of degraded paving or road 
materials, and may entail excavations to allow for water piping replacements. However, 
Page  10
as the project is involving cities where physical cultural resources are in the vicinity, as is 
the case in Cartagena, the policy is triggered, and the EMPs will include programs to 
properly deal with potential chance finds.  
 
There is not however a significant impact to be caused by the project. Sites of cultural 
value will not be affected by the works. EMPs include measures to ensure that nearby 
buildings and areas of cultural and heritage value, are protected during works. Also, the 
designs will take into account ways to prevent damage to heritage structures already 
affected by the transport corridors. The NUTP (through the Bank-financed IMTS project) 
has successful experience in preventing additional damage to historic monuments in 
Cartagena, where the project corridors were realigned to add a buffer zone to protect the 
ancient city walls (where there were no buffer zone before), or to add a vibration barrier 
to the structures of the Castle of San Felipe in Cartagena. These are examples of proper 
physical cultural resources management, where the project not only avoids damage to the 
existing buildings, but adds protective measures to prevent damage in the future.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP4.10). This policy is not triggered based on the assessment made 
by the Project#s Social Specialist, which included two missions to Valledupar. It was 
determined that the Project area does not overlap with land or natural resources to which 
indigenous peoples hold collective attachment. Besides, the Project will be implemented 
on consolidated, already converted urban areas (main streets) where public urban 
transport currently operates. The interventions are focused only on pavement, road 
rehabilitation and maintenance, and development of public space. However, RAPs in the 
medium-sized cities, as in the rest of the Project, will include measures to provide 
particular assistance to project affected people who are vulnerable, including indigenous 
population.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term negative impacts are expected, and most negative impacts are temporary. 
On the other hand, positive long term impacts are expected, as accessibility and road 
safety are improved, public urban space is enhanced, and emissions and exposure to local 
pollutants are diminished.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has developed a strong institutional capacity to ensure implementation of 
the Bank's environmental and social safeguards. This capacity has been acquired through 
the implementation of the IMTS Project (original Loan and two subsequent Additional 
Loan financings), which has helped develop efficient urban transport systems using BRTs 
in the cities of Barranquilla, Bogotá, Bucaramanga, Cartagena, Medellin, and Pereira.  
 
Page  11
At the national level, the implementing agency of the NUTP is the Ministry of Transport 
(MT), which has established a strong Project Coordination Unit (PCU), staffed by a mix 
of civil servants and individual consultants, including urban transport engineers, 
economists, accountants and social and environmental specialists, among others. The unit 
has proven to be effective in the implementation of the Bank-financed IMTS project and 
provides direct support to the participating cities and local Implementing Entities in 
technical, operational, environmental, social/resettlement, and procurement aspects. In 
the PCU there is an Environmental Specialist and a Social Specialist, who provide 
assistance to the local Implementing Agencies with regards to the EMP and RAP 
development, implementation and monitoring. MT reports to the Bank on compliance 
with the Environmental and Social Safeguards and accompanies the Bank on the overall 
Project supervision.  
 
At the local level, Implementing Agencies in large cities have also been staffed with 
multidisciplinary teams, including Environmental and Social Specialists. Likewise, civil 
works contractors, and works supervision contractors are also required to have proper 
environmental and social specialists in their teams.  During supervision missions of the 
IMTS project, the team has found that, in general, the environmental and social 
management teams are dedicated, hard working and with high professional standards. 
Where the Bank team has identified problems of lack of capacity, as has been the case in 
Cartagena, the implementing agencies have taken measures to improve staff composition 
and performance. In medium-sized cities, local Implementing Entities have been 
established and are in the process of staffing their units, with social and environmental 
specialist to manage safeguard issues. Knowledge-transfer is also taking place between 
large and medium-sized cities, so that the newly created entities in medium-sized cities 
are aware of the lessons learnt and practices that have worked in terms of environmental 
and social management in large cities.  
 
Environmental Management Plans. The environmental specialist in the Implementing 
Entity is in charge of developing the EMPs for all infrastructure works to be contracted in 
their cities. EMPs become part of the bidding documents for contracting the construction 
and infrastructure works required for the urban transport project restructuring at each of 
the participating urban areas. Once contracts are awarded, the construction contractors 
need to develop a Plan for the Implementation of the EMP. Infrastructure works also 
require contracting of a supervision contractor. The supervision contractor oversees 
implementation of works in accordance with bidding documents, and design and 
infrastructure plans. Both the civil works contractors and the supervision contractors are 
staffed with environmental (i.e. environmental and occupational health) and social 
specialists. Every day, the supervision contractor fills in a checklist on the Plan for the 
Implementation of the EMP compliance, which is later discussed on a weekly meeting 
with a committee composed also by the environmental and social specialists from the 
civil works contractors and by the environmental and social specialists from the local 
Implementing Entity.  At the end of the month a compiled report on EMP compliance is 
produced by the works supervision contractor, and submitted to the environmental 
specialist at the PCU. This report presents an overall evaluation and ratings on the 
different EMP programs. If the ratings are below 100 percent, the civil works contractor 
Page  12
does not receive full payment of its claimed expenses related to EMP implementation. 
Rather, it its reimbursed, in accordance to the performance rating obtained. If an EMP 
activity is not complied with, for subsequent periods of time, the contractor may get a 
warning and/or a fine. A fine will affect their scorecard to contract with the Government 
in the future.  
 
To help local Implementing Entities deal with EMPs, the Bank developed an 
Environmental Management Framework (#Guidelines for the Development, 
Implementation and Monitoring of EMPs related to Urban Transport Infrastructure 
Works#). The EMF has been jointly developed by the Bank, the Ministries of 
Environment, and Transport, the National Planning Department, and the Implementing 
Entities in large cities that participated under the IMTS operations. The EMF is designed 
to ensure proper environmental management of the main aspects related to the 
infrastructure works, including:  
 
(i) 
Environmental Management System, which establishes the institutional 
requirements to implement the EMP, including proper staffing, and the procedures for 
following up and rating performance;  
 
(ii) 
Environmental Management of Works. This section of the EMF includes 
programs for proper management of wastes, materials, lubricants and fuels, camp sites, 
equipment and machinery, so that noise, potential emissions and liquid discharges are 
prevented or mitigated. The section also includes measures to isolate works, demolition 
and excavation areas from people and vehicles, and proper signaling. This chapter 
includes a program for proper management of historic patrimony and heritage, and set up 
procedures in case of chance finds. Also, there are programs for proper excavation and 
demolishing practices.  
 
(iii) 
Traffic Management. These programs are designed to avoid conflicts of transport 
modes, including pedestrians, with the works areas. It helps keep safe walking and 
circulating paths, and makes sure that the affected community are properly consulted and 
informed.  
 
(iv) 
Industrial Safety and Occupational Health. This program includes all relevant 
measures to ensure safety and occupational health, and it relates to minimum 
requirements for proper gear, safety procedures, and contingencies plan.  
 
(v) 
Management of Trees and Green Coverage. These programs are designed to 
protect and prevent effect to the green areas and trees around the working areas. The 
section sets rules for compensating losses of trees and green areas, as well as procedures 
for proper removal, transfer, and planting of trees.  
 
(vi) 
Social Management and Communications. The chapter includes measures for 
proper communication, consultation, and socialization of works, and establishes 
mechanisms for addressing complaints, and for compensating potential damage to 
properties and people. It also includes programs to promote local hiring of non-skilled 
workers and training.  
 
For the new medium-sized cities participating in the Project (i.e., Sincelejo, and 
Valledupar), the newly created Implementing Entities will appoint environmental and 
social specialists, who will be trained by both the MT and the Bank. The first bidding 
Page  13
documents and works supervision will require a close follow-up from the MT and the 
Bank, to ensure proper application of the EMF.  
 
Resettlement Action Plans. Under the IMTS operations, the Bank has generally 
documented very good implementation of RAPs in large cities. As explained above the 
Project in large cities will continue to be implemented by local Implementing Entities in 
each city. Each of these units has a social sub-unit which manages social issues, in 
particular the resettlement components. The number of staff in these social management 
teams varies from just a few, in, for example, Bucaramanga, to a large team in Medellin. 
The composition of the social management teams is diverse and consists of 
anthropologists, sociologists, economists, lawyers, social workers, psychologists, 
administrative staff and others. During supervision missions of the IMTS project, the 
team has found that, in general, the social management teams are dedicated, hard working 
and with high professional standards. Where the Bank team has identified problems of 
lack of capacity, the implementing agencies have taken measures to improve staff 
composition and performance, for example in Cartagena. In medium-sized cities, local 
Implementing Entities have been established and are in the process of staffing their units, 
with social and environmental specialist to manage safeguard issues. Knowledge-transfer 
is also taking place between large and medium-sized cities, so that the newly created 
entities in medium-sized cities are aware of the lessons learnt and practices that have 
worked in terms of social management in large cities. For instance, the Implementing 
Entities in medium-sized cities participated in a two-day safeguards workshop (October 
2010) with the social and environmental teams of the large cities in order to learn from 
each other and exchange experiences on the implementation of the Bank#s safeguard 
policies. At the national level, the PCU is also staffed with an experienced social 
specialist that helps cities participating in the NUTP manage social and environmental 
issues according to the Bank#s safeguard standards. The major issue that still needs to 
show better progress is the resettlement of street vendors. The conversion from the 
informal to the formal sector will require improved collaboration with the respective 
municipalities.  
 
Table 1#Resettlement in Large Cities: Progress to date*  
 
Municipality Properties  
Street Vendos  
 
Affected Delivered Affected  Relocated 
 
 
Bucaramanga91 73 108 108 
 
 
Cartagena 425 385 1560 603 
 
 
Medellín (Envigado, Itaguí) 1553 
838 
250 
237  
 
Pereira 
201 136 46  46 
 
 
TOTAL 
2841 1938 2423 1452 
 
 
Source: Local Implementing Entities, December 2010.  
 
The current status of RAPs in large cities participating in the NUTP is shown in Table 2. 
The resettlement process in Bucaramanga and Pereira is almost completed; in Pereira 
most of the remaining properties that have yet to be affected are associated with the 
Page  14
segment of San Mateo (neighborhood of El Plumon), and will be completed by August, 
2011. In Cartagena and the Medellin Metropolitan area, significant resettlement, 
relocation of street vendors, and land acquisition is expected to take place during the 
implementation period of this operation per the construction schedule of the systems in 
these cities.  
 
In Cartagena, the remaining properties and street vendors to be affected mainly 
correspond with the construction of 1.4 km of segregated BRT corridor that is adjacent to 
the local municipal market (Bazurto market). Interventions to this corridor began in 
October, 2011, and the social and environmental teams in Cartagena are working with the 
municipality to relocate almost 900 street vendors. The District of Cartagena and the 
local Implementing Entity have entered into a special inter-institutional arrangement to 
implement a strategy to relocate the street vendors adjacent to the Bazurto market. In this 
arrangement, the local Implementing Entity will provide financial resources, technical 
assistance and manpower (social/environmental teams) to help carry out the relocation of 
these street vendors, while the city of Cartagena will lead the process and supply a venue 
for the street vendors to finally relocate. There have been numerous and well documented 
consultations with street vendors to understand their preferences in terms of final 
location/venue, including a new municipal market that is being built, or renovations and 
enlargements of the Bazurto market.  However, the District of Cartagena and the local 
Implementing Entity have designed a contingency plan that involves adapting an internal 
plaza in the Bazurto market to temporarily relocate these street vendors while 
construction of the BRT takes place. This course of action has also been widely consulted 
with the street vendors, and in principle they have agreed to this approach. In terms of 
physical resettlement and land acquisition (other than the street vendor issue) in the 
remaining 1.4km of BRT corridor, out of a total of 236 affected properties, 192 properties 
have already been acquired and the social units have resettled, and only 40 properties 
remain to be affected (see Table 2). To date, resettlement and land acquisition in 
Cartagena has been satisfactory and ample experience has been documented and is 
available in the project files.  
 
In Medellin, a large number of properties are also to be affected during the 
implementation of this phase of the NUTP. Medellin#s subproject encompasses the 
entirety of the metropolitan area (which includes Medellin, Envigado and Itagui) and the 
remaining investments to be undertaken are almost entirely in Envigado and Itagui. All 
off the outstanding properties (715) being affected are related with infrastructure 
investments taking place in Envigado and Itagui and are being financed under this 
Project. It is expected that approximately 70 percent of these properties will be resettled 
by end of 2011 and the remaining number of properties by mid 2012. To accomplish this, 
the social teams have been strengthened as requested by the Bank, and now Envigado has 
gone from 1 social specialist to a team of 8 social/legal specialist to manage the 
resettlement process, and Itagui from 2 social specialists to a team of 10. To date, 
resettlement and land acquisition in Medellin has been highly satisfactory.  
 
Project risks that go beyond the coverage of the safeguards may include, for example, 
those related to the ongoing conflict and violence that still permeates part of Colombia. 
Page  15
Sincelejo, one of the medium-sized cities to be financed, is a city where half of the 
population has been displaced by such violence. Other risks may include the loss of jobs 
for those informal bus drivers and #motorcycle-taxis# that may not be captured by the 
new formal bus system or included in capacity building and employment programs 
offered by municipalities. With respect to #motorcycle-taxis#, the Project (under 
Component A) will carry out a diagnostic work and characterization of the problem given 
that this relatively recent phenomenon spans social, economic, and even political 
dimensions, and the GoC has yet to formulate adequate policy guidelines pertaining this 
issue. This study is meant to inform the GoC#s assessment and policy making process in 
the realm of informal transport.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Social assessments are integral parts of RAPs. The 27 RAPs which have been and are 
being implemented in large cities, all include extensive social assessment information. 
This information is the baseline data which is necessary in order to prepare and execute 
resettlement action plans. Medium sized cities will follow the same methodology used in 
the preparation of the RAP#s for the large cities, and will follow the same methodology 
as in the large cities when preparing to carry out social assessments. The social 
assessments have and will include information, but not exclusively, on:  
 
#
Census and socio-demographic profile of the project affected people including 
identification and classification of all stakeholders, and of the project area to provide 
information on economic, social and cultural diversity (including gender);  
 
#
Estimated impacts on people and property, including social risks which are 
closely associated with the impacts;  
 
#
Communication and participation strategy, which defines the methodology for 
consultations and involvement of project affected people;  
 
#
Institutional analysis of both formal and informal institutions involved with the 
project to provide information on the institutional set-up, rules and behavior.  
 
In fact, the implementation of the IMTS Project has made a specific effort to pay 
particular attention to the very poor and vulnerable. Therefore, we find in each 
participating city, a large number of identifiable cases of vulnerable social units which 
have received noteworthy and exceptional assistance. For example, members of the 
social/resettlement teams in all the large cities have gone far beyond the call of duty in 
assisting particularly vulnerable families and until now they maintain strong bonds with 
these families. This very special support and dedication to assist those most in need, has 
also resulted in municipal decrees, which legalize additional support to vulnerable cases 
(for example in Bucaramanga). In addition, as part of the social assessments, the 
implementing agencies will command studies that identify the key stakeholders and the 
mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on 
potentially affected people. Key stakeholders in the Project include those living, working 
or moving along the bus routes, including residents, shop-owners, informal vendors, 
other merchants, bus users, bus operators, and bus drivers.  
 
Page  16
The Project initiated consultations with potentially affected people early on. 
Stakeholders involved in consultations during preparations included, among others, 
people affected by land acquisition, bus owners, private transport associations, local 
government, and central government officials.  During project implementation in large 
cities, the GoC and local Implementing Entities have collaborated with construction 
companies and bus operators to share information and allow public consultation through 
information offices, workshops, and information dissemination material. The consultation 
process has been instrumental in informing the Project#s design and environmental and 
social management. For instance, in Medellin (Envigado) citizens have contributed to 
overseeing project implementation and monitoring, and in Bucaramanga consultations 
resulted in key adjustment to the project#s design in order to improve public space layout 
and promote the pedestrian mobility. In medium-sized cities, the consultation process 
also initiated early-on and has included a number of workshops, formal and informal 
meetings with public transport users, bus owners, private transport associations, local 
government, and GoC officials, among others.  Two workshops on Bank (July 22, 2010) 
fiduciary and safeguards policies (October 7, 2010) took place during Project preparation 
as an initial approach to share with medium-sized cities policies that would be applicable 
in the Project. These workshops were extremely useful for relevant stakeholders in 
medium-sized cities, since representatives from large cities where the Project is already 
being implemented shared their experiences on fiduciary and safeguard issues. 
Furthermore, during January 18 and, 19,2011 consultation meetings took place in 
Sincelejo and Valledupar, respectively, to socialize the RPF with key stakeholders.  
Stakeholders included potential public transport users,  representatives from territorial 
social organizations (Juntas de Acción Comunal),  municipal government officials, city 
council members, education centers and universities, associations/chambers of commerce 
related to architecture  and engineering, mainstream media (radio, press and t.v.) among 
others. The city Mayor attended in the case of Sincelejo and Valledupar, and assistance in 
each of the three cities surpassed 50 people. Once the RPF was presented and 
disseminated, and its application to the Project was explained, the Bank answered 
questions from the audience including issues regarding to project timing and execution of 
civil works, treatment of affected properties under the project, best practices in large 
cities in terms of community involvement/management, importance of developing 
programs to address the occupation of public space and street vendors, solutions and 
regulation to tackle motorcycle cabs (mototaxismo), and requests to update proposals to 
the Land Use Plan, among others. Feedback around the issues of street vendors and 
informal occupation of public space has been reflected in the RPF, and will be crucial for 
the proper management of social issues is medium-sized cities.  
 
The EMF was also consulted with relevant stakeholders on February 7 and 9. 
Participants included representatives from the community (i.e., local neighborhood 
boards); engineers; consultants; members of the Universities, transport operators, and the 
media. At the meetings the EMF was socialized, and the procedures for developing and 
implementing specific EMPs in the future were presented. No significant issues were 
raised and all participants welcomed the environmental management standards presented, 
and expressed their interest in participating in future consultation events.  
 
Page  17
In terms of disclosure the RPF, EMF and all EMPs, RAPs, have been disclosed through 
Infoshop and the MOT, and local Implementing Entities.  
 
In terms of grievance mechanisms, the Project has in place a number of systems to 
receive, solve and track complaints. The most important one is the Centers for Public 
Attention, which not only operate as a mechanisms for ongoing project consultation, but 
also receive and help solve complaints. Before any civil work starts, as required by EMPs 
a
Center for Public Consultation is established in the corridor neighborhood. These 
centers become the point of contact with the local community regarding questions and 
complaints, and also serve as a mechanism for receiving questions, claims and 
complaints. In fact, the Centers for Public Attention all have records of the state of 
properties (i.e., #Actas de Vecindad#), in the project area # before and after the project. 
The Centers are also used to socialize the project and publicize traffic measures, works 
plans and work progress. The Centers for Public Attention is, for the Project, probably 
the most important point of contact with the public. Apart from this mechanism, each 
local Implementing Entity also has several procedures for receiving, processing and 
solving claims and grievances. Claims can be posted on the website, received in the 
office of the Implementing Entity or in a local office in the field. In each city, every step 
of this process is very well documented and the teams also digitalize all information.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/26/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/11/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/31/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  18
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  19
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mauricio Cuellar 
02/16/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan Lopez-Silva 
02/14/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter 
02/14/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/23/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
