Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/26/2011 
Report No.:  AC5420
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P101745 
Original Project Name: CONGO DRC - 
Pro-Routes Project 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P120709 
Project Name:  CONGO DRC - Pro-Routes Project (Additional Financing) 
Task Team Leader:  Alexandre K. Dossou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 7, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (34%);Agricultural marketing and trade (31%);Central 
government administration (18%);Sub-national government administration (17%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (33%);Conflict prevention 
and post-conflict reconstruction (33%);Other social development (17%);Environmental 
policies and institutions (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
63.30 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.90 
 
UK-DFID Trust Fund to Support GoU's NDP 
57.80
73.70 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to re-establish lasting access between provincial capitals 
and districts and territories in four provinces (Province Orientale, Katanga, Sud Kivu, and 
Equateur) in a way that is sustainable for people and the natural environment in the area 
of influence of the Project.  
 
The AF will be used to: (i) reopen 376 kilometers of the high-priority road network and 
maintain them thereafter; (ii) organize and fund, on decreasing terms, the maintenance of 
741 kilometers of the recently rehabilitated high-priority National Road 4 (RN4) between 
Kisangani and Beni, (iii) replace two panel bridges along Kisangani - Banalia (RN4 
section recently reopened under the initial project) and four*  panel bridges along 
Kisangani # Beni; (iv) strengthen the capacity of the ministry of public works and the 
agencies involved in the road sector, including strategy and policy formulation; and (iv) 
Page  2
help the country combine post-conflict infrastructure recovery with the protection of 
environment and indigenous communities such as the pygmies.  
 
(*Footnote 1:   In compliance with the Bank#s TF Administration directives, an 
adequate price contingency must be built to cover the exchange rate fluctuations between 
the contribution currency (DFID#s GBP) and the holding currency (USD). A special 19% 
price contingency has thus been applied to DFID#s contribution of USD 46 million 
equivalent on March 31, 2011. This contingency translates into a 13% price contingency 
on the overall project cost since DFID#s contribution is 42%. If it turns out that the 
special contingency has only been used partially or not at all, it will be used to fund the 
replacement of up to 6 additional bridges along Kisangani # Beni. The use of this special 
contingency will be monitored regularly once the AF disbursement will have reached 
50%.)   
 
3. Project Description 
As for the initial Project, the Pro-Routes AF comprises four components:  
 
Component 1 will help re-establish lasting land access in the Equateur and Orientale 
provinces as follows:  
 
The reopening and subsequent maintenance until mid 2016 of 376 km of a high priority 
national road between Akula # Gemena # Libenge # Zongo in the Equateur province for 
an estimated cost of US$30 million (supervision and contingencies included). This road 
segment will be taken over from two low performing contracts terminated under the 
Bank-funded Emergency Living Conditions Improvement Support project (ELCIS).  
 
The maintenance until mid 2016 of 741 km of the high-priority road RN4 between 
Kisangani and Beni, a.k.a. the Ituri road, for an estimated cost of US$29.4 million. This 
unpaved road (except for 60 km being paved from Beni) whose rehabilitation was 
completed two years ago under the Bank funded EESRS project, is the backbone of 
North Eastern Congo. The road is still in good condition but has started to show signs of 
deterioration. If timely, effective and recurrent maintenance works are not carried out on 
the roadway, the road will become impassable and the investment will be wasted. The AF 
will therefore provide the necessary technical and financial assistance to rapidly set up a 
long term (5 to 7 years) maintenance contract and fund its implementation jointly with 
the RMF over the first four years. The RMF contribution will gradually increase from 
nothing to full funding over the AF implementation period.  
 
The funding of the replacement of worn-out panel bridges by two-lane modular bridges: 
two along the Kisangani # Banalia section of RN4 and four along the Kisangani # Beni 
section of RN4. Up to five additional bridges could be replaced along Kisangani # Beni 
with the unused portion of the special contingency to cover against the fluctuation of 
GBP to USD exchange rate (see footnote 1).  
 
Component 2 includes, as for the initial project, all activities related to capacity 
building, institutional strengthening and project implementation. The additional 
Page  3
institutional support will mainly cover the strengthening of the CI taking into account 
possible economies of scale, further capacity building for the Ministry of Public Works 
and Office des Routes (OdR) and additional support to the road construction industry.  
 
Component 3 will also cover environmental and social protection activities. The 
component will have the same activities as for the initial project but related to the new 
road sections and an additional space borne monitoring of the forest and protected areas 
in the area of influence of the roads to complement and orient the field environmental 
surveys and data collections carried out by a consulting firm.  
 
Component 4 covers monitoring and evaluation including the development of a road 
data collection system and monitoring of the environmental and social program as per the 
initial project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The road segment Akula - Gemena - Libenge - Zongo - CAR (376 km) is located in the 
North Equateur, passing through rainforest and areas inhabited by indigenous Aka pygmy 
groups, but not directly impacting any protected areas. The road serves as a route for the 
export of timber through CAR to Cameroon.  
 
The Kisangani - Beni section passes through rainforest, including the Okapi Wildlife 
Reserve, as well as areas inhabited by indigenous Batwa and Mbuti pygmy groups. The 
section is particularly sensitive, as it is the principal transport route for the export of 
timber extracted under poorly controlled artisanal cutting permits to Uganda and Kenya.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The AF investment will fund two different road operations: maintenance of existing roads 
and reopening/rehabilitation of abandoned roads. Maintenance of existing roads will 
improve mobility and induce site specific impacts. Reopening of the roads will first of all 
enhance accessibility, and when traffic picks up, mobility gains will be made; 
accordingly, road reopening will induce extended impacts.  
 
The AF will specifically support the reopening of Akula-Gemena-Libenge-Zongo, the 
maintenance of Kisangani # Beni (the road works for this segment were completed with 
financing from PUSPRES), and the replacement of worn-out panel bridges by modular 
stronger metal bridges, two on Kisangani # Banalia and four  on Kisangani-Beni. These 
road segments have the following physical characteristics:  
 
#
The road segment Akula - Gemena # Libenge - Zongo (376 km) is located in the 
Equateur province, passing through rainforest and areas inhabited by indigenous Aka 
pygmy groups, but not directly impacting any protected areas.  The road serves as a route 
for the export of timber through CAR to Cameroon.  
 
#
The Kisangani - Beni section passes through rainforest, including the Okapi 
Wildlife Reserve (a World Heritage Site), as well as, areas inhabited by indigenous 
Batwa and Mbuti pygmy groups.  The section is particularly sensitive, as it is the 
principal transport route for the export of timber extracted under poorly controlled 
artisanal cutting permits to Uganda and Kenya.  
 
The Pro-Routes Project operates in a variety of sensitive ecological areas, including 
high biodiversity rainforests and highlands. Many of these areas were subject to 
significant human pressure over the last decades, such as slash-and-burn agriculture and 
poaching, although due to the status of the roads, these areas were relatively isolated.  
The reopening of the roads will likely open greater economic opportunities and attract a 
variety of interests looking for short-term profits, as well as, economically disadvantaged 
people looking for ways to sustain a living. Logging, charcoal production, and 
commercial poaching are likely to increase, as well as, encroachment on newly opened-
up forested areas by agriculturalists, artisanal miners, and others. This will put in danger 
some forest ecosystems and species, as well as, the traditional territories of indigenous 
pygmy groups, and potentially will cause conflict with resident populations.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential long term indirect and cumulative impacts of road reopening and improved 
mobility through maintenance are the gradual disappearance of rainforest in the area of 
influence of the road segments, and the reduction of biodiversity through commercial 
bush meat hunting and agricultural expansion.  
 
Page  5
Other negative impacts include an increased rate of accidents due to increased 
motorized traffic, and higher respiratory health hazards for the populations living along 
the roads due to dust in the air generated by fast moving vehicles during the dry season.  
 
Economic growth as a result of the road reopening is likely to lead to further intrusion 
into the territory of indigenous pygmy groups with potential consequences such as loss of 
their traditional territories and resources, leading to further impoverishment and 
incremental loss of their cultural specificity.  
 
Impacts on physical cultural resources are expected to be site specific and limited to 
possible damage to sites within the right of way, such as graves, sacred places and trees.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The only project alternative available, except for minor modifications in the alignment of 
the roads, would be not to reopen the roads. This alternative has been rejected because 
these roads are the principal means by which currently isolated populations can be 
connected to the markets and inputs essential to improve their livelihoods. These roads 
are also a key factor in reinstating peace and security in areas which have been shaken by 
civil unrest.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The AF extends the civil works undertaken under the initial Pro Routes project by (i) 
taking over and properly completing and maintaining thereafter the unfinished civil 
works (Akula-Zongo) executed under the Emergency Living Conditions Improvement 
Support project (PUAACV) which is scheduled to close by the end of 2011, and (ii) 
maintaining the Kisangani-Beni road section rehabilitated successfully under the 
Emergency Economic and Social Reunification Support project (PUSPRES) which 
closed on March 31, 2011. Safeguards documents have been prepared for all three 
projects and address the environmental and social impacts of the road and bridge 
rehabilitation, repairs, and maintenance. These documents remain valid for the 
implementation of activities under the Additional Financing. Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) 
have been prepared for each road segment in each project. Each project has also prepared 
a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Indigenous Peoples Plan. Resettlement 
Action Plans (RAPs) have been prepared as the technical work for various road segments 
has been finalized. All the safeguards documents have been consulted upon and disclosed 
in-country and at the InfoShop (see paragraph 3 below on the PUAACV safeguards 
documents). These instruments have also been implemented and regularly supervised.  
Additional** safeguards instruments will be prepared as and when necessary once the 
sites and civil works are finalized.  
 
(**Footnote 2: This includes works for two bridges (Ituri I and II) on the Kisangani-
Beni road that have been rehabilitated with financing from DfID.)  
 
Page  6
The following is a table with the safeguards documents that are applicable to the 
ongoing road and bridge civil works in the initial Pro Routes project and the AF, 
including the activities that were originally carried out in PUSPRES and PUAACV:  
 
Safeguards Document/Disclosure Date  
 
PRO-ROUTES  
 
EA # Rehabilitation of routes: Loange River-Lake Mukamba; Gemena-Kisangani; 
Lisala-Akula; and Kasomeno-Uvira  
 
[September 1, 2007]  
 
Detailed ESIA/ESMP # Kisangani-Bunduki [November 1, 2007]  
 
Detailed ESIA/ESMP # RN5 # Kasomeno-Uvira [August 1, 2007]  
 
Detailed ESIA/ESMP # Gemena-Karawa-Businga [June 1, 2007]  
 
Environmental and socio-economic study # Loange River-Lake Mukamba [June 1, 
2007]  
 
RPF # Bunduki-Kisangani and Fizi-Kasomeno [September 1, 2007]  
 
RAP # Bunduki-Kisangani [February 1, 2008]  
 
RAP # Uvira-Kasomeno; Moba-Kapona; and Dulia-Bondo [April 21, 2011]  
 
IPP # Bunduki-Kisangani and Fizi-Kasomeno [September 1, 2007]  
 
PUSPRES  
 
Environmental and Social Assessment # Roads Rehabilitation RN1 (Matadi-Mponzo), 
RN2 (Mbuji Mayi-Bukavu), and RN4 (Kisangani-Beni)[January 1, 2006]  
 
RPF [January 1, 2006]  
 
RAP # RN4, Lot 2000, PK410-PK450  [April 1, 2008]  
 
IPP (RN1, RN2, and RN4) 
[September 26, 2007]  
 
PUAACV  
 
Environment and Social Assessment # Akula-Zongo and Lumbubashi-Kasenga
 
[January 1, 2006]  
 
RPF [January 1, 2006]  
 
RAP # Akula-Ngbonga Mbako [April 22, 2011]  
 
RAP # Bogoro Wagatda-Gemena[April 22, 2011]  
 
IPP # Akula-Zongo [April 11, 2011]  
 
The IPP for PUAACV was prepared in October 2006 and involved extensive 
consultations with indigenous groups along and beside the Akula-Zongo road segment. 
The RAPs for the portions of the Akula-Zongo road (Akula-Ngbonga Mbako and Bogoro 
Wagatda-Gemena) were prepared in 2008, also following extensive consultations with 
the project-affected people (PAPs). Due to delays in the road works, the project team 
began implementing and supervising the IPP and RAPs in 2009 until December 2010, 
when the road works were suspended and subsequently incorporated in this AF.  While 
consultations were held on the IPP and RAPs in 2007 and 2008, respectively, due to an 
administrative error, they were not disclosed in the InfoShop when they were prepared 
several years ago. The IPP and RAPs have since been disclosed in the InfoShop in April 
2011 (see paragraph 9 below). Management does not consider that this has had an 
Page  7
adverse impact on the project, as the project and its impacts were discussed with 
Indigenous Peoples and PAPs during preparation and implementation and draft IPPs and 
RAPs were shared with the communities.  
 
In order to mitigate non-construction related environmental impacts and to strengthen 
the enforcement of the pertaining laws, an environmental and social component 
(Component 3) has been developed for the Project. This is being implemented through a 
delegated management contract, which was signed at the end of 2009, with the 
consultants mobilizing in January 2010.  The main subcomponents of this Component 
are:  
 
(i) 
comprehensive environmental capacity building for the responsible institutions; 
and  
 
(ii) 
participatory natural resources management.  
 
To address the risks to forests, biodiversity and indigenous pygmy groups in a proactive 
manner, the participatory natural resources management subcomponent will promote 
participatory land use planning and sustainable livelihood opportunities, thus minimizing 
spontaneous colonization of newly accessible areas.  This subcomponent will promote 
participatory community-based land and natural resources planning processes in five pilot 
areas containing sensitive ecological resources, where it will help conduct local 
multipurpose land-use planning to agree on priority uses of forest areas, and to map out 
these uses.  This will involve local consultations and participatory mapping of existing 
uses. It will aim at securing local communities# rights of use and access to land and 
forests, including those of indigenous pygmy groups.  Building on this participatory 
process, the project will support and help pilot local initiatives for community forests, 
income-generating activities, and agricultural intensification. The goal of these activities, 
which have yet to be identified in detail, is to reduce pressure on newly accessible 
resources by providing local communities with alternative sources of livelihood and 
income through raising the productivity of their existing resources in a sustainable 
manner. The Project will not support the purchase of pesticides for these activities.  Pilot 
projects will be developed and implemented in partnership with local NGOs or other 
local associations. Implementation of Component 3 is still in the planning and 
identification stage, and no activities have yet been initiated on the ground.  
 
The following road segments have been completed to date: Kisangani-Banalia (RN4), 
and PK25-PK75 north of Kalemie (RN5).  The safeguards documents (ESIAs, ESMPs, 
RAPs, and IPP) have been implemented in a satisfactory manner.  
 
With regard to the section that extends for 120 km from Kisangani to Banalia (along 
RN4), an NGO was contracted to implement the RAP for this segment. The satisfactory 
implementation of both the RAP and Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) for this segment was overseen by the Environmental Unit of the Infrastructure 
Unit (CI - the Project implementation unit) and the Environment and Social Unit of OdR 
(CESOR). Subsequently, the implementation of these measures was audited by the firm 
Page  8
in charge of the delegated management contract under the environmental and social 
management component of the Project (Component 3), and found to be satisfactory. 
During Project preparation, no indigenous pygmy groups were identified within the zone 
of influence (75km either side of the road) of RN4 between Kisangani and Banalia. 
During Project implementation however, one such group has been identified at a distance 
of 111km from the road, and their situation is being monitored to determine whether an 
Indigenous Peoples Plan is required, should any negative impacts be identified, or 
additional measures required to ensure indigenous people can have access to project 
benefits.  
 
Works under the initial Project have also begun on the Kalemie to Uvira segment of 
RN5. An ESIA, RAP and IPDP for this segment have been prepared and have been 
reviewed by the Bank. Comments have been provided by the Environment Unit of the 
Infrastructure Cell and CESOR on the draft reports before they are finalized. The 
preparation of IPDPs under the Project has also been informed by the national Strategic 
Framework for the Preparation of a Pygmy Development Program which was jointly 
prepared by the World Bank and the Government, and finalized in January, 2010.  
 
Strengthening environmental management capacity  
 
The capacity building subcomponent of Component 3 targets in particular the 
Congolese Institute for Nature Conservation (ICCN), the Ministry of Environment, 
Nature Conservation and Tourism (MECNT), and the Roads Office (OdR). This sub-
component provides equipment and training to these institutions to strengthen their 
capacity for local consultation, participatory planning, strategic communication, 
implementation of national regulations and World Bank safeguard policies, and data 
collection for the monitoring of impacts. These measures complement and reinforce the 
capacity building supported by the Bank-financed Forest and Nature Conservation 
Project and National Parks Network Rehabilitation Project, which are both currently 
under implementation by MECNT and ICCN respectively.  Along the segment of the 
RN4 that passes through the Okapi Wildlife Reserve the Project will build on the 
measures supported by the Bank-funded Emergency Economic & Social Reunification 
Support Project to strengthen the capacity of ICCN to control the illegal transport of bush 
meat and other forest products, such as the provision of equipment (including guard 
posts, radios, vehicles and operating costs) for park guards.  
 
This subcomponent will strengthen the capacity of MECNT to monitor forest 
management plans, the transport of logs, and monitor commercial poaching and bush 
meat trade in Project-affected areas. It will help carry out awareness-raising campaigns 
with the help of national NGOs. It will establish a baseline by updating local maps and 
databases, run controls in the field and at checkpoints, and disclose information on 
controls and penalties. It will also monitor the implementation of the cahier des charges 
by concession holders in the Project area, and the use of forest revenues by local entities.  
 
With the Environment Unit of the Infrastructure Unit, the Environment and Social Unit 
of the OdR (CESOR), and the delegated management contract for Component 3 of the 
Page  9
Project in place, there is adequate capacity and resources to ensure the effective 
implementation of the safeguard measures for the Project.  Independent oversight of this 
implementation will be provided by the Environmental and Social Advisory Panel 
(ESAP) for the Project.  Establishment of this Panel has been delayed as a result of the 
overall delays in project implementation; however, Terms of Reference have been now 
been prepared and are under review. Given the delays in the works supported by the 
Project, recruitment of the ESAP by the target date of June 2011 will provide adequate 
independent oversight of the physical progress and associated environmental and social 
risks.  
 
The safeguards arrangements will remain substantially unchanged under the AF, except 
for a new contract for capacity building under the same TOR to cover the additional road 
sections and another contract to perform quarterly interpretation of selected satellite 
imagery of all project roads to track forest and protected areas degradation. The 
independent technical and safeguards monitoring will remain in effect and be broadened 
to match the increased project scope.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include project-affect communities, including indigenous pygmy 
groups, NGOs, district authorities, the Ministry of Infrastructure, Public Works and 
Reconstruction (MIPWR), the Cellule Infrastructures (CI), the Office des Routes (OdR), 
MECNT (Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism), ICCN 
(Congolese Institute of Nature Conservation), and the Provincial Authorities.  The CI, 
acting as the project implementation unit, is responsible for managing the interactions 
with the OdR, MECNEF, ICCN and NGO partners.  
 
Extensive public consultations were undertaken during the preparation of the ESMF and 
RPF, and are undertaken during the preparation of segment-specific ESIAs, RAPs and 
IPPs.  For each road segment, as an element of the RAP, a grievance committee is 
established to address any complaints that may be brought by project-affected people.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/20/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2007 
 
Page  10
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  11
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexandre K. Dossou 
03/31/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
03/31/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
03/31/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/26/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
04/26/2011 
Comments:   
