Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/15/2011 
Report No.:  AC5408
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P117382 
Project Name:  DRC Establishing Capacity for Core Public Management 
Task Team Leader:  Antonius Verheijen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 25, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 12, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTPR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (25%);Public expenditure, financial management and 
procurement (25%);Other public sector governance (25%);Managing for development 
results (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
29.90 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
to strengthen core public administration functions of selected central and provincial 
institutions   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Strengthening leadership and results-based management capacity  
 
Component 2: Strengthening core functions of public administration  
 
Component 3: Support Training Centers to Design and Implement Programs of 
Excellence  
 
Component 4: Strenghtening SENAREC and building a quality control system   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in Kinshasa as well as in the 11 provincial capitals of 
the DRC. Apart from training and coaching activities, it also includes support to 8 
Centers of Excellence, located in Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, Kisangani and Bukavu, with 
two more locations to be determined. Rehabilitation of facilities will take place at these 
sites. However, in view of weak procurement capacity, all design and procurement 
aspects will be managed directly by SENAREC, which will also have responsibility for 
ensuring that, if the need arises, safeguard assessments are made. At this point, however, 
and based on site visits, there is no need for any new construction to fulfill the objectives 
of the project   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project does not envisage financing any new construction projects, and rather focuses 
on the rehabilitation/refurbishment of existing university and training institution 
buildings and the SENAREC offices. These rehabilitation/refurbishment activities have 
minor and localized impacts and will be managed through the application of local and 
national laws and regulations. None of these works will involve land 
acquisition/involuntary resettlement or restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods. 
The preparation of safeguards documents (e.g. environmental impact assessments, 
resettlement action plans, etc.) is therefore not required.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies is limited, but the civil 
works for this project will be minor and localized, and the country has the capacity to 
undertake such rehabilitation/refurbishment of training institutions and offices.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonius Verheijen 
01/13/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
01/24/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
01/30/2011 
Comments:   
