                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6077


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/11/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Costa Rica                        Project ID: P122265
Project Name: Innovations to Enhance Performance of Health Care Networks in Costa
Rica
Task Team Leader: Fernando Montenegro Torres
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 11,      Estimated Board Date: July 3, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: LCSHH                       Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                           Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (90%);Other public sector governance (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):         200.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                     0.00
                                                                     0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The objective of the proposed Project is to enhance performance and cost-efficiency of health
care networks to respond to emerging needs of the population by modernizing infrastructure,
data generation, management and decision-making tools.

 The following are the key results expected from the proposed Project:
 Basic health care management units (Areas de Salud) and hospitals are using single identifier
electronic medical records to manage patients across different levels of care in their catchment
areas;
 The CCSS can determine and track individual health care costs for services provided;
 The Center for adoption of technologies is producing and disseminating technology adoption
evaluations and recommendations in accordance with international standards; and
 Reduction of patients receiving outpatient and inpatient secondary level services at tertiary level
hospitals.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed Project would be supported through an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) with two
phases. This lending instrument would ensure the commitment of sufficient financial resources
needed to meet the investment and technical assistance needs of the CCSS while providing
flexibility in disbursements to achieve the overarching objectives of the Project. The APL would
support the achievement of the medium-term strategic activities identified by the CCSS as part of
the long-term vision of institutional strengthening and technological innovation. The proposed
Project would be implemented in two phases with an implementation period of three years for
each phase. Both phases will have the same components.

 The first phase (US$200 million) would lay the foundation for innovation with investments in
infrastructure, technology, and capacity building needed to overhaul administrative and health
care management. The first phase would focus on the design, acquisition and installation of
digital and electronic platforms and communication systems and other needed infrastructure. In
addition, it would establish a new Center for Clinical Excellence and Technology Adoption.
Finally, the first phase also would finance the construction of two secondary level hospitals in
Golfito and Turrialba and the preparatory work for construction of tertiary level hospitals in
Cartago and San Juan de Dios.

  The second phase (US$181 million) would focus on completing infrastructure and civil works
activities as well as putting in place new management tools and organizational arrangements to
improve the efficiency and quality of health care provided by the health networks. The second
phase would focus on completing investments needed to introduce use of the new electronic and
digital infrastructure and technical assistance and training needed to integrate various decision-
making levels and units into a new comprehensive management aimed at setting targets and
monitoring results to enhance efficiency and quality of services delivered by health care
networks. The second phase would also finance the completion of civil works for the tertiary
level hospitals in Cartago and San Juan de Dios. To start the implementation of the second phase
trigger indicators would be identified. If these trigger indicators would have been successfully
met the second phase can start before the first phase is completed.

 Component 1. Strengthening Institutional Capacity. The objective of this Component is to
strengthen institutional capacity for improved decision-making, with the goal of delivering
sustainable health care services with appropriate, cost-effective interventions and technology.
Through the routine collection and analysis of electronic health information the CCSS seeks to
achieve progress in fostering adaptive health care system which applies evidence-based decision-
making for strategies to improve health care. To do so, this Component will finance two sub-
Components:

 Subcomponent 1.1. Improving administrative and clinical management
 i. Modernization of administrative processes of the financial and human resources department
with investments to develop and interconnect various electronic and digital platforms and to
implement organizational adjustments to improve monitoring of costs and optimize allocation of
resources.
 ii. Development and integration of various modules for health care management into a
comprehensive information system of Electronic Medical Records (EMR) that links information
generated at all levels of care including community and household information.
 Subcomponent 1.2. Strategic innovations for improved health system performance.
 i. Development of a center for generating relevant analysis and information for decision-makers
to use in developing institutional standards for new diagnostic and therapeutic technologies and
clinical protocols.
 ii. Strengthening the efficiency of institutional strategies for international procurement of
pharmaceuticals seeking international partners and interventions aimed at improving long-term
sustainability of timely access to quality products.

 Component 2: Improving the delivery of care in regional health networks. The objective of this
component is to strengthen two of three CCSS health care networks that cover the southern and
eastern regions of the country by financing technical assistance, training and investments in civil
works. This Component will finance two sub-Components:

 Subcomponent 1. Civil works for secondary and tertiary level hospitals
 i. Relocation and construction of new facilities for two secondary level hospitals (located in
Golfito and Turrialba) and one tertiary level hospital (located in Cartago).
 ii. Civil works needed to modernize the high complexity surgical and emergency services of
Hospital San Juan de Dios (tertiary level hospital located in San Jose).

 Subcomponent 2. Improving management of health care networks through the use of existing
and new information systems.
 i. Improving continuum of care in health care networks through integrated management of
patients from household to inpatient care using new e-Health tools.
 ii. Strengthening management of allocation of resources health care networks based on data
analysis.

D. Project location (if known)
Civil works supported under the Project will be located in the regions of Golfito, Turrialba,
Cartago and San Jose. The Electronic Medical Records System will be located nationwide.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The borrower has the institutional capacity to undertake and implement safeguard policies. The
implementing agency, CSSS, has demonstrated, through previous Bank projects the capacity to
successfully implement Bank safeguards. However, even though Costa Rica’s environmental
legislation is fairly comprehensive and covers relevant areas that would affect the project such as
construction and solid and health care waste, compliance will need to be monitored closely by
project staff as contractors do not always abide by the rules.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)
   Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    This project will invest in health-care infrastructure using construction techniques whose
adverse environmental impacts are well-known and easily manageable. There will be no large-
scale, significant or irreversible adverse impacts associated with this project. As a result, the
project category is a B.

     The project will include a series of activities ranging from decommissioning of some
existing facilities, the refurbishment and extension of existing health care facilities to the
complete construction of secondary and tertiary level hospitals. For infrastructure investments
that will be known during preparation, each investment, be it to decommission an existing
hospital or construct a new one, will be preceded by the development of an Environmental
Assessment (EA) that will identify the scale of impacts of the investment. Coupled with each EA
will be an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) that will establish mitigation measures for
each impact type, develop monitoring criteria, describe implementation arrangement for
implementing safeguard activities, and identify the budget implications of the mitigation and
management of each measure. Each EA and EMP will also deal with the issue of medical,
excreta and hazardous waste management. Draft EA/EMPs will be disclosed and consulted upon
with potentially affected peoples and other interested stakeholders prior to the commencement of
works. This must be done before appraisal.

      Should any investments remain unidentified before appraisal, the project will prepare an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that will outline the process of
developing the EA and EMP for each subsequent investment (with appropriate impact typologies
and the suite of mitigation measures that will be applied) once sites are eventually identified. The
ESMF will also include (i) the environmental criteria needed for choosing project location sites
and (ii) a framework for the treatment and disposal of construction waste, excreta and medical
waste.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
    Activities supported under this project will not be done in any natural habits and therefore
this safeguard policy is not triggered.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
    The proposed project activities will not affect any forests and therefore the Project is not
triggered.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
    The proposed project activities do not support vector management and therefore the Project
is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
    At this time, while no known physical cultural resources are expected to be found in the areas
of construction and this safeguard policy is not triggered, each EA/EMP (and the ESMF) will
include a chance find clause that will be added to each construction contract.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                X
    Costa Rica has an approximate indigenous population of 30,862, which is equivalent to about
less than 1 percent of the national population. The project will screen for the presence of
Indigenous Peoples (IPs) in the project area. Following this, a Social Assessment (SA) will
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes            No           TBD
identify all relevant social and cultural characteristics and vulnerabilities that affect IPs as
beneficiaries of the project. The SA will be developed in close consultation with IPs. Should the
findings of the SA suggest that project activities may have an impact on IPs, an appropriate
instrument will be developed. For example, and depending on the scale and scope of impacts, an
Indigenous Peoples Plan may be necessary to address impacts related to investments that have a
known impact footprint, or an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework may be more appropriate
should the exact location of investments not be known before appraisal and thus the precise
impacts remain unclear. Alternatively, the project design may be amended to directly include
provisions to enhance the ability of IPs to benefit from the project.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    The project is not expected to require any involuntary resettlement. However, land has
been/will be acquired for the project. The land for one of the facilities (San Juan de Dios) has
already been purchased. The CCSS has also identified lands for two other hospitals but still is in
the process of sale negotiations. The land for the fourth facility has not yet been identified. As
such, the SA will seek to confirm that any land acquired is done so through voluntary sale at
market prices. The SA will also determine if the purchased properties are free of rival claims or
occupied by any third parties (e.g. squatters) who could be involuntary resettled as a result of the
project. In such an event, an appropriate action plan would be developed. If the precise sites that
will be acquired are not identified prior to appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be
prepared that provides simple standards for assessing value, confirming eligibility and providing
compensation. Should the SA identify any involuntary resettlement as a result of land already
acquired for the project, an (abbreviated) Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared to rectify
any losses.

      In the course of land acquisition, the Bank will do its due diligence to ensure that CCSS
publicly discloses that purchased sites belong to the CCSS and that any occupation between the
disclosure of such information and initiation of construction will not be eligible for relief or
compensation.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
    This project will not construct or support the construction of dams and therefore this policy is
not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
    The project does not finance activities in international waterways and therefore this safeguard
is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X
    The project does not finance activities in disputed areas and therefore this safeguard is not
triggered.


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 05/12/2011
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   All safeguards documents will be disclosed prior to Appraisal.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Fernando Montenegro Torres                                  02/09/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             03/29/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Joana Godinho                                               04/11/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
