Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/01/2011 
Report No.:  AC6137
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P122219 
Project Name:  Integrated Land Administration System Project 
Task Team Leader:  Victoria Stanley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (40%);Public administration- Information 
and communications (35%);Information technology (25%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (60%);Administrative and civil service 
reform (30%);Law reform (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
21.05 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2.08 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.07
2.15 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed Project is to modernize the land administration and 
management system to improve the efficiency, transparency and cost effectiveness of 
government services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would focus on further improving the real property registration 
system managed by MOJ and SGA, and support the development of an NSDI. The 
proposed project would have four main components:  (A) Land Registration System 
Development; (B) Spatial Information and Cadastre System Modernization; (C) 
Improving Digital Services; and (D) Project Management.  
 
Component A # - Land Registration System Development would focus on further 
simplification and automation of the land registration system operated in the municipal 
courts under MOJ/LRMS. The activities to be financed include development of a land 
Page  2
administration strategy, scanning and digitizing land registry documents, legal framework 
improvements, and further cleaning of the digital data for migration to the JIS.  
 
Component B # - Spatial Information and Cadastre System Modernization would focus 
on improving the quality and presentation of spatial data managed and maintained by 
SGA and implementation of a national spatial data infrastructure (NSDI), in line with the 
EU INSPIRE Directive. This component will also support SGA with its own re-
structuring, including improving the physical premises of several regional offices (which 
includes construction and rehabilitation of existing buildings) and TA to support HR 
planning and future IT outsourcing.  
 
Component C # - Improving Digital Services would support further development of the 
JIS and completion of the JIS roll-out to all cadastre and land registry offices, the 
associated data migration, and training; and associated public awareness and information 
campaign to introduce the JIS and service improvements to the public.  
 
Component D # - Project Management, M&E and Training.  This Component will 
support a small Project Management Unit (PMU) responsible for fiduciary functions and 
monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is nationwide and focused on improving institutional capacity, IT activities, 
scanning, building works, and technical services. It will be concentrated in the offices of 
the implementing agencies in urban areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Vera Dugandzic (ECSS4) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project has been classified as an environmental category B and triggers the safeguard 
policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. The Project is planning rehabilitation 
and construction of buildings, primarily cadastre offices and data facilities. The review of 
existing documents and subsequent field visits to some of the potential locations 
concluded that the construction proposed under this project would not trigger a full 
Environmental Impact Assessment under the Croatian laws nor the World Bank policies. 
The type of expected environmental impacts of concern are localized in nature and more 
adequately addressed through environment permits and good construction practice, or in 
the case of World Bank policies, through implementation of site specific environmental 
management plans (EMP checklist) (in the case of construction of  smaller buildings or 
extensions). The environmental impacts of the project are expected to be of manageable, 
temporary and of local impact as they are related to the general construction activities on 
already known location. These most commonly include:  a) Dust and noise due to 
excavation, demolition and construction; b) Management of demolition and construction 
wastes and accidental spillage of machine oil, lubricants, etc.; c) Risk of damage to 
historical or cultural property or unknown archaeological sites; d) Traffic disturbance; e) 
Impacts / damage to ecosystems; and f) Impacts on hydrology of the area. These risks can 
be effectively anticipated in advance of project implementation and addressed by direct 
mitigation activities in the design, planning and construction supervision process as well 
as during the operation of the facilities.  
 
The OP/BP 4.11 policy on Physical Cultural Resources is triggered based on the site 
visit to the town of Sisak on March 8, 2011. The current building of the cadastre office in 
the town of Sisak is located in its historical core. The building itself is not the cultural 
heritage site but its location falls under protected cultural historic area. The Croatian 
Ministry of Culture has already approved rehabilitation works and construction of an 
annex to the building. The Ministry will oversee all works related to rehabilitation / 
annex construction.  In addition, since the team saw some remains of Roman ruins in the 
courtyard of cadastre office, there might be a possibility of some chance finds discovery 
during excavation for the construction of an annex (300m2). With this in mind, the team 
sees the need to trigger the policy on Physical Cultural Resources. As per usual practice, 
provisions on chance finds have been already incorporated in the EMF.  
 
The social impacts are expected to be positive as more land information is made more 
easily available online to the public and private sector and citizens. Other online 
government services will also be improved through the implementation of NSDI. On 
March 7 and 8, 2011, the social safeguard team traveled to the towns of Sibenik, Sisak 
and Vinkovci and based on these site visits, discussions held and review of available 
documentation, the team confirmed that the OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement 
safeguard policy is not triggered. There will be no land acquisition for the minor works 
under the Project as these will all take place on public property. More specifically, the 
Project will finance renovation or buying space (already constructed buildings) from 
Page  4
willing private parties for 3 regional offices and construction of the building for data 
conversion within the Scan centre in Vinkovci. The team visited proposed sites / 
buildings. The buildings and site under consideration do not have any occupants or users.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental and social implications of the rehabilitation / reconstruction / 
extension of cadastre offices and data conversion center to be supported under the project 
are described in the Environmental Management Framework prepared by the PIU during 
project preparation and will be described in consequential EMP checklists. Potential 
environmental impacts are expected to be local and occur during the construction only. 
Civil works may result in some adverse environmental impacts unless appropriate design, 
construction and operational practices are followed. The EMF has taken into account 
local Croatian laws and practices related to environmental and construction permits as 
well as the Bank Operational policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and 
OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. No significant indirect or long-term 
environmental impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The building rehabilitation works were not originally planned as part of the Project 
however it is clear that in order to implement the extensive IT systems, good office 
premises are necessary. The Project did not look into assessment of the alternatives from 
the environmental point of view as the needs of the project required rehabilitation of the 
buildings in the urban areas and anticipated works usually do not have significant impacts 
on environment. The project chose the locations / institutions based on significance of 
impact and demonstrable efficiency gains.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The PIU is familiarized with the safeguards policies as this is the follow up project of 
successful implementation and completion of the Real Property Registration and Cadastre 
Project. Although mention project was category C, it entailed minor indoor rehabilitation 
works. PIU and the Bank supervised the rehabilitation which was done fully according to 
national environmental legislation and good civil engineering practice which was 
recorded  in the AMs of the project. For the follow-up project, as part of project 
preparation, the PIU prepared an overall Environmental Management Framework (EMF) 
due to the fact that the exact number and place of rehabilitation and construction is not 
fully confirmed. The EMF provides environmental screening procedures, the nature of 
EMP which should be prepared for construction or extension, and an example of the 
environmental issues associated with rehabilitation that will be addressed through the 
permitting, construction, contracting, and operations of the new and/or rehabilitated 
facilities. These environmental issues will be addressed and ensured through EMP 
checklists, a series of local permits, through constructor contracts, through site 
supervising engineer oversight, through the local municipality requirements, and through 
oversight by Project Implementation Unit.  
Page  5
The PIU will allocate one person within the team to monitor the implementation of the 
EMF and EMPsand provide continuing support / knowledge transfer on World Bank 
environmental policies to other staff, contractors and supervising engineers. The person 
will have experience in civil engineering and implementation of WB projects. The 
Project Team, in coordination with the local environmental authorities, is responsible for 
monitoring the compliance of the EMP implementation. For all PIU staff as well as the 
contractors and supervising engineer a half day training on the implementation and 
monitoring of EMP will be organized by WB local safeguards specialist and PIU person 
responsible for monitoring of EMF implementation.  
 
Monitoring will focus on measuring compliance with pollution standards and 
requirement of related permits (wastewater discharges, air quality, construction perm   it, 
etc.) while mitigation measures will include actions to prevent environmental hazards 
such as health and safety for the construction workers and the public, noise disturbance, 
restriction to access, dust, soil and water pollution from fuel and oil, excavation of 
materials and disposal of surplus soil and other construction materials, etc. Special 
attention will be paid during construction works to works on cultural heritage buildings.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EMF has been disclosed on March 24, 2011 on the projects website and one 
hardcopy version is available on the information board of PIU. The announcement on 
disclosure of the EMF has been published in Jutarnji list and Vecernji list (two major 
daily newspapers). All received comments will be addressed and reflected in the EMF. 
The EMP checklist that will be prepared in the later stage of the project will as well be 
disclosed on the website of the PIU and respective cities municipal boards and cadastre 
offices. Here as well all received comments will be addressed and reflected in the site 
specific EMP checklists.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/18/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Victoria Stanley 
03/11/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
03/14/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Vera Dugandzic 
03/14/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John V. Kellenberg 
03/15/2011 
Comments:   
