Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
Date prepared/updated
:
02/14/11
 Report 
No.:59804
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  
Czech Republic
 Project 
ID: 
P114304 
Project Name: 
Green Investment Scheme
 
Task Team Leader:  
Ahmad Slaibi
 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 
05/13/10
 Estimated 
Board 
Date: 
05/27/10
 
Managing Unit:  
ECSSD
 Lending 
Instrument: 
Carbon Finance
 
Sector: 
Renewable energy and energy efficiency services (100%)
 
Theme:  
Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount   (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount   (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount   (US$m.):            
~50.00
 
Other financing amounts by source (US$m.):  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
00.00 
 
Environmental Category: FI 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [
X
]
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [
X
]
2. Project Objectives
 
The main objective of the proposed project is to reduce CO2 emissions and air pollutants, 
to increase the use of renewable energy sources and to improve energy efficiency in the 
residential sector of the Czech Republic.  
 
C. Project Description 
 
The proposed areas of support primarily include energy saving and energy efficiency 
investments 
in the country’s housing sector and include: (a) heat insulation of family and 
apartment buildings; (b) improving energy efficiency by replacing existing equipment 
with equipment with higher energy efficiency; (c) fuel switch to more environmentally 
friendly fuels (e.g., switch from coal to renewable energy) and installation of bio-fuel 
burners; (d) installation of low-emission biomass sources; (e) installation of solar thermal 
collectors in family houses and apartment buildings and (f) installation of heat pumps, 
some types of which require installation of equipment in boreholes.  
 
Page  2
2
D. Project location 
 
The project will be implemented over the entire territory of the Czech Republic based on 
demand for the proposed activities. Most investments / subprojects under the project are 
expected to be located in existing residential areas or mixed urban areas 
(residential/commercial/industrial). Some projects might be located in areas dedicated for 
new residential construction by municipal urban / spatial plans.  
 
Specific locations of all projects to be supported by the GIS will be identified and 
assessed during the implementation stage. Because projects must be consistent with 
existing spatial plans (see below), and no new construction is foreseen under the project, 
it is unlikely that they would be situated in the vicinity of protected areas or sensitive or 
critical habitats, or near natural water bodies (lakes, rivers).  However, in the event that 
such issues do arise, in accordance with Czech law and 
the project’s Environmental 
Management Framework, these investments will be flagged and a specific environmental 
review / assessment process will be triggered.  
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr. Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD)  
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
According to the World Bank’s OP/BP/GP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, the CZ GIS 
is classified as “FI” Category, which applies to all proposed projects that involve 
investment of Bank funds through a financial intermediary (FI). Commonly the specific 
environmental impacts of the subprojects cannot be determined before appraisal of the 
project. Investments in energy saving and energy efficiency investments in the country’s 
housing sector, including new passive family houses and apartment buildings, are not 
expected to cause significant adverse environmental and social impacts and to be located 
in protected areas, critical habitats or culturally or socially sensitive areas. However, 
potential adverse environmental impacts might include: (a) dust and noise due to the 
Page  3
3
demolition and construction; (b) unregulated disposal of demolition and construction 
wastes, accidental spillage of machine oil, lubricants, etc; (c)  pollution and/or changes of 
hydrological regime of the ground waters due to the impacts of heat pumps operating 
within deep strata of ground water; (d) installations of biomass burners might cause 
pressures on fuel wood or other biomass markets and put strain on biomass sources (e.g. 
in extreme cases leading to deforestation). All these potential environmental impacts 
were investigated within an environmental management framework (EMF) and found to 
carry only minor risks, either due to a small magnitude of the expected consequences, or 
due to a very low probability of their occurrence. Overall they were found to be easily 
manageable and mitigeable during the project implementation. 
 
One notable feature about the GIS project is, that the preparation of safeguards 
instruments and mitigation measures for the project follows a special path: During project 
preparation it was recognized that the 
World Bank’s environmental due diligence system 
under OP4.01 and the Czech environmental management system (which is harmonized 
with the relevant EU directives) are closely aligned. Thus under the CZ GIS project the 
two systems will be treated as compatible and environmental due diligence instruments 
will be produced and applied following the Czech system. The EMF analyzes the 
functionality of the Czech system and explains how environmental due diligence as 
required by OP4.01 will be implemented in the project using Czech legal and regulatory 
instruments.   
 
The EMF further describes the specific Czech instruments and mechanism for 
mainstreaming environmental due diligence into the expected small scale construction 
projects (such as location permits, construction permits) and the roles and responsibilities 
for project supervision and monitoring, both from licensing and regulatory authorities and 
the SEF. 
 
Overall the GIS activities will create positive environmental impacts related to reduction 
of greenhouse gas emissions.  Furthermore, the Project is expected to have positive social 
impacts: The upgrading of existing or construction of new residential houses and 
buildings will improve quality of life for the population, especially in rural areas and 
small towns, and would contribute to reduction of air polluting emissions, especially SO
2
and PM
10
,
and greenhouse gases. 
 
As no new construction is planned under the GIS project no land acquisition or 
involuntary displacement of people or businesses will occur.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected long term and cumulative impacts of the activities proposed under the GIS 
are mostly positive and include reduction of air pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions 
as well as improvements of people’s livelihoods by more livable and comfortable 
housing. Potential long term impacts on the bio-fuel market or forests were found to be 
highly unlikely. 
 
Page  4
4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts: 
N/A 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues: 
Using the existing
 
World Bank Safeguard Policies and Procedures for FI projects, an 
Environmental Management Framework was prepared by 
the Client (the “Seller”, 
represented by SEF – CZ State Environmental Fund). The project 
Environment 
Management Framework 
outlines environmental and social assessment procedures and 
mitigation requirements for the subprojects which will be supported by the GIS. It 
provides details on procedures, criteria and responsibilities for subproject screening, 
preparing, implementing and monitoring of subproject specific EAs. It describes the 
assessment of potential impacts and generic mitigation measures to be undertaken for 
identified subprojects in all stages - from identification and selection, through the design 
and implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of results. As the GIS would 
include the support of biomass boilers, the EMF describes the CZ bio-fuel market, bio-
fuel sourcing, including the existing regulatory processes which have ensured and will 
ensure that bio-fuels will continue to be sourced in an environmentally sustainable 
manner and air emissions standards for the proposed biomass boilers are met.  
 
As described in Section A1 above under the CZ GIS project the environmental 
management systems of the Czech Republic and the World Bank will be treated as 
compatible and environmental due diligence instruments will be produced and applied 
following the Czech system. The functionality of the Czech system was thoroughly 
analyzed for all environmental aspects of the project, resulting in the confirmation that 
environmental due diligence as required by OP4.01 will be fully implemented in the 
project using Czech instruments.  
 
For example, construction of new residential structures would be classified as Category B 
under OP 4.01 and would typically require preparation of a simple EMP.  Under the 
Czech regulatory system no EIA or EMP is required for this type of investment, but the 
permitting process, encompassing two steps, the Location Permit and the Construction 
Permit
1
cover the same mitigation measures as would be found in an EMP prepared under 
OP401, such as good construction practice, workplace health and safety, waste 
management, water and groundwater protection etc. The general suitability of the site for 
residential construction is established in the spatial plan, which is compulsory for every 
municipality in CZ and involves, as part of its elaboration, an environmental assessment 
of the plan.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
The Ministry of Environment has disseminated the first draft EMF to its institutions and 
to other relevant ministries for review and comments, also posting (on May 19, 2009) it 
for wide public on SEF web site (www.sfzp.cz) in Czech language. After one week, on 
May 26, 2009, the SEF has conducted a public briefing and consultation meeting on the 
1
In the case of very small houses, a “Notification Document” services in lieu of the Construction Permit 
Page  5
5
documents. Besides participants from the interested state institutions also representatives 
from environmental NGOs, local representatives of the government bodies, such as 
Regional offices (Krajské ú
ady), Chamber of commer
ce (Obchodní komora), Union of 
towns and municipalities (Svaz m
st a obcí) and others took part in the meeting. The 
meeting concluded that the draft EMF covered practically all potential impacts and 
possible mitigation measures. The updated draft document has been disclosed on the GIS 
Program web site (
www.zelenausporam.cz
)
and submitted to InfoShop on April 23, 2010. 
The final version of the EMF was publicly disclosed prior to appraisal.   
 
On sub-project level consultations will be carried out according to Czech regulations, 
which require the notification of neighbors and other potentially affected parties when 
construction works are carried out. For new construction the consent of the neighbors is 
required, rehabilitation and upgrading works require notification of adjacent property 
owners and residents. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
4/22/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
4/23/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
4/23/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
N/A  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Draft Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been disclosed in country and 
InfoShop; Regional Environmental Unit will finalize review of the draft EMF prior to 
appraisal. 
Page  6
6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr. Ahmad Slaibi 
Feb 14, 2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr. Arcadii Capcelea 
Feb 14, 2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Ms. Agi Kiss 
Feb 15, 2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr. John Kellenberg  
Feb 16, 2011 
Comments:   
