Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5693 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/06/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P120191 
Project Name: Kom Ombo Solar Power 
Task Team Leader: Chandrasekar Govindarajalu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 11, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: November 28, 2011 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
170.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
53.00 
 
African Development Bank 
170.00 
 Clean 
Technology 
Fund 
100.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
32.00
355.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to enhance the solar thermal power 
generation capacity in Egypt.  
 
The key results indicators are reduction of GHG emissions, increased share of solar power in 
total power generation and increased electricity production based on national resources   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support the construction and initial operation of the proposed 100 MW Kom 
Ombo CSP plant in Upper Egypt.  The plant is proposed as a public sector project to be 
implemented by the New and Renewable Energy Agency (NREA), which leads the 
implementation of donor financed public sector renewable energy projects in Egypt.  
 
The approach being adopted by the Government in scale-up of CSP is to go with plant 
configurations that can provide reliable power supply, preferably with increasing levels of 
Page  2
dispatchability as compared to wind power, the other new renewable energy technology that is 
being aggressively pursued by the Government.  
 
Different technology configurations are being considered for the project including a solar only 
option, a molten salt thermal storage option, and a solar plant with an auxiliary heating option 
that would allow buffering for cloud passage, reduce start-up time etc.  For the solar field, 
parabolic trough with thermo oil as the heat transfer fluid is proposed in view of the level of 
maturity of this technology at the proposed plant size.   The GOE has stressed its preference for a 
commercially proven technology to the extent possible to minimize risk.  The final selection of 
the technology configuration will be made based on a comprehensive technical, economic, 
environmental and social evaluation of these options as part of the feasibility study.  
 
The development of the Kom Ombo project has been led by NREA and is being supported by 
the kfW, African Development Bank (AfDB) and the World Bank.  These donors are also 
interested in financing the project with European donors led by kfW/Neigborhood Investment 
Facility(NIF) but including European Investment Bank (EIB) and the AfD/NIF.  The GoE also 
expects additional EU grant financing under the National Indicative Programming (NIP) for the 
current period.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The site "Kom Ombo" is located at the boarder of the village Faris, Kom Ombo Municipality just 
outside the green and fertile strip of land in the Nile valley. Kom Ombo is located approximately 
40 km north of Aswan and 150 km to the south of Luxor. The site condition can be described as 
not complex, mainly flat, with a slight slope to the east, and suitable for large scale CSP 
application. Access is given by an excellent paved road connecting Kom Ombo to the desert 
highway Aswan - Luxor.  
 
The total suitable area for a CSP plant installation amounts to approximately 750 ha. The shape 
is almost rectangular which is regarded as suitable. Some very limited levelling will be required 
for the internal access roads.   
 
E
.
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has been financing power projects with international financing institutions for a 
number of years and is thus experienced with the Bank's safeguard polices. The New and 
Renewable Energy Agency (NREA) has gained significant experience in designing and 
implementing wind energy projects and the first pilot CSP project with international loan and 
grant financing. Currently, NREA is implementing a GE-financed solar-thermal power plant in 
Kureimat, and is properly implementing the project's environmental management plan according 
to World Bank standards. Besides NREA often collaborates and draws on assistance from the 
Egyptian Electricity Holding Company (EEHC) which has strong institutional capacity with 
respect to Bank's safeguard policies having several Bank-financed large Category A and 
Category B project under supervision. Forthcoming mission will further assess NREA capacity. 
Egypt has strict environmental regulations on ESIAs in conjunction with large infrastructure 
projects and each ESIA undertaken needs formal approval by the Egyptian Environmental 
Affairs Agency (EEAA).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSO) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Overall, the project is expected have positive environmental and social impacts. Nonetheless, 
negative unintended impacts could also occur during construction and/or operation phases. 
Therefore, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (EISA) will be carried out by an 
independent consultant, according to terms of references which would be reviewed and approved 
by the Bank. The ESIA will evaluate the Operational Policy triggering, and proposed 
Environmental and Social Management Plan, which will include institutional requirements, 
mitigation measures, and monitoring plans.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Determination of the triggering of the Cultural Heritage OP/BP 4.11 will be evaluated: 
during project preparation, once the exact project site has been determined, and during the ESIA 
preparation by an independent consultant, as certain locations in Upper Egypt are known to have 
archeological sites. If triggering of this OP is deemed appropriate, the project would proceed 
only after obtaining the necessary clearances from the Supreme Council of Antiquities (Ministry 
of Culture). At any rate, a chance finds procedure will be prepared as part of the ESIA, to be 
followed by the contractor, in the event of finding any archeological artifacts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The need to trigger OP 4.12 will be assessed during forthcoming missions.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects on International Waters OP/BP7.50 is triggered because the project is located on the 
river Nile, which is an international waterway.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/15/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared. The need to 
trigger OP 4.12 will be assessed during forthcoming mission.  
 
The NREA needs to finalize terms of reference for the (ESIA).  A draft ESIA is planned to 
be available May 11, 2011, while the final ESIA report will be completed in June 11, 2011.  
Consultations with stakeholders and project affected people will be conducted as required for 
compliance with environmental and social safeguards applicable to this investment operation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Chandrasekar Govindarajalu 
12/01/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/02/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
12/06/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
