Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5888 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/07/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P118090 
Project Name: EG-Enhanced Water Resources Management 
Task Team Leader: Yoshiharu Kobayashi 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 19, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2011 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Water resource management (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.68 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.68 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
0.00 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
0.00
6.68 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve water resources management by enhancing the 
capacity and knowledge of the government agencies in water sector in Egypt. This will be 
achieved through: (i) development and testing of pilot schemes for improving synergy and 
coordination among project management units and government agencies implementing water 
projects by promoting the IWRM principles and strengthening the role of stakeholders at the 
lowest possible administrative level including local authorities, water user organizations, women, 
and NGOs; and (ii) support for the institutional and technical capacity and knowledge of the 
government agencies to monitor and manage the available surface water and groundwater more 
effectively and efficiently across the sectoral borders by provision of monitoring equipment, 
capacity building training, and targeted studies on water management and monitoring procedures 
including the climate change impacts.  
 
The global objective of this project is to establish the basis for scaling up investments through 
the Government#s IWRM plan and contribute more significantly to depollution and improved 
Page  2
ecosystem health of the Mediterranean Sea and its biodiversity resources. It is expected that the 
successful operationalization of the IWRM approach and principles in pilot schemes will 
demonstrate the benefits of synergy of the ongoing investment projects and will be replicated in 
the Nile Delta, which will result in increased water use efficiency, and improved water quality 
and livelihood of the poor; which would eventually have a great impact on reducing the pollution 
load flowing into the Mediterranean Sea (the objective of Sustainable MED).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Project will comprise the following three components:  
 
Component 1: Pilot Schemes (GEF - US$1,200,000; GOE -US$2,960,000)  
 
The GEF project is expected to further improve coordination, complementarities, and 
integration across the ongoing water sector projects  in Egypt. Investments from these projects 
will be re-directed and supported by the GEF project  to demonstrate synergy of the integration 
of these sectoral efforts in pilot schemes in the Nile Delta. This integrated approach is expected 
to lead to more efficient and effective water resources management, which will result in (i) 
reduction of transaction costs for the GOE, the Bank, and GEF to implement activities as 
economies of scale will be harnessed, (ii) maximization of the investment benefits as synergy of 
the investments will be generated, and (iii) acceleration of desemination of lessons and 
knowledge learned from pilot activities promoted through the GEF project.  
 
Under this component, pilot areas will be selected to improve surface water and groundwater 
quality mangement and pollution control through applying the principles of IWRM. The GEF 
project will help plan and establish the most efficient sequence of coordinating activities to be 
implemented by the participating projects including consultation and participation of WUAs and 
beneficiaries, monitor and evaluate the implementation process, and establish successful 
procedures for future replication of this IWRM approach in the Nile Delta. The GEF project will 
also provide intensive training for government staff as well as stakeholders at the lowest possible 
administrative level including local authorities, WUAs, women, and NGOs in order to facilitate 
decentralized IWRM.  
 
(i) Surface water pilot scheme (GEF - US$700,000; GOE # US$1,600,000)  
 
This subcomponent will focus on the quality of surface drainage water in the agricultural 
drainage networks in the Nile Delta by helping to integrate the innovative technological and 
management interventions introduced by each of the on-going projects that target improving 
water quality in the agricultural drains in the Nila Delta. Local level IWRM by WUAs will be 
enhanced through intensive technical assistance, capacity development and traing at this pilot 
scheme.  
 
(ii) Groundwater pilot scheme (GEF - US$500,000; GOE # US$1,100,000)  
 
This subcomponent will focus on the water quality management of groundwater in the Nile 
Delta, and its linkage with the surface water and land use practices by helping to improve water 
quality and availability in an area where groundwater is subject to pollution from agricultural, 
municipal and industrial sources. Local level groundwater aquifer management as well as 
conjunctive use of surface and groundwater by WUAs will be enhanced through intensive 
technical assistance, capacity development and training at this pilot scheme.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building for Surface Water and Groundwater Management and 
Monitoring (GEF - US$5,432,000; GOE - US$3,270,000)   
 
The GEF project will also assist the government agencies concerned to strengthen their 
institutional and technical capacity and knowledge in monitoring and managing the surface water 
Page  3
and groundwater more effectively and efficiently across the sectoral borders. This will include 
provision of monitoring equipment, training and modeling, and carrying out strategic studies 
addressing priority issues, to make the most of the available water resources in the Nile River.  
 
(i) 
carrying out strategic studies that would support implementation of the GOE strategic 
objectives for improving water quality and availability;  
 
(ii) 
strengthening water quality modeling capacity of MWRI to support planning and 
decision making related to water management interventions;  
 
(iii) 
strengthening water quality monitoring of the Nile system (the river and its two main 
branches, canals, drains, and Lake Nasser) with emphasis on water quality hot spots where 
drainage water is mixed with irrigation canals for reuse and/or discharged into the Nile River, 
inland lakes, coastal lakes and the Mediterranean Sea;  
 
(iv) 
strengthening groundwater monitoring capacity, particularly in regions with vulunerable 
and sensitive aquifers; and  
 
(v) 
setting plans for nationwide registration, protection and management of wells and testing 
the proposed plan in the West Delta.  
 
As a result, this component will establish enhanced procedures and improved knowledge for 
surface water and groundwater management to increase their availability.  
 
Component 3: Project Management (GEF # US$50,000; GOE - US$450,000)  
 
Considering its broad scope and many stakeholders to be involved in implementaiton of this 
project, it is crucial to have an effective project implementation unit (PIU). Also, it is expected 
that the project will generate a lot of useful information, improved knowledge and strengthened 
capacity for IWRM. In this regard, this component will provide support for PIU and facilitate 
knowledge sharing. It will include the following:  
 
(i)  
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) - investment to strengthen the PIU; and  
 
(ii)  
IW Learn - a tracking tool for reporting and disseminating lessons learned, and 
investment for sharing information at the international water conferences.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nile Delta, Nile River, and Aswan High Dam in Egypt.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Stakeholders of the proposed project will include Line Ministries of GOE such as the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Ministry of Environment, research centers, universities, local authorities, 
WUAs, community leaders, interest groups, and NGOs. The existing WUAs established by the 
IIIMP could be a platform for coordination at the local level and their role will be further 
enhanced by the project to be able to address water quality issues more seriously. A Steering 
Committee (SC) comprising the representatives of stakeholders will be established to facilitate 
the project implementation. The on-going Bank projects are implemented through existing 
PMUs/PIUs and they are expected to be represented in the SC and play an important 
coordinating role.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gabriel Dedu (MNSSD) 
Mr Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany (ECSS1) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project will help improve water quality of the drains in the Nile Delta by introducing 
integrated pest management as one of its means to reduce contamination by pesticides in the 
farmlands.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The project will improve management of Aswan High Dam in order to increase available 
water for irrigation, which may trigger this safeguard policy. The team will consult with Bank's 
dam specialist on this during preparation of the project.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/27/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
06/27/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
desk study for social and environmental assessment using the documents of ongoing 
projects whose funds will be redirected to carry out pilot schemes in the Delta.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yoshiharu Kobayashi 
04/06/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/06/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francis Ato Brown 
04/06/2011 
Comments:   
