Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/25/2011 
Report No.:  AC5878
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID:  P120161 
Project Name:  EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2 
Task Team Leader:  Parameswaran Iyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (65%);Sewerage (35%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (33%);Pollution management and 
environmental health (33%);Water resource management (17%);Access to urban services 
and housing (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
100.00
100.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to provide the targeted population in the 
Governorates of Menoufia, Sharkeya, Assiut and Sohag increased access to improved 
sanitation and sewerage services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The three components of ISSIP2 are:  
 
Component 1: Wastewater infrastructure systems in rural areas within the two Delta 
Governorates of Menoufia and Sharkeya (Estimated cost US$150 million).  
 
Component 1 will provide wastewater infrastructure systems for households within the 
targeted areas using appropriate technology. It will provide sewerage systems comprising 
wastewater treatment plants and/or collection networks connection (gravity sewers and 
pump stations) for villages within 8 clusters in the two project Governorates. 
Page  2
Decentralized treatment systems may be incorporated into the project design subject to 
their being successfully piloted in ISSIP.  
 
Component 2: Wastewater infrastructure systems in rural areas within the two Upper 
Egypt Governorates of Assiut and Sohag (Estimated cost US$150 million).  
 
Component 2 will provide wastewater infrastructure systems for households within the 
targeted areas using appropriate technology. It will provide sewerage systems comprising 
wastewater treatment plants and/or collection networks connection (gravity sewers and 
pump stations) for villages within 10 clusters in the two project Governorates. 
Decentralized treatment systems may be incorporated into the project design subject to 
their being successfully piloted in ISSIP.  
 
Component 3: Project Management (Estimated cost US$10 million).  
 
Component 3 will finance (a) project management costs at HCWW and subsidiary water 
and sanitation company levels; (b) construction supervision; (c) environmental and social 
management and (d) training and utility strengthening activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will target priority rural areas in the Governorates of Sharkeya, Menoufia, 
Assuit and Sohag. Two of these Governorates are in the Nile Delta (Sharkeya and 
Menoufia) while the other two are further south in the Nile Valley (Assiut and Sohag). 
This distinct geographical separation creates two somewhat different settings in terms of 
the project intervention areas. The more spatially spread yet heavily populated Nile Delta 
is covered by a vast network of irrigation and drainage canals with relatively distinct 
basins (with the drainage canals flowing to the North and ultimately disposing into the 
Northern lakes).  This creates an opportunity to plan and implement sanitation schemes 
that cover complete basins in line with the planning methodology adopted under the first 
Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage Infrastructure Projects (ISSIP) currently under 
implementation. The Nile Valley Governorates on the other hand are horizontally 
confined with agriculture and urban development limited to relatively narrow stretches on 
both sides of the Nile River which receives return flow from the drainage canals.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mariana T. Felicio (MNSSO) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No significant environmental impacts are expected from the project implementation. As 
such, the project is classified as Category B according to the Bank#s Operational Policy 
OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. Due to project spatial extent, and the fact that 
detailed design will follow during project implementation, an environmental and social 
assessment framework (ESAF) was prepared. This will be followed with scoped 
environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs) for each project implementation 
phase of specific clusters.  
 
The overall social impact of the project is considered highly positive as it will improve 
access to sanitation and sewerage services as well as improve environmental conditions 
of the rural poor.  Data collected through in-depth interviews and focus group discussions 
as part of the social assessment reveal that the most common ailments are those related to 
the digestive system, kidney failures, skin conditions and eye allergies.  As such, the 
project will have a direct positive impact on the livelihoods and health of the populations 
in the target villages, particularly of women and children who are the most affected by 
the poor sanitary conditions.  
 
OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement has been triggered because land acquisition is 
expected therefore a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared.Negative 
impacts are associated with temporary and/or permanent land acquisition, temporary 
disturbances in circulation and access, noise, air quality (associated with odor and 
pollution), public health and safety issues while operation, and influx of temporary 
workers.   These impacts are in general limited and considered manageable through the 
establishment of necessary mitigation measures as detailed in the ESAF and RPF.  
 
Consultations were held in the four target Governorates with the participation of key 
local stakeholders including community members, Local Authority leaders, CDAs, WSC 
staff, and governmental authorities on: (1) Assiut: November 8, 2010; (2) Sohag: 
Page  4
November 9, 2010; (3) Menoufia: November 22, 2010; and (4) Sharkeya: December 30, 
2010 .  
 
The key issues raised were the need and willingness to pay for services and questions 
about cost of connections. The ESAF and RPF have been disclosed in the InfoShop in 
accordance with World Bank policies on January 13, 2011, prior to Appraisal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main potential indirect impact is associated with increased generation of treated 
wastewater is the production of sludge from the wastewater treatment plant. This, 
however, is not an issue since Egypt has had extensive experience in the management of 
wastewater treatment plants and the management of the ensuing sludge. The detailed 
design will determine the optimal method for sludge management, such as dewatering, 
using drying beds, and final disposal.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As part of the ESAF, alternative technical and siting approaches were evaluated, from a 
technical, environmental, and social view points. Furthermore, the ESAF evaluates the 
no-project alternative, which was rejected as it risks perpetuating the poor sanitation 
conditions in the rural areas in the four Governorates. Specific alternatives, however, will 
be finalized and selected during the final feasibility study and detailed design, to be 
conducted during project implementation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Egypt has a relatively good legal and regulatory framework (Law 04/1994, updated in 
2009), and the related guidelines on preparation of Environmental Impact Assessment 
studies related to environmental and social protection, which became effective in July 
2009. These guidelines include clearly defined requirements for environmental 
assessment and mitigation, including the requirements for public consultation and 
disclosure. Similarly, GoE also has established general provisions for prior compensation 
of expropriated assets which is initiated and executed at the central, local and community 
levels, and implemented by Egyptian General Authority for Land Survey (#ESA#).  GoE 
has prepared, through two independent consulting firms, an Environmental and Social 
Assessment Framework (ESAF) for the four project governorates, which were disclosed 
prior to appraisal and which highlight issues to be addressed in the project#s 
Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Framework (ESMMF). The 
ESMMF provides the framework for managing the environmental and social impacts 
anticipated. The main entities responsible for project implementation, the Holding 
Company for Water & Wastewater (HCWW) and the National Organization for Potable 
Water and Sanitary Drainage (NOPWASD), are currently involved in the implementation 
of the first ISSIP and have thus gained additional capacity with regards to World Bank 
safeguard policies, in addition to their knowledge of Egyptian regulations. Additional 
training will be provided to environmental and social experts within the project 
Page  5
implementation units to raise their capacity with regards to the implementation and 
management of the environmental and social management plans.  
 
Two RPFs have been prepared, following the same logic as the ESAF, which provide a 
framework that provides expropriation procedures, valuation and compensation, 
grievance procedures, administrative mechanisms and appeal to court and legal 
requirements for disclosure has been prepared. The implementation of the RPF will be 
closely monitored once specific project sites have been identified by both the HCWW 
and the World Bank during project implementation to ensure compliance with 
entitlements and procedures documented in the RPF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations were held in the four target Governorates with the participation of key 
local stakeholders including community members, Local Authority leaders, Community 
Development Associations (CDAs), WSC staff, and governmental authorities.  In Upper 
Egypt, the target populations were informed about the consultations through 
announcements and through the official newspaper (Al-Ahram) prior to the consultation 
dates.  The consultations were held on November 8, 2010 in Assiut and on November 9, 
2010 in Sohag.  The consultations were held on November 22, 2010 in Menoufia and 
December 30, 2010 in Sharkeya and were advertised in two main newspapers and 
through direct outreach to potential target village leaders.  
 
High demand for the provision of sanitation and sewerage services was consistently 
expressed in the consultation, focus group discussions, in-depth interviews and 
questionnaires administered in all four Governorates.  Key issues discussed were 
people#s willingness to pay and cost of connections.  In-depth interviews revealed that a 
large informal group working in the area of sewerage disposal.  They are involved in 
emptying the trenches and the collected sewerage disposal, generally done in highly 
unhygienic conditions.  As a result, target populations already pay high prices for 
emptying their trenches by private operators. The consultations confirmed community 
willingness to participate and support the project.  Issues about the transparency of the 
village selection criteria and implementation delays were raised.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/13/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/13/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/13/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/13/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/13/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/13/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  7
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Parameswaran Iyer 
01/14/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Alaa Ahmed Sarhan 
01/19/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Gabriel Dedu 
01/19/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Gael A. Gregoire 
01/20/2011 
Comments:  Acting for Hocine Chalal, Regional Safeguards Coordinator 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Francis Ato Brown 
01/19/2011 
Comments:   
