Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5676 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/06/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P117407 
Project Name: EG - Helwan South Power Project 
Task Team Leader: Vladislav Vucetic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 2, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2011 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
385.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1,400.00
1,400.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to increase electricity generation capacity and thus help 
improve reliability and security of electricity supply in the country.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The main component of the proposed project is the construction of the Helwan South power 
plant, which will have the capacity of 1,300 MW (2x650 MW) and use supercritical steam 
technology. The plant will be cooled by the water from the Nile River and use natural gas as the 
main fuel and heavy fuel oil as the back-up.  The plant will be connected to the electricity 
transmission network through a gas-insulated substation and high-voltage transmission lines. The 
project will also include: engineering and project management services to cover project design, 
procurement, construction supervision, testing, and commissioning; the implementation of the 
environmental and social management plan; and wrap-up insurance.  
 
The project may include technical assistance in some of the following areas: energy efficiency, 
investment financing, improved policy framework for private investment, pricing and subsidies, 
and sector regulation and governance. The components and the content of the technical 
assistance will be identified and firmed up during project preparation.   
 
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
The site of the proposed project is located on the east side of the Nile, about 8 km south of the 
Kureimat power plant complex. The site which covers about 90 feddans is owned by the Upper 
Egypt Electricity Production Company (UEEPC), and has the shape of a trapezoid with the 
shorter side (800 m) facing the Nile and the longer side (1 km) facing east. It is located on desert 
land between the river and the main road. The distance from the west side of the site to the Nile 
ranges from 150 to 300 meters, and the land in this area is farmed. The farmer in question owns 
about 27 feddans along the east river bank. An estimated 2 feddans may need to be expropriated 
to construct the intake and discharge.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has been financing power projects with international financing institutions for a 
number of years and is thus experienced with the Bank's safeguard polices. Egyptian Electricity 
Holding Company (EEHC) has strong institutional capacity with respect to Bank's safeguard 
policies having four Bank-financed large Category A and Category B projects under supervision. 
Forthcoming mission will assess UEEPC capacity. Egypt has strict environmental regulations on 
ESIAs in conjunction with large infrastructure projects and each ESIA undertaken needs formal 
approval by the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSO) 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava (SARDE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The ESIA will examine whether the safeguards OP/BP 4.04 (on Natural Habitats) will be 
triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The ESIA will examine whether the safeguards OP/BP 4.11 (on Physical Cultural 
Resources)will be triggered. Regardless of whether OP 4.11 is triggered, a chance finds 
procedure will be prepared as part of the ESIA.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No resettlement of people is expected to take place under the project. Some very limited land 
acquisition may be needed for the associated infrastructure - transmission line and gas pipeline.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects on International Waters OP/BP7.50 is triggered because the project is located on the 
river Nile, which is an international waterway.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/18/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) will be prepared. The ESIA will include preparing baseline information on 
environment and social aspects; identification and evaluation of environment and social 
impacts resulting from construction and operation of power plants as well as from the 
associated infrastructure such as transmission lines; gas pipeline, road infrastructure and 
water supply lines.  
 
The UEEPC has finalized terms of reference for the (ESIA).  A draft ESIA and draft RAP 
(or Resettlement Policy Framework # RPF, if more appropriate at that stage) are expected to 
be available in December 2010, while the final versions of these documents are expected to 
be completed in January 2011.  Consultations with stakeholders and project affected people 
are planned to be carried out at least twice, during the scoping stage and as soon as the draft 
ESIA has been completed.  
 
The ESIA will be prepared by an independent, third-part, environmental/social consultants, 
in line with the requirements for Category A projects.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vladislav Vucetic 
12/01/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/02/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
12/06/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
