Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/22/2011 
Report No.:  AC5968
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P050272 
Original Project Name: Ethiopia - Private 
Sector Development Capacity Building 
Project 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P122463 
Project Name:  Private Sector Development Capacity Building - Additional Financing 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Asya Akhlaque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTFE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (60%);Central government administration 
(32%);Tertiary education (8%) 
Theme:  Export development and competitiveness (29%);State enterprise/bank 
restructuring and privatization (29%);Other financial and private sector development 
(14%);Regulation and competition policy (14%);Small and medium enterprise support 
(14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to enhance the competitiveness and growth of the 
light manufacturing industries in the Ethiopian economy; and accelerate the process of 
divestiture of public enterprises.   
 
3. Project Description 
This goal will be achieved by (1) bridging the financing gap for the implementation of its 
Privatization Program of commercial public sector enterprises; and (2) augmenting the 
resources for the Ethiopian Competitiveness Facility (ECF) that administers matching 
grants (MG) for exporting firms; and chambers of commerce and sectoral associations. In 
Page  2
addition, the AF proposes (i) to extend the ECF grants to enterprises in light 
manufacturing industries that also cater to domestic markets on a competitive basis, for 
products that would otherwise be imported; (ii) to provide support to  the recently 
established Ethiopian Public-Private Consultative Forum (EPPCF) Secretariat that aims 
to address sector-specific and cross-cutting policy and implementation matters; (iii) to 
support Ministry of Industry's efforts to develop a Special Economic Zone Strategy, and 
framework for Ethiopia; and (iv) to strengthen the existing Project Management and ECF 
units for successful implementation of the program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component One - Accelerating the Implementation of Privatization Program has been 
assisting the Government in accelerating the implementation of its Privatization Action 
Plan by providing technical and financial support to the Privatization and Public 
Enterprises Supervising Agency (PPESA). The PAD identified 55 of the total 155 State 
Owned Enterprises (SOEs) that would be privatized under this project. These 55 SOEs 
are a subset of the total of 123 SOEs that was slated for privatization by 2013 in the 
Privatization Action Plan drafted by GoE. These 55 SOEs were selected on the basis of 
their strategic importance, the size of the enterprise and the need for environment 
assessments. This component aims at broadening the range of divestiture modalities 
including asset sale, concessions, leasing, joint ventures, management contracts, etc, 
adopting market-oriented, open, transparent and competitive bidding processes, and 
supporting voluntary retrenchment of workers from state enterprises.  
 
This component includes (a) Institutional capacity building of PPESA; (b) transaction 
advisory services to the divestiture process; and (c) design and sharing the costs of 
implementation of the voluntary redundancy packages in the public enterprises slated for 
privatization that would provide a package of benefits, which may comprise of voluntary 
redundancy, early retirement, counseling, retraining and placement, for redundant 
workers; (d) environmental audits for 96 SOEs and (e) studies to monitor compliance by 
investors with contract covenants.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS) 
Ms Almudena Mateos Merino (YPP) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
An environmental pre-audit, funded through the PHRD grant, was undertaken for 155 
enterprises under PPESA in the first project. The study identified 24 enterprises requiring 
full environmental audits, 72 for partial audit and the rest requiring no further work. 
PPESA has completed the Environmental Audits (EAs) of the 96 SOEs, which pertain to 
the following sectors: chemical, breweries, leather, mining and mineral, agriculture, 
cement, construction, food, pharmaceutical and health, printing, transport, wood and 
basic metal and engineering. The audits dealt with assessment of the prevailing 
environmental risks for each of the firms, and determined the implications and the actions 
that need to be taken to mitigate the risks including cost estimates. Based on the audits, 
the client has prepared an EMP; specific action plans for each SOE will be prepared as 
the SOEs are privatized. The RPF has been prepared to mitigate potential triggering of 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement when the remaining SOEs are offered to the private 
investors. The RPF is based on a rapid social audit of the remaining 28 SOEs through 
field surveys. The assessment of affected people in the preparation of the RPF did not 
consider management of excess labor in public enterprises being considered for 
privatization. It is understood that compensation for any restructuring and elimination of 
job redundancies (retrenchment) is to be covered under the Voluntary Retrenchment 
Program. This RPF will only apply to the encroachers earning a livelihood within the 
legal premises of the SOE. PPESA has also agreed to undertake an assessment of the 
Voluntary Retrenchment Program. This assessment will take into account: applicable 
labor and social security laws, implementation of a transparent process for managing the 
restructuring/retrenchment, a communications strategy, and preparation of a social 
assessment for the people affected by the restructuring/retrenchment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long term potential direct or indirect impacts due to anticipated future 
activities.   
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This is a privatization project of a specific number of State Owned Enterprises. The 
environmental and social impacts will be mitigated by the implementation of an 
Environmental Management Plan aimed at putting in place corrective actions based on 
the results of the environmental audits and a Resettlement Policy Framework to mitigate 
potential involuntary resettlement or loss of assets and livelihood.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In preparation for the additional financing, the client has prepared a Resettlement Policy 
Framework. The RPF is required as a safeguards instrument as the number and identity of 
the industries and businesses associated to the remaining SOEs to be privatized is not yet 
clear. In addition, the client has prepared an EMP based on the environmental audits 
undertaken in 2008-2009.  
 
It was agreed with PPESA that the monitoring of the EMP and application of the RPF 
will be the responsibility of PPESA. To support the monitoring, PPESA is in the process 
of hiring an environmental and social specialist. These two experts would be responsible 
for, inter alia: providing support, on a needs basis, in the development and 
implementation of Resettlement Action Plans as per the guidelines provided in the RPF 
and the implementation of the Environmental Management Plans for each enterprise. 
These experts will also be responsible for the assessment of the Voluntary Retrenchment 
Program. The responsibility of financing the EMP and RAPs will be the responsibility of 
PPESA.  
 
In addition, the project will prepare an environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) as a long term strategy for PPESA to manage the environmental and 
social impacts of future investments.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The preparation of the EMP and the RPF has taken place in consultation with the 
stakeholders, including PPESA, the project implementation staff, the managers of the 
SOEs and the potentially impacted communities. The list of participants is included as an 
annex in the RPF and EMP. The consultants have discussed and shared the draft with 
PPESA and PIU, and have incorporated their comments prior to the disclosure of both the 
documents. The report on the consultations is incorporated in both the EMP and the RPF, 
including the list of participants.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/09/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/09/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  6
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Asya Akhlaque 
02/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Almudena Mateos Merino 
02/22/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab 
02/22/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/22/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michael J. Fuchs 
02/22/2011 
Comments:   
