Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2011 
Report No.:  AC6095
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P101474 
Original Project Name: Urban Local Govt 
Development Project 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P125316 
Project Name:  Urban Local Govt Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Abebaw Alemayehu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (55%);Roads and highways (15%);Solid 
waste management (10%);General industry and trade sector (10%);General water, 
sanitation and flood protection sector (10%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (29%);Municipal governance and 
institution building (29%);Decentralization (28%);Municipal finance (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
58.00
58.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to support improved performance in the planning, 
delivery and sustained provision of priority municipal services and infrastructure by 
urban local governments   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing will be used to support the same types of activities as in the 
original project which has two components. Performance grants (Component 1) will 
support a grant transfer mechanism in the form of a conditional specific purpose grant 
fully integrated within the intergovernmental fiscal framework to Ethiopia's urban local 
governments. Under this component activity such as local roads, water, sanitation, solid 
waste management, markets, terminals, and other infrastructure for which urban local 
governments are responsible will be supported.   The second Component 
(Implementation support) will finance the management activities associated with program 
Page  2
implementation, including establishment and operation of a monitoring and evaluation 
system, studies, training, and technical assistance.  
 
Over all, the proposed Additional Financing would permit the scale-up of the project's 
impact and development effectiveness, by: (a) enabling the currently participating 19 
cities to continue to improve their performance in several areas covered by strengthened 
performance criteria, as well as in creating critical infrastructure and in delivering 
services; and (b) building basic capacities in the areas of capital investment plan 
preparation, asset management, financial management, revenue enhancement, 
procurement, environment and social management in an additional 12 cities, to prepare 
them for participation in a subsequent program.  
 
The Additional Financing will be used to support the same types of activities as in the 
original project, specifically local roads, water, sanitation, solid waste management, 
markets, terminals, and other infrastructure for which urban local governments are 
responsible.  As with the original project, funds will be provided through performance 
grants.  This approach has proven highly successful in focusing the administrations of 
urban local governments on performance in planning, budgeting, financial management, 
preparation and implementation of participatory capital investment plans, operations and 
maintenance, and preparation and implementation of revenue enhancement plans, asset 
management plans and of safeguard management   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project supports 19 urban local governments, including Addis Ababa and four 
regional capitals.  The 19 cities are home to about 5 million people, or 42 percent of 
Ethiopia's urban population.  The urban local governments will prepare capital 
investment plans annually, which will identify the specific subprojects that they will 
undertake during the coming year.  Specific project sites are not yet known.  Therefore, to 
ensure that the subprojects are implemented in accordance with the Bank's Safeguard 
Policies, project implementers will apply the existing Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address 
potential impacts on the environment, physical cultural resources, and social issues 
associated with resettlement.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS) 
Mr Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
There are no likely large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with 
the project. The project will provide performance grants which will constitute the vast 
majority of the project funds and which will be disbursed based on cities performance 
across a range of measures, one of which is compliance with the Bank's Safeguard 
Policies.  Given that the specific locations of individual investments are not known in 
advance of cities' preparation of their annual capital investment plans, an ESMF and a 
RPF have been prepared to address the potential negative environmental and social 
impacts. Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action 
Plans(RAPs) will be Prepared as and when necessary.  
 
Anticipated capital investments include roads, drainage, water and sanitation services, 
solid waste management, markets, terminals, and other infrastructure for which urban 
local governments are responsible.  The potential direct environmental impacts associated 
with these investments include: damage/destruction to cultural heritage, soil erosion, 
exploitation of natural resources, and depletion and pollution of surface and ground water 
resources.  Potential social impacts may arise from: traffic accidents, exposure to toxic 
waste and communicable diseases, and involuntary resettlement. The potential negative 
impacts of the investments will be minimized and mitigated through careful planning for 
investments and vigilant supervision of their implementation.  
 
Although ULGDP infrastructure projects may individually have insignificant adverse 
environmental and social impacts, several projects in combination could have larger, 
more significant cumulative impacts.  To avoid and mitigate the likely cumulative 
impacts, it is highly recommended in the ESMF and RFP documents that individual 
projects should be planned carefully based on sound technical knowledge of the location, 
size, and material requirements of infrastructural projects.   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
See above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an ESMF and RPF to minimize and mitigate potentially 
negative environmental and social impacts.  It has also recently prepared an 
environmental and Social management guideline for cobblestone quarry sites.  As some 
80 percent of project finance is used to build cobblestone roads, this is an important 
document.  The Government and the Bank will moniotr its use throuoghout project 
implementation.  During implementation of the original project, an environmental impact 
assessment (ESIA), an environmental and social management plan (ESMP), and a 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for a sanitary landfill subporject were prepared, as the 
latter involved land acquisiton and the loss of farm and grazing land of some house holds. 
The Urban Governance Capacity Building Office (UGCBO) serves as the coordinating 
body across federal, regional, and local agencies. All cities routinely conduct 
environmental and social screening for the ULGDP projects and there is a very 
encouraging trend of screening other projects outside ULGDP.  In all the cities, 
environmental and social screening is done for all capital investment projects by the city. 
This contributes significantly to the achievement of the main objective of ULGDP which 
focuses on mainstreaming the project approach into the exiting institutions of systems 
and procedures.  There is also close collaboration between regional bodies and the cities, 
especially with respect to environmental and social safeguard issues.  The regional 
environmental protection authorities (REPAs) provide input into the screening process by 
reviewing the screening form, determining the appropriate level of environmental work 
for each subproject and visiting project sites as necessary.  In some regions, the bureaus 
have introduced certification of environmental and social screening for projects 
implemented by cities, and requires renewal each year.  
 
UGCBO is maintaining on its staff environmental and social development specialists, 
whose responsibilities include supervising the overall implementation of the ESMF and 
RPF, providing support to other agencies that have a role to play such as the 
Environmental Council, the Ethiopian Environmental Protection Agency, regional 
bureaus, regional urban planning institutes and urban local governments.  
 
Furthermore, the government carries out periodic ESMF and RPF training targeting 
various audiences.  Training and sensitization will continue to be undertaken for the 
following groups:  
 
Page  5
Regional Bureaus of Urban Development and Construction, Regional Environmental 
Bureaus, and other key desk officers (water, roads, health, education, etc.).  
 
#
Councilors, mayor, and city managers), heads of bureaus, professional staff in key line 
bureaus, environmental staff, and infrastructure office staff.  
 
#
Line agencies at regional levels.  
 
#
UGCBO staff and other staff of the ministry involved in implementing the ULGDP.  
 
The government has prepared Guideline for managing environmental and social  issues 
associated with cobblestone quarry sites.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In compliance with World Bank guidelines and in the Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) proclamation, before an investment project is approved, the applicable documents 
(EIA, Environmental Management Plan, Cultural Resources Management Plan and/or 
Resettlement Action Plan) will be developed in consultation with the impacted 
communities and made available for public review at a place accessible to local people 
(for example, at a local government office like kebele council, urban local government 
and regional bureaus, the Ethiopian Environmental Protection Authority), and in a form, 
manner, and language they can understand, prior to the start of any physical works.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/26/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/21/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/07/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/26/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/21/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/07/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abebaw Alemayehu 
03/21/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Asferachew Abate Abebe 
03/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab 
03/21/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/30/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
03/30/2011 
Comments:   
