Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/12/2011 
Report No.:  AC6158
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P092353 
Original Project Name: Irrigation and 
Drainage Project 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P125307 
Project Name:  Irrigation and Drainage 
Task Team Leader:  Francois Onimus 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 6, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
18.70
18.70 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Ethiopia Irrigation and Drainage Project development objective is to sustainably 
increase agricultural output and productivity in the Project Area. This will be achieved by 
developing 20,000 ha of irrigation and appurtenant infrastructure (17,000 ha net 
irrigated), and providing support to the Government and the project beneficiaries for 
agricultural and market development and for sustainable irrigation management.  
 
The proposed additional financing (AF) would help complete the original project 
objectives in the context of an unanticipated financing gap. Detailed engineering designs 
have produced higher cost estimates than the preliminary cost estimates based on the 
conceptual design used for the purposes of project appraisal.  The additional funding will 
allow the Borrower to complete the construction of the two large irrigation schemes 
initially included in the project to their full extent.  Despite the significant cost increase, 
the revised economic analysis shows a strong positive return of the proposed investment.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The expected project results include: (i) improved access to water on about 17,000 
hectares of land through investments in infrastructure; (ii) improved access to markets for 
inputs and produce through support to targeted supply chains and promotion of 
SME/SMIs; (iii) effective management of irrigation through public-private partnerships 
and strengthening of capacities of water users associations; and (iv) satisfactory project 
management and efficient use of resources.  
 
The project also aims to support the Nile Basin Initiative and contribute to improved 
cooperation between Nile riparian countries. Investments under the project will show the 
tangible benefits that accrue to the improved understanding on the part of the Nile 
riparians. All parties benefit from continued commitment to the agreements reached 
under the NBI, and the project contributes to sustaining that momentum.  
 
Lending Instrument  
 
The lending instrument for this operation is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL). The 
implementation period is eight years with an original closing date on October 31, 2015. 
The project duration will be extended by two years to cope with initial delays related to 
the detailed design of the irrigation schemes. The project duration is longer than a 
conventional operation because of the scope of the project which includes detailed 
design, then construction and capacity building and institutional strengthening to ensure 
the sustainability of the project.  
 
The total cost of the project is increased from US$ 110 million originally to US$178.7 
million. The IDA contribution, which was originally US$100 million and was reduced to 
US$90 million in 2009 for the food crisis emergency response is now increased to 
US$150 million resulting in a US$60 million additional financing.  
 
Project Components  
 
The proposed project comprises three technical components: (i) Irrigation Development; 
(ii) Agricultural and Market Development; and (iii) Irrigation Management. The fourth 
component is Program Management. The project will support the Lake Tana growth 
corridor and will closely work together with other operations such as the Tana Beles 
project and the Agricultural Growth Program.  
 
Component 1: Irrigation Development  
 
The objective of this component is to sustainably develop about 17,000 ha net of ground 
and surface water infrastructure and ascertain future irrigation potential in 80,000 ha. The 
component will directly benefit participating households, expected to number 
approximately 16,000.  
 
The component will finalize feasibility and detailed design studies, prepare bidding 
documents and launch tenders for construction and construction supervision, and develop 
Page  3
irrigation infrastructure supplying about 17,000 hectares. The component will also 
conduct feasibility studies into 80,000 hectares of irrigated agriculture and will conduct a 
number of additional studies. Finally, the component will promote low-cost irrigation 
technologies in low-lying areas around Lake Tana. Specifically, the project will finance 
the following sub-components:  
 
(i) 
Sub-component 1.1 - Irrigation Investments. Development of about 20,000 
hectares of irrigation and appurtenant infrastructure (17,000 ha net), including completion 
of technical feasibility and detailed design studies, implementation of works, and 
construction supervision. Two sites have been retained for development: Megech and 
Ribb. The component will also promote existing low-cost individual irrigation 
technologies, and will pilot groundwater development around lake Tana. All studies, 
construction and construction supervision will be outsourced to the private sector. 
Beneficiaries will be expected to contribute to overall investment costs.  
 
(ii) 
Sub-component 1.2 - Technical Assistance. The project will prepare feasibility 
studies for up to 80,000 hectares of new irrigation development in selected sites, 
including Anger, Upper Beles, Negesso and Megech. Anger will be taken up to design 
level, if the feasibility study confirms its viability. A number of additional studies will be 
conducted, including appropriate irrigation legislation, support for the completion of an 
irrigation strategy and establishment of a national irrigation maintenance fund for the 
maintenance of public irrigation infrastructure. Studies also include ways to improve the 
efficient use of irrigation water, and the preparation of an institutional framework for 
large- and medium-scale irrigation development and management.  
 
(iii) 
Sub-component 1.3 - Environmental and Social Assessments. The project will 
provide support to the GoE in conducting environmental and social assessments of 
investments in hydraulic infrastructure to help ensure that these meet internationally 
accepted standards. The assistance will not be limited to infrastructure immediately 
associated with the project, but will be extended to Anger Dam as well. Dam Safety 
policy will also be applied to Megech Dam. The component will finance implementation 
of the recommendations of the Environmental Management Plans in the project area. 
Payment of compensations for resettlement is also included in the project costs but is 
entirely the responsibility of the GoE.  
 
Component 2: Agricultural and Market Development  
 
The objective of this component is to promote sustainable intensification and 
commercialization of agriculture on the irrigation schemes developed by the project. The 
component will contribute to the project development objective of assisting the GOE in 
identifying investments in irrigation that are cost effective, environmentally and socially 
sound, beneficial to the rural poor, and to finance such investments adding approximately 
20,000 hectares to irrigated area. The component will provide resources to assure the 
delivery of adaptive research and development (R&D) on improved production systems 
and technologies, the delivery of agricultural advisory services including increased 
pluralism in service, the strengthening of research-extension-farmer linkages, and the 
Page  4
improvement of market linkages within the project target woredas (districts) and kebeles 
(sub-districts). Activities under this component will be implemented by the regional 
agricultural bureau and complement the interventions of the Rural Capacity Building 
Project (RCBP) and Agricultural Growth Project (AGP) in the project areas.  
 
Sub-components and activities to be funded are the following:  
 
(i) 
Sub-component 2.1 - capacity-building for farmers in irrigated production through 
the delivery of adaptive R&D and farm management tools that will enable them to take 
full advantage of irrigation infrastructure and technologies;  
 
(ii) 
Sub-component 2.2 - capacity-building for applied research and extension 
services to improve the delivery of relevant agricultural and farm management advice; 
and  
 
(iii) 
Sub-component 2.3 - market and value chain development, as well as a matching 
grant mechanism, to help commercial entities (SME/SMIs, including farmer owned 
entities) take advantage of market opportunities and develop value chains.  
 
Component 3: Irrigation Management  
 
The objective of this component is to enhance the efficiency and the financial 
sustainability of irrigation infrastructure intended for implementation and future study. 
Doing so will help ensure that investments in irrigation infrastructure under Component 1 
will be sustainable. This will be accomplished in two ways: (i) strengthening the capacity 
of water user associations to enhance their constituency base and to carry out necessary 
O&M and cost recovery functions; and (ii) promoting and implementing a greater role for 
public-private partnerships in irrigation infrastructure management in order to improve 
efficiency and operational performance.   
 
These services will be delivered by a contracted operator who will be in charge of 
design review and endorsement, construction supervision and operation and maintenance 
of the irrigation and drainage facilities and access roads for a given period of time. The 
operator will also contribute to the establishment of the Irrigation Water User 
Associations (IWUA) through capacity building and delivery of various services, with a 
view to establish a financially viable and sustainable structure to handle the O&M of the 
scheme after the end of the management contract.  
 
The component includes the following sub-components:  
 
(i) 
Sub-component 3.1 - Developing and Strengthening Capacity of Water User 
Associations: this will include (a) implementation of an intensive program of stakeholder 
consultations and dissemination of information to farmers; (b) establishment of legally 
recognized water user groups, (c) implementation of demand-based approaches to system 
planning and design for Ribb and Megech schemes; and (d) strengthening capacities of 
farmers, WUAs and regional and national irrigation extension staff on issues associated 
with irrigated agriculture, and assistance to MoWE and local authorities to make sure that 
Page  5
they play a supporting role in the enforcement of WUA rules and regulations. The costs 
of this sub-component will include a provision for the shortfall in O&M cost recovery 
from water users during the initial years of scheme operations, and the O&M costs of 
primary public irrigation infrastructure. It also includes the cost of construction 
supervision which is going to be done by the same operator.  
 
(ii) 
Sub-component 3.2 - Promoting the Role of Private Operators in Irrigation 
Infrastructure Planning and Operation: this will include advisory and transaction TA to 
implement the Ribb and Megech transaction models, and identification of other possible 
opportunities within the remaining 80,000 hectares of feasibility study. The sub-
component will assess risks associated with each scheme, consult with Government and 
farmer groups on risk allocation, communicate with stakeholder groups, develop legal 
agreements and bid documents, launch a search program for both foreign and local 
bidders, and manage the bid and contract negotiations.  
 
Component 4: Program Management.  
 
The objective of this component is to manage resources in accordance with the project 
objectives and procedures. It will finance the following sub-components:  
 
(i) 
Sub-component 4.1 - Management of the Project, including: (a) provision of 
technical assistance, training, office equipment and vehicles, minor office upgrading 
works, auditing and evaluation studies, and incremental operating costs in support of 
project management; (b) overall project planning, outsourcing of quality oversight 
through independent financial and technical audits and evaluation of project activities; 
and (c) strengthening procurement and financial management capacity at all levels.  
 
(ii) 
Sub-component 4.2 - Establish a Monitoring and Evaluation system. Determine 
project specific performance based MIS system, based on baseline survey arrange for 
data collection and reporting on key performance output and impact indicators, through 
surveys, participatory assessments and mid-term and final evaluations.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented on sites on the north and east side of Lake Tana, 
Megech and Ribb respectively.  Feasibility studies on up to an additional 80,000 ha will 
be conducted in Megech, Upper Beles and Anger.  Adjacent to, and within, the command 
areas are important habitats that will be sensitive to irrigation developments.  
Resettlement within the command areas, and, for Ribb, into the command area from the 
new Ribb reservoir financed by the GoE, will be necessary to realize irrigation benefits. 
Detail maps of the study areas have been produced and attached with the ESIA studies of 
the projects.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASDS) 
Mr Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTEN) 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The principal environmental sensitivities associated with the proposed irrigation 
developments are aquatic habitats in rivers and in Lake Tana, and wetlands along the 
lakeshore and within the command areas.  These habitats provide important spawning 
and nursery areas for economically important fish species well up into the drainages, and 
vital habitat for vulnerable and threatened bird species.  Changes in river flows and 
annual flooding due to water storage and withdrawals, as well as land conversion, can put 
these habitats and species at significant risk.  As well, water-borne diseases, especially 
malaria, are environmental health threats in the area that may be exacerbated by irrigation 
development.  Potential water quality impacts from the use of agricultural chemicals are 
also a concern and shall be mitigated through appropriate pest management practices.  
The project involves earthworks and permanent land take in an area with a significant 
level of known cultural heritage, and surface evidence of unknown physical cultural 
heritage (archaeological remains such as stone tools made by Early Man).  The Ribb 
scheme will be supplied by a large dam and safety issues need to be considered.  The 
principal social issues are associated with resettlement of people to and within command 
areas as a consequence of reservoir flooding, plus land restructuring and consolidation, to 
realize irrigation benefits. Relocation, adapting to new agricultural production systems, 
and developing new community structures will be quite stressful for the people involved, 
and will take some time and need careful support to be completed successfully.  
 
All the above concerns are adequately described and addressed through the 
environmental and social assessments, and consequent management/resettlement plans 
and Pest Management Plan.  A two phased approach was used to prepare PMP. The first 
phase of PMP identified the main pest problems and their context and laid the foundation 
for the preparation of the second phase PMP as part of the project implementation to 
address the pest problems identified. A Reconnaissance Physical Cultural Heritage 
Survey was carried out and incorporated in the ESIA. Additional ground-based cultural 
heritage investigation is to be carried out by the responsible Ethiopian authority 
(ARCCH) prior to construction. Specific provisions related to chance-find procedure 
Page  7
have been incorporated in the Construction tender documents. The Dam Safety Panel is 
operational. The Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) and the Operational and 
Maintenance Plan will be finalized in July 2011.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Government of Ethiopia (GoE)-financed Ribb Dam is one of five dams being 
planned by Ministry of Water and Energy (MoWE) on rivers draining into Lake Tana, 
and irrigation developments in addition to Megech and Ribb are also being planned.  In 
addition, the Tana Beles hydropower project which was just completed is going to divert 
a
large flow out of the Abbay River (Blue Nile). Cumulatively, these developments will 
have significant adverse biodiversity and social impacts in the basin, as demonstrated by 
the assessment done in the ESIA study for Megech and Ribb schemes.  These cumulative 
impacts are considered at a broader scale within the Tana Beles Integrated Water 
Resources Development Project also supported by the World Bank. In order to mitigate 
cumulative impacts a River Basin Authority has been established that will monitor the 
Lake on a regular basis and establish rules for effective water management. The Project 
will provide support to the GoE in conducting environmental and social assessments of 
investments in hydraulic infrastructure related to the project to help ensure that these 
meet internationally accepted standards.  
 
Livestock is an integral part of the farming system in both Ribb and Megech project 
areas. Part of the communal grazing land will be maintained but a significant part will be 
used for irrigation development. In order to compensate for the loss of grazing land, it 
was recommended that 5 percent (in Megech) to 9 percent (in Ribb) of the irrigated land 
should be dedicated to the production of fodder for livestock. In addition it was 
recommended to plant leguminous trees and shrubs with good forage values around 
homesteads. These recommendations will be followed up as part of the implementation 
of Component 2 of the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Final selection of the Megech and Ribb project sites was the result of an analysis of the 
comparative economic, environmental and social benefits and costs of a number of site 
alternatives proposed by the GoE.  Design of the two irrigation schemes during project 
implementation involved the consideration of a number of alternate infrastructure layouts 
and technologies (pressurized or surface irrigation) to deliver irrigation benefits while 
minimizing environmental and social impacts.  The alternative retained # full surface 
irrigation # is yielding significantly higher benefits and is considered to be the most 
appropriate in the existing socioeconomic context.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Ethiopian Water Resources Management Policy is set out in proclamation No. 197/2000. 
The Policy is intended to promote comprehensive and integrated water resources 
management and optimal utilization of available water resources for sustainable socio-
economic development.  In Addition to that the Federal Environmental Protection 
Page  8
Authority was established with the main objective of mainstreaming environmental 
concerns into development programs, plans and projects.  
 
National level infrastructure projects environmental and social safeguard instruments 
are generally formulated and implemented at the Federal level. Several internationally-
financed programs and projects have triggered the development of Environmental and 
Social Management Frameworks (ESMF), training for which is often given through 
cascade training down to Woreda and Kebele levels. A detailed environmental and social 
audit was conducted in December 2010 and the bi-annual supervision missions of the 
Bank team has confirmed that the implementation of the irrigation and drainage project 
ESMF was on track and that the project is in compliance with all World Bank safeguard 
policies.  
 
The ESIA developed for the irrigation and drainage project will be implemented by the 
Ministry of Water and Energy. The Ministry established National and Regional Project 
Coordination Offices. The National Project Coordination Office employed an 
environmental specialist that will ensure the implementation of the project#s EMPs and 
RAP along with the Amhara Region Environmental Protection Bureau. It is worth noting 
that the capacity of government institutions in enforcing environmental management 
plans is limited and there is a need for a close follow up by the project#s Environmental 
Specialist. Independent annual audits will be conducted.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project was initially designed using a framework approach, because the detailed 
design of the two schemes was not available at appraisal and it was not possible to 
evaluate the impacts with sufficient accuracy and comprehensiveness. The ESMF and the 
RPF were disclosed on February 21, 2007.  
 
The feasibility studies as well as preparation of the EMP and RAP involved substantial 
consultations with project beneficiaries and project affected people. The ESMF and RPF 
specify further consultations, as needed, in the preparation, disclosure and approval of 
EA studies and RAPs. A disbursement condition related to the disclosure of the EAs and 
RAPs is included in the Financing Agreement and will be maintained.  
 
The following documents have been approved since project effectiveness: additional 
fisheries study disclosed on January 2, 2008; supplementary EA for Ribb Dam (approved 
on June 29, 2009); RAP for Ribb Dam (disclosed on January 4, 2009 for phase 1 report 
and on March 2, 2011 for phase 2 report); ESIA for Megech scheme (disclosed on March 
2, 2011); ESIA for Ribb scheme (disclosed on March 2, 2011). The RAP for Megech 
scheme was received on January 31, 2011 and is currently being reviewed. Each of these 
documents includes extensive description and proceedings of the public consultations and 
is made available to the public in the Ministry of Water and Energy, the Environmental 
Protection Authority and the appropriate local public offices.  
 
Executive summaries of the two main ESIA studies for Megech and Ribb schemes have 
been sent to the Executive Directors on March 18, 2011, per the requirements of OP 4.01.  
Page  9
All these documents complement the original two framework documents (ESMF and 
RPF) which were used for original appraisal and remain fully enforceable. Dates of 
disclosures of these original documents are mentioned in the table below.  
 
Finally, the changes brought to the project do not change in any way the scope of the 
construction works nor the use of the water and the original notification to riparian 
countries made in 2007, to which both Sudan and Egypt have not objected. The riparian 
notification required under OP 7.50, therefore, remains fully valid.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/06/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/02/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/23/2011  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/11/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  10
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  11
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francois Onimus 
04/05/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Asferachew Abate Abebe 
04/05/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Shankar Narayanan 
04/05/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/05/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/05/2011 
Comments:   
