Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/14/2010 
Report No.:  59038
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P103022 
Original Project Name: Ethiopia Protection 
of Basic Services Program Phase II Project 
Country:  Ethiopia 
Project ID:  P121727 
Project Name:  Ethiopia Protection of Basic Services Phase 2 Project Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Robert S. Chase 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: February 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTSP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (53%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(21%);Health (15%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (6%);General 
transportation sector (5%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (33%);Public expenditure, financial management and 
procurement (33%);Other social protection and risk management (17%);Participation and 
civic engagement (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
420.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
523.00 
 
African Development Bank 
110.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  19.20 
 
EC: European Commission 
0.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
2.60 
 Financing 
Gap 
366.70
1,021.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Program Development Objective (PDO) for PBS 2 Additional Financing remains 
unchanged. It is to contribute to expanding access and improving the quality of basic 
services in education, health, agriculture, water supply and sanitation, and rural roads 
delivered by sub-national governments, while continuing to deepen transparency and 
local accountability in service delivery. The PDO is closely linked with the second and 
Page  2
fourth strategic objectives of the CAS (improving access to and quality of basic service 
delivery and fostering improved governance).   
 
3. Project Description 
PBS 2 Additional Financing will support two sub-programs of the PBS 2 Project.  
 
Sub-program A - Support to Delivery of Basic Services: PBS 2 Additional Financing 
will support the first part of sub-program A.  
 
Sub-program A1 finances recurrent expenditures (salaries, operations and maintenance) 
in the delivery of sub-national basic services (i.e. these are the eligible expenditures 
under pooled PBS IDA, donor, and Government own-revenue sources).  Capital 
expenditures in these sectors would continue to be financed from Government sources.  
 
Sub-program B - Health MDGs Support Facility: PBS 2 Additional Financing will 
continue to assist Government in its efforts to accelerate the attainment of health-related 
MDGs, in line with the goals and objectives of HSDP3. It will provide financing for the 
procurement of treated bed nets and insecticides to support the Government in its efforts 
in the fight against malaria.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
PBS 2 Additional Financing will be implemented throughout the country by local 
government authorities in collaboration with respective sector specialists operating at the 
local and regional levels.  
 
In the case of sub-program B, where safeguards policies are applicable, the physical 
setting is taken into account as part of the procedures to be followed when using the 
Guidelines for Medical Waste Management and Guidelines for Residual Insecticide 
Spraying, already disclosed under PBS 1 and re-disclosed under PBS 2.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTSP) 
Mr Tamene Tiruneh (AFTSP) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with OPCS guidelines, as continued IDA support for Phase 2 of the PBS 
Program, PBS 2 Additional Financing remains a Category B operation.  Likewise, PBS 2 
Additional Financing triggers the same safeguard policies as PBS2, i.e., OP 4.01, OP 4.09 
and OP 4.12.  Under PBS 2 Additional Financing, the PBS program will continue to 
apply the same four safeguards tools used in PBS 2 (ESMF, RPF, Medical Waste 
Management, and Residual Insecticide Spraying guidelines), all of which were published 
under PBS 2 and do not require any changes.  Sufficient resources will be available for 
safeguards application and monitoring during the life of the AF.  
 
The safeguard arrangements and principles agreed for PBS 2 Subprogram A Part 1 (the 
Basic Services Block Grant) will continue to apply to PBS 2 Additional Financing for 
this sub-program. Namely, as Project financing is limited to recurrent expenditures for 
basic services and does not include financing for capital development, safeguard policies 
are not triggered and no safeguards tools are required. Although there is concurrent 
Government financing for capital development in the basic services sectors that will 
enhance the development outcomes of Sub-program A Part 1, this is not necessary to 
achieve the objectives of PBS 2.  
 
The principal safeguards issues in PBS2 are associated with the Pilot LIG component 
(Subprogram A2), funded under the initial PBS 2, which will not receive additional 
resources under PBS 2 Additional Financing. These impacts for the Pilot LIG component 
are neither large-scale nor irreversible. They are associated with sub-projects involving 
the construction and/or rehabilitation of small-scale investments in the education, health, 
agriculture, water supply and sanitation, and rural roads sectors. In some cases small-
scale resettlement issues might arise due to encroachment on land or household assets.  
 
Page  4
Potential impacts of  Subprogram B are in the area of medical waste management, the 
use of insecticides in the anti-malaria spraying program, and  the purchase and disposal  
of treated bed-nets. The same safeguards tools and principles adopted in PBS 2 through 
the Medical Waste Management and Residual Insecticide Spraying Guidelines are 
followed in this Additional Financing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternative, other than 'No project', exists for Sub-program A, Part 1 (Basic Services 
Block Grants), which covers salaries, and operations and maintenance of five eligible 
sectors: health, education, agriculture, water supply and sanitation, and rural roads. In the 
case of the health component (Sub-program B), no practical alternative exists, apart from 
not providing the necessary health services.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MOFED) has recruited a full-time 
Environmental and Social Safeguards specialist, responsible for overseeing the 
implementation of all environmental and social safeguards policies for PBS 2 and this 
AF. MOFED has agreed that one of this Officers tasks early in 2011 is to ensure the 
implementation of Guidelines for Medical Waste Management and Guidelines for 
Residual Insecticide Spraying, already disclosed under PBS 1 and re-disclosed under PBS 
2, by incorporating them into a brief Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for Sub-
program B, to be implemented by all weredas under this Sub-program.  
 
Following the preparation and distribution of the ESMF Operational Summary, there 
have been improvements and the system for screening of LIG sub-projects has been 
institutionalized.  
 
Most of the regions have established a Land and Environment Protection Office at 
woreda (district) level. Though the capacity of these offices is limited, it provides an 
opportunity to mainstream environment issues into development planning and 
implementation at local levels. Under PBS, training on Environmental Impact 
Assessment, and the project#s Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) was provided to woreda and regional officials to create awareness and build 
capacities to address environmental and social issues with local investments.  
 
As part of PBS 2, an Environmental and Social Sustainability study will be undertaken. 
This is currently ongoing and expected to be completed in May 2011. The objectives of 
the study include:  
Page  5
-
Examine the quality and effectiveness of safeguard tools developed for PBS 2 as 
instruments for efficient integration of environmental and social concerns at regional, 
woreda and kebele levels, and recommend ways to strengthen them;  
 
-
Assess the institutional arrangements, existing regulations, and capacity 
challenges for better ensuring appropriate environmental and social management, and 
impact assessment in the planning and delivery of services supported by PBS 2 at all 
relevant levels, and recommend appropriate and realistic ways to strengthen them; this 
should include an assessment of the institutional links for PBS implementation of the 
Government#s strategic response to climate change;  
 
-
Review the consistency of PBS 2 approaches to environmental and social 
management, and impact assessment with national policies and standards, and with 
approaches being taken by other national programs (e.g. PSNP, WASH, etc.), and 
recommend ways of ensuring coordinated approaches to enhancing the application of 
environmentally and socially sustainable best practices at the regional and woreda levels 
in relation to the delivery of PBS-supported basic services; and  
 
-
Identify the potential implications of the climate change adaptation for the 
services provided under the PBS program. This assessment should look at both threats 
(e.g. the impact of climate change on roads constructed under PBS) and opportunities 
(e.g. the potential for attracting climate finance for PBS activities).  
 
It is expected that the newly established Woreda Land and Environmental Protection 
Offices, the training on EIA and the project#s ESMF, and the findings and actions 
resulting from the Environmental and Social Sustainability Study will contribute to 
improved capacity of the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Communities and woreda and regional officials of relevant sectors are the key 
stakeholders. EIA and ESMF training was organized for these officials, and a cascade of 
training will be undertaken in the future to improve the implementation of safeguards 
measures at local levels. The establishment and strengthening of woreda Land and 
Environmental Protection Offices would also contribute to mainstreaming environment 
into development planning and project/program implementation at local levels.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/07/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/10/2010 
 
Page  6
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/20/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/29/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/31/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/20/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/17/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Please note that there is no stand-alone PMP, but that under the LIG component, the 
Guidelines and the ESMF require an Integrated Pest management Plan to be drawn up 
whenever agro-chemicals are likely to be used. The guidelines have been disclosed.  
 
Please note that the revised (1) National Guidelines on Medical Waste Management 
dated December 2007 and (2) Guidelines for Indoor Insecticide Residual Spraying dated 
April 2007 were re-disclosed in the country on October 20, 2008 and submitted to 
INFOSHOP on November 17, 2008.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
N/A 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
N/A 
Page  7
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert S. Chase 
12/05/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Tamene Tiruneh 
12/05/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Ian Leslie Campbell 
12/05/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
12/06/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
12/05/2010 
Comments:   
