Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5875 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/19/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Fiji 
Project ID: P121843 
Project Name: Integrated Flood Management - Nadi Basin Pilot 
Task Team Leader: Emilia Battaglini 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASNS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (80%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (50%);Other urban 
development (50%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.57 
 
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery 
0.83
1.40 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to pilot an integrated flood management approach in the Nadi basin as a 
measure to reduce disaster risk that can be replicated in other watersheds in Fiji and other Pacific 
countries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed activity is centered on three key components that are closely aligned with the Fiji 
National Action Plans for Disaster Risk Reduction.  
 
1) Institutional Strengthening of Flood Forecasting and Warning Systems (approx. $400,000 of 
which $140,000 from GFDRR). The GFDRR stocktake has noted the decline of hydrological 
networks and the quality of available data in the region. This component will strengthen the 
capacity of Fiji Met Service in flood forecasting and warning, review the existing hydrological 
data for flood modeling in Nadi and provide strategic guidance for more efficient services. These 
are urgent needs identified during the 2009 post flood assessment. Key outputs of this 
component include:  
 
a) 
A Standard Operating Procedure for flood monitoring and warning  
Page  2
b) 
A manual for operation and maintenance of the flood warning system  
 
c) 
A report outlining strategies and providing guidance for improved and efficient provision 
of hydrological services  
 
d)
Revised hydrological data set for Nadi catchment  
 
2) Flood Risk Assessment, Identification of Mitigation Measures, and Dissemination 
(approx.$600,000 of which $400,000 from GFDRR). The GFDRR Stocktake found that the 
baseline hazard and risk information in the Pacific is too rudimentary in the Pacific to derive 
flood risk assessments necessary to underpin meaningful flood management strategies. This 
activity will acquire necessary baseline data and develop a state-of-the-art flood inundation 
model for the greater Nadi area from which flood hazard and flood risk maps will be produced. 
These will inform the identification of effective flood mitigation measures and knowledge 
urgently required to underpin the Nadi Basin Flood Management Plan. This knowledge will be 
disseminated though national and regional workshops. Key outputs of this component include:  
 
a) 
A new high resolution digital elevation model (DTM) for the Nadi area, which will be 
available for multiple uses ranging from environmental modelling to tourism marketing  
 
b)
A
2D flood inundation model, which can be modified as new developments or more data 
become available  
 
c) 
Flood hazard maps for the greater Nadi area  
 
d)
A
report summarising the flood hazard for Nadi and outlining appropriate flood risk 
reduction measures  
 
e) 
A new high resolution digital elevation model (DTM) for the Nadi area, which will be 
available for multiple uses ranging from environmental modelling to tourism marketing  
 
f) 
A 2D flood inundation model, which can be modified as new developments or more data 
become available  
 
g) 
Flood hazard maps for the greater Nadi area  
 
h)
A
report summarising the flood hazard for Nadi and outlining appropriate flood risk 
reduction measures  
 
3) Institutional Strengthening for Integrated Flood Management (approx.$250,000 of which 
$200,000 from GFDRR) Although flooding is a major impediment to development in the Pacific, 
the importance of flood management is not currently reflected in the planning and institutional 
arrangements of Pacific island countries. This component will develop and strengthen the policy, 
institutional and regulatory frameworks underpinning - Integrated Flood Management in Fiji. 
Key outputs of this component include:  
 
a) 
A national Integrated Flood Management (IFM) policy document, outlining strategies, 
actions and institutional structures and roles  
 
b)
Draft legislation to underpin IFM  
 
c) 
A report reviewing current practises of flood management and highlighting effective 
strategies and measures for integrated flood management  
 
d)
A
sector roadmap and action plan  
 
e) 
A manual/strategy for Integrated Water Resource Management, including IFM.  
 
3.2  
The proposed project will be implemented by SOPAC, the Pacific Islands Applied 
Geoscience Commission, in close collaboration with key Fiji government agencies over a period 
of 30 months. SOPAC will provide technical mentoring and capacity building to counterparts in 
Page  3
the Fiji government and will ensure dissemination and replication mechanisms through their 
institutional mandate as the DRR agency in the Pacific. Key stakeholders will be involved by 
SOPAC through local and national workshops, training, and dissemination of the IFM strategy 
and action plan. Outputs are to be disseminated nationally within Fiji as well are regionally 
through the dissemination of a report and hosting of regional and national workshops targeted at 
decision makers in flood risk management in the Pacific.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project activities will take place in Fiji, specifically in the Nadi watershed where key 
counterparts will be the Met service, and agencies involved in flood monitoring and 
management.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not applicable as no safeguard policy is triggered   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project supports the provision of technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of 
government institutions responsible for flood management in Fiji. It finances consultant services 
and goods. Main outputs will be an integrated flood management plan and operational 
guidelines, training and workshops. No construction works are envisaged. The project is 
expected to have no adverse environmental or social impacts. No Safeguards Policies are 
triggered by the proposed TA project and the project is classified as Category C.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  4
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
01/21/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This is a Category C project for which, beyond screening, no further EA action is required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Emilia Battaglini 
12/03/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
01/19/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
12/21/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
