Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/14/2011 
Report No.:  AC5771
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P120636 
Project Name:  Land Administration Project - 2 
Task Team Leader:  Charles Annor-Frempong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (50%);General 
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Law and justice (10%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (29%);Personal and property rights 
(29%);Decentralization (14%);Other accountability/anti-corruption (14%);Administrative 
and civil service reform (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective is: To consolidate and strengthen urban and 
rural land administration and management systems for efficient and transparent land 
service delivery.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Strengthening the Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework for Land 
Administration.  
 
The component will provide a platform for continued work on the legal and regulatory 
framework governing land administration and land use, building upon the 
accomplishments achieved under LAP I.  It will support completion of the Land Bill and 
Land Use and Planning Bill (currently in draft forms)and their associated legislative 
instruments (LI).  LI's will also be prepared for the Administration of Stool Lands Act, 
Act 481 of 1994 and the Lands Commission Act, Act 767 of 2008. In addition, the 
component will support the dissemination of information concerning the new laws and 
Page  2
regulations, and training of stakeholders. The judiciary will be supported under this 
component to review court processes and rules in order to improve court performance in 
the adjudication of land cases and to build capacity of relevant land sector players 
(including the Judiciary) in alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.  
 
Component 2:    Decentralizing and Improving  Business and Service Delivery 
Processes.  
 
This component will improve transparency and reduce the time and cost involved in 
delivery of services such as deed and title registration and other services provided by the 
land sector agencies. To achieve these objectives the project will finance the functional 
decentralization of services to the regions and selected districts; and consultant services 
to re-engineer and automate business processes to shorten the time taken to deliver 
services. As part of decentralization of land administration services, new and selected 
existing Customary Land Secretariats (CLS) will be  supported in collaboration with 
traditional authorities. This component will also support automation and proper records 
management by making functional and upgrading the LIS piloted under Phase 1 and the 
open source Cadastre and registration system proposed by FAO which will be integrated 
with the LUPMIS and the UMLIS.  
 
Component 3: Improved Maps and Spatial Data for Land Administration.  
 
This component will provide up to date maps and other spatial products and develop the 
infrastructure for collecting and sharing data and information to be used as inputs directly 
or indirectly in land administration.  
 
Component 4:  Human Resource Development and Project Management.  
 
The component aims to develop human resources capacity and provide logistical 
support and equipment to the land sector agencies, land owners as well as the private 
sector to improve service delivery. A comprehensive review of the human capacity skill 
requirements will be undertaken for the land sector agencies. The Human Resource 
Division of the Lands Commission (LC)will be strengthened to carry out skill gap 
analysis in order to develop a coordinated staff training and recruitment program for the 
LC, OASL and T&CPD. A new Lands Commission regional office will be constructed in 
Kumasi in the Ashanti region ( for which an ARAP and ESIA have been prepared and 
dully disclosed in country and at the infoshop. The component will also provide capacity 
for private and public sector service providers including surveyors, planners, valuers, real 
estate agents, tenant farmers and NGOs involved in land administration such as  CICOL. 
The implementation of the gender, civil society engagement and communication (i.e. 
public education and outreach) strategies prepared under LAP 1 will be supported under 
this component and integrated across all the project components.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
LAP 2 will have a national focus for all activities with the exception of Mapping and 
Spatial Data activities that will be limitied to four regions namely, Greater Accra, 
Western,  Ashanti and Northern regions due to the cost involved. Greater Accra is 
selected for purposes of reducing land litigation and enhancing security of investment 
Page  3
while Western region is selected primarily due to the discovery of oil in the area and the 
likelihood of emergence of land disputes.  Ashanti region is selected on the basis of 
having a fairly cohesive single traditional authority, making it an advantageous area for 
scaling up the development of traditional land administration systems. And the Northern 
region because of its position and renewed focus on development through the SADA.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTEN) 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no long term impacts anticipated or associated with the project. The project is 
categorized as B since the environmental and social impacts are expected to be minimal, 
site-specific and manageable. Potential minor environmental impacts have been identified 
with connection to the construction of the Ashanti regional Lands Commission office. 
The land for the construction of the office space is already known. The impacts include, 
on a minor scale, air and dust emissions, noise and vibration, open pits/trenches, disposal 
of construction waste and public safety/health concerns. The borrower has prepared site 
specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) to help address these minor impacts. There are six people who 
have farms on the site and who may lose their farms and their source of income.  For this 
reason the borrower has prepared an abbreviated resettlement action plan (ARAP) that 
addresses the identified impacts and appropriate entitlements.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is likely to have positive impact on reduction of land litigation due to 
streamlined land transaction and registration processes and the efficiency from the land 
administration system being put in place. This will largely reduce challenges associated 
with land issues. It is also likely to lead to best practice in land transaction which could 
Page  4
improve the investment climate and generate further economic activities and 
employment. From the social perspective, it could bring about social cohesion and better 
rent arrangements between land owners and tenant farmers. Some of these long term 
positive impacts have been outlined in the ESIA and the ARAP.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to mitigate these potential environmental impacts of the LAP II, GoG has 
prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an Environmental 
and Social management Plan with an implementation plan for the project.  
 
The ESIA outlines the policy, legal and administrative framework, land ownership and 
administration and institutional arrangements for land and environmental management. 
The ESIA also identifies both positive and negative social and environmental impacts and 
outlines measures to mitigate or address the negative impact. These measures are 
supported by the management plan (with a budget) developed as part of the assessment.  
 
Mitigation measures for environmental due diligence will be enforced through 
contractor performance monitoring and evaluation as well as the overall implementation 
of the ESIA with participatory supervision from the Land Administration Project 
Coordinating Unit, and in collaboration with the EPA, the World Bank and other relevant 
institutions or organizations including Non-Governmental Organizations(NGOs) which 
will be using social accountability tools for participatory assessment.  
 
From the social perspective, the project has developed an abbreviated resettlement 
action plan (ARAP) which outlines the legal and policy guidelines, a socio-economic 
profile of the project affected persons (PAPs) and the different impacts and their 
entitlements. It also indicates a cut-off date. The ARAP also include the basis for 
valuation of the assets and institutional arrangements for the payment of entitlements to 
the PAPs and overall implementation. In addition, the ARAP describes a grievance 
redress mechanism, a monitoring system with specific indicators. The preparation of the 
ARAP was guided by the World Bank's policy on involuntary resettlement, OP 4.12 and 
Government of Ghana laws on resettlement. One significant aspect of the ARAP is the 
role of NGOs in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation process.  
 
On borrower capacity, the MLNR has adequate capacity to implement the safeguards 
plans outlined in the ESIA and the ARAP. There will be need however, for follow up 
capacity improvement to ensure they are fully in charge of both the implementation and 
the monitoring.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are public officials in the land sector  (who will play key roles in 
implementing the action plans and ensuring compliance), the project affected persons, 
traditional land owners (chiefs), civil society organizations, women and tenants farmers. 
In the course of preparing the ESIA and the ARAP, there was considerable consultation 
with officials of the Land Sector Agencies, the Kumasi Metropolitan Assembly and other 
stakeholders including the PAPs.  The ARAP and ESIA give details of the consultations. 
Furthermore, the in-country disclosure in the form of media presentation, newspaper 
adverts, meetings and discussion forum, took place over a 3 day period. There was 
additional opportunity to engage with the PAPs and other stakeholders including the 
media. In addition to these specific consultations for the ARAP and the ESIA, the project 
conducted extensive consultations as part of the preparation process with a broad 
spectrum of stakeholders including the judiciary, the Ghana Bar Association, community 
and family leaders, chiefs, tenant farmers, including women and institutional 
representatives and civil society. Some of the concerns raised have been incorporated into 
the final project document whilst the disclosure reports have been attached as Annex to 
the ESIA and ARAP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/12/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/27/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/06/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/05/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/27/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/06/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Charles Annor-Frempong 
12/24/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour 
12/24/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah 
12/24/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/03/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
02/03/2011 
Comments:   
