Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/02/2011 
Report No.:  AC5862
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P118112 
Project Name:  Ghana Skills and Technology Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Peter Darvas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 7, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (40%);General industry and trade sector (20%);Agricultural 
extension and research (20%);Animal production (10%);General information and 
communications sector (10%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (40%);Export development and 
competitiveness (20%);Small and medium enterprise support (20%);Improving labor 
markets (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to improve demand-driven skills development and 
increase adoption of new technologies in selected economic sectors.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed operation is a five-year investment complementing ongoing government 
reforms and programs. The proposed GSTDP will combine interventions to improve the 
institutional framework and overall capacities of the Technical and Vocational  Education 
Training (TVET) and Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) systems while 
promoting demand-driven training opportunities and improved linkages between private 
sector employers and training institutions through a competitive fund.  The project will 
target programs to provide skills and technology to selected industries.  These industry-
focused programs would be designed so that they could be replicated in other industries 
Page  2
as needs and priorities evolve over the medium and long term, including beyond the 
duration of the project.  
 
Component 1:  Institutional Strengthening of Skills Development (estimated base cost 
US$4 million). The objective of this component is to strengthen the governance and 
capacity of providers of skills development to more effectively rationalize and coordinate 
relevant training activities to meet the demands of the labor market.  Support will be 
provided to strengthen the Council for Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
(COTVET) and key elements of their strategic program including the development of a 
national skills strategy, a comprehensive information system on TVET and labor market 
observatory, support the guidelines for developing the National Qualifications 
Fframework and Competency Based Ttraining and support various policy studies.  The 
project will also provide technical assistance to key training institutions in priority 
economic sectors.  
 
Component 2:  Institutional Strengthening of Science and Technology Development 
(estimated base cost $4 million). The objectives of this component are to (i) strengthen 
the planning, management, and coordination of national science, technology and 
innovation (STI) policies and programs in order to make efficient use of resources and 
complement the national economic development plan; and (ii) support technology 
development and diffusion that is more responsive to the needs of the economy by 
enhancing interactions between selected research institutes, university departments, and 
their external clients (e.g., private sector), thereby encouraging domestic innovation.  
 
Component 3:  Financing of Skills and Technology Development Programs through the 
Skills Development Fund (estimated base cost US$50 million).  The objective of this 
component is to finance skills and technology development programs in prioritized 
economic sectors through a demand-driven skills development fund (SDF) managed by 
COTVET.  The Fund represents the main project instrument to achieve the government's 
long term objectives of supporting both demand-driven skills and technology 
development which requires productive and strategic partnerships between firms, service 
providers and industry associations. By focusing on enterprise development, stimulating 
demand and encouraging cost-sharing, the SDF will assure that activities are focused on 
the economic agenda and that the demand for skills and technology increases. This in 
turn would also lead to more relevant supply of skills and technology services as well as 
cost-sharing between employers and training and technology providers. Furthermore, the 
competitive and transparent financing process would enable the Government to focus on 
coordination and quality assurance instead of being a provider of such services itself. The 
SDF also sets up a framework for harmonized donor support while ensuring that 
technology development is well integrated with skills development.  
 
SDF Funding windows: The SDF established by COTVET has three existing funding 
windows aimed at skills development.  The first window focuses on larger scale skills 
development for medium and large enterprises.  The second window focuses on smaller 
scale skills development, mostly for micro and small enterprises in the informal sector, 
and the third window focuses on innovative training approaches. For the GSTDP, the 
Page  3
fund will open a fourth window to support partnerships between industry and technology 
providers. An SDF manual provides the guidelines and details for accessing, managing 
and reporting on SDF grants.  
 
Component 4:  Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated base 
cost US$5 million):  The objective of this component is to provide effective 
implementation of the project by establishing a project support unit embedded within 
COTVET that manages all development partner project funds.  The Project Support Unite 
(PSU) will be a small group of dedicated staff assisting COTVET and all participating 
ministries for effective coordination and monitoring and evaluation, as well as the 
implementation of an information and communications strategy. The PSU will also 
support and report to the Project Steering Committee. The technical support for 
implementation includes a team of short and long-term consultants, specializing in 
project implementation (including project management, financial management, 
procurement, environmental and social issues, and M&E), resident in COTVET, and 
providing regular support to all participating ministries, agencies and industry 
associations.  The capacity building support for implementation would begin during the 
project preparation stage and necessary training would be provided to project 
implementers. For the monitoring and evaluation, COTVET will continue to update data 
to facilitate accurate reporting on the key progress indicators identified in the results 
framework.  Most of the data for monitoring project outcomes will come from regular 
project reports, key surveys and the labor market observatory.  This data will be 
supplemented by project preparatory studies in key economic sectors and a baseline 
survey undertaken prior to effectiveness.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The beneficiaries of the Skills Development Fund will include employers, employees, 
industry associations, public and private training institutes, universities, and other 
agencies engaged in technology development throughout the country. In the short and 
medium-term, the project will benefit employers and employees of designated economic 
sectors who gain additional skilled employment, higher earnings, and improved 
productivity. In the medium to long-term, it will benefit a larger group of economic 
actors through better access to modern training and technology services as an outcome of 
an improved institutional structure and policy regime.  
 
The project will mostly fund training and technical assistance.  The project may finance 
minor rehabilitation of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on existing 
sites - work that will be guided by applicable local and national laws and regulations. The 
project will also finance training equipment, technology and consulting services.  The 
project will not finance projects that require involuntary land acquisition nor will it 
deprive people of access to their usual means of livelihood. No significant adverse 
environmental or social impacts are anticipated.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (AFTEN) 
Page  4
Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is rated as a Category B.  Under Component 3 the project may provide 
financing for grants that will be used towards small-scale rehabilitation within already 
existing structures or the construction of new structures.  There may also be minor 
rehabilitation of existing infrastructure under components one and two. The 
environmental and social impacts of the rehabilitation are expected to be minor. GSTDP 
will not finance any subprojects resulting in the involuntary acquisition of land, loss of 
physical and economic assets, and/or loss of livelihoods.  
 
Overall, the proposed Project is expected to have a positive social impact. The 
promotion of firm growth and development are key sources of economic and employment 
growth, which in turn contribute to poverty reduction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Minor impacts associated with rehabilitation and some newer construction may include 
noise, dust, possible water pollution, drainage issues, burrow pits and safety issues.  
These impacts will be mitigated by ensuring that all burrow pits are back-filled, that 
construction workers adhere to the safety plan, that water points are protected from 
accidental contamination and that there is an adequate sanitation and waste water plan in 
place to treat waste from the new buildings. The detailed impact and mitigation plan can 
be found in the ESMF.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
To avoid resettlement (even though this possibility is covered in the ESMF), the project 
focuses on using existing buildings and land that are Government or privately owned. In 
Page  5
addition, a negative list will be created to ensure that project activities do not trigger 
resettlement.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures undertaken by the borrower include the provision of an ESMF, capacity 
building for environmental management and the provision of an operational manual that 
includes a negative list of activities that cannot be funded, particularly those that may 
negatively impact the environment and communities.  
 
Through Component 3 the Skills Development Fund may finance subprojects that 
require rehabiliation and construction of new buildings on already-owned premises. To 
ensure proper assessment and mitigation of the potential adverse environmental and 
social impacts of activities under the Fund, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be in place to guide the implementation agency on how to 
address any environmental and social impacts of project investments.Under the ongoing 
Education Sector Project (EdSeP), an ESMF was prepared in 2003 by the Ghana Institute 
of Management and Public Administration (GIMPA).  The scope of potential activities 
for the planned project is likely to be similar to some of the current investments under 
EdSEP, therefore the government has decided to update the existing ESMF to detail the 
safeguard procedures that would apply to the propsed GSTDP.  The operational manual 
for the SDF will include a negative list of items that may not be funded, especially those 
items that would cause environmental issues and/or trigger additional safeguards (e.g., 
pesticide management, resettlement). In addition, the members of the Project Steering 
Committee and the Skills Development Fund Committee,  and the groups of potential 
contractors are to be provided with Environmental Awareness Training.  For the last two 
groups the training would also be aimed at developing and improving on skills to screen 
for site selection and potential environmental and social impacts, to be able to 
comprehend and take mitigation measures and steps for monitoring of potential impact. 
Finally, close monitoring by the PSU will ensure that activities comply with the ESMF 
and if necessary, an Environmental Management Plan will be developed.  
 
The project will adopt a three-pronged approach to promoting and addressing social 
inclusion by including: a robust outreach and communication program to ensure that a 
broad range of actors throughout the project target areas will be familiar with the goals 
and objectives of the project; a funding window to the informal sector which will provide 
access to training to less skilled workers and owners of small-scale enterprises; and 
attention to monitoring participation of beneficiaries by firm size and gender.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include employers and employees in the formal and informal 
sectors, industry associations, public and private training institutes, universities, and other 
agencies engaged in technology development.  Extensive outreach will be conducted 
prior to the call for proposals and will include discussions around safeguard policies 
regarding what can and cannot be funded under the SDF. The ESMF was disclosed in 
Page  6
country and at the Infoshop. Already, notices have appeared on line and in some key 
newspapers and the ESMF will continue to be available in public locations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/21/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/26/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/25/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  7
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peter Darvas 
01/26/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nyaneba E. Nkrumah 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa 
12/16/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel J. Welmond 
02/02/2011 
Comments:   
