Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6229 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/31/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P125595 
Project Name: Ghana - PPP Project 
Task Team Leader: Peter J. Mousley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 4, 2012 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2012 
Managing Unit: AFTFW 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (80%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The central objective of this initiative is to assist the GOG to tackle the binding infrastructure 
constraints that hamper firm productivity and employment generating growth. This project seeks 
to increase infrastructure service levels and quality through supporting private sector 
participation through a PPP financing model.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: PPP Pipeline Preparation and Transaction Advisory Support (US$ 30 million)  
 
This project component will support the development of an official pipeline of PPP projects, 
with a subset of first mover transactions confirmed by the GOG. Consequently the component 
will provide resources for conducting detailed due diligence for particular PPP pipeline 
transactions to ensure a market-credible project pipeline, this will include financing: (i) 
Investment Appraisal, VfM and Pre and Full Feasibly Studies preparatory work; (ii) Transactions 
Advisory Services including related embedded specialist consultant services to assist MDAs to 
manage and assess transaction advisory services; (iii) safeguards due diligence work; and (iv) 
market outreach resources.  
 
Page  2
In addition to supporting full preparation of PPP transactions to market, in accordance with the 
new PPP Policy, this component of the project would also provide technical advisory support to 
assist the GOG to manage the development and negotiation of existing PPP projects currently 
listed in the Tier 2 pipeline included in Annex 1.  This includes many of the prospective PPPs 
projects currently on a unsolicited bid track.  In this instance, the Bank support would support 
would be via the provision of technical advisory services to government MDAs to assist in 
specific areas of project development and contract negotiation.  
 
Component 2: PPP Institutional Building # Legislative, Policy and Systems, Fiduciary and 
Financial Capacity Building for PPPs (US$12 million)  
 
This component will provide capacity building and technical assistance support to MDAs that 
will have critical roles to play in the implementation of a PPP program and preparation of lead 
transactions for market and support the continuing evolution of the legal and regulatory 
framework for PPPs.  
 
The component aims at enhancing MDAs ability to manage transaction and technical advisors 
of PPPs, oversee project feasibility work, negotiate with the private sector, in addition to 
building government capacity to monitor and evaluate PPP projects after closure. Building on the 
challenges identified in the Ghana PPP Diagnostic Study(2010)  the component will comprise of 
three support instruments namely: (i) technical assistance; such as supporting advisory services 
to assist in the development of policy work and project preparation, (ii) support for systems and 
equipment: this will include support for ICT system that will help MDAs manage and track PPP 
projects and performance and interface with other PPP units within the government, and (iii) 
training which includes general PPP training for key staff and #subject-specific# courses, 
seminars and workshops.  
 
Among the proposed recipients are the: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (Public 
Investment Department - PID, Aid and Debt Management Division - ADM, Budget Division - 
BD, Legal Division - LD), Bank of Ghana, line/sector MDA such as: Ministry of Energy, 
Ministry of Health, Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development, Ministry of Ports 
Harbor and Railways, Ministry of Road and Transport, Ministry of Tourism and Modernization 
of the Capital City, Ghana Ports and Harbor Authority, in addition to the National Development 
Planning Commission, the Public Procurement Authority, the Attorney General#s Department, 
and the Regulatory Authorities (e.g. Public Utilities Regulatory Commission and Ghana Railway 
Development Authority). The final determination of principal MDAs to support, in addition to 
the key central agencies will depend on the priority transactions that the GOG direct the World 
Bank to support under this proposed credit.  The focus would be particularly on the full-time 
Project Delivery Teams (PDTs) that would be set up in each Ministry leading on a priority 
transaction.  
 
While the GOG is currently in the process of drafting a PPP National Policy and a PPP Act, 
further support will be required to draft the associated regulations and guidelines, in addition 
other complementary laws or policies such as: procurement or financial management legislation 
or sector specific policies, such as toll policy. Furthermore the component will support the 
implementation of this legislation including vital outreach and dialogue across the Government 
MDAs and in respect to existing sector legislation that could be impacted by the PPP law.  
Page  3
This component will support efforts towards improving the availability and access to long term 
financing for infrastructure. Supported by the relevant diagnostic studies of the previously 
highlighted challenging features of Ghana#s long term financing market, the proposed activities 
under will include: (i) establishing a policy framework for provision of long-term financing, (ii) 
strengthening the capacity for formulating and implementing long term finance policies, (iii) 
developing an infrastructure financing framework, and supporting capital market development to 
support, over time, the issuance of equities and bonds for infrastructure, and examining the 
potential of  mobilization of pension and insurance funds to support this market.  
 
Furthermore this component will assist the GOG to examine the modalities of a  of potential 
statutory long term PPP infrastructure financing facility in line with the National PPP Policy 
objectives and international best practice, with due attention to the need for an appropriate 
pricing of long term credit, the potential crowding out private financiers, and governance 
concerns.  
 
This project component will also support the GOG, in accordance with the National PPP Policy 
to design and mobilize domestic and donor funding for a Project Development Facility (PDF).  
 
Component 3: Facilitating the Provision of Long Term Development Finance (US$ 180 
million)  
 
Consideration will need to be given to the most effective means by which the World Bank can 
support the financing needs of the GOG PPP Program. For Bank support to the private sector 
financing needs for PPP projects, one option for further investigation would be the provision of a 
Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL) # in line with OP8.30 guidelines - through which the Bank 
can assist to introduce long-term local currency to help facilitate financial structuring, 
particularly for PPP projects lacking a foreign currency revenue flow. FIL funding could be 
deployed on an interim basis through qualifying #Participating Financial Institutions# (PFIs) 
possibly via arrangements with the Bank of Ghana, to meet priority project financing needs. 
Over the longer term, once in place, Bank FIL support could be directed through the 
Infrastructure Financing Facility the government plans to establish, as is the case in countries 
such as Bangladesh, India and Indonesia. The FIL could be financed via IDA or potentially 
IBRD or a blend, depending on ongoing current graduation discussions ongoing between the 
Government of Ghana and the World Bank. This will require further investigation over the 
coming period of project preparation.  
 
Another project financing area for potential World Bank support under this project would be to 
the Viability Gap Facility (VGF) that the GOG PPP Policy has indicated that it plans to establish 
to assist private sector investment in those PPP projects that # while having commercial potential 
#
have additional substantial initial capital expenditure outlays that require additional public 
sector support in order for them to be effectively structured for market. In addition to liquidity 
and governance benefits, a WB contribution to a VGF can often have an important 
demonstration effect for other donor agencies and DFIs to also make contributions to the facility.  
 
These World Bank IDA\IBRD financing options can be further complemented on a 
transactions-by-transactions basis by various World Bank, MIGA and IFC financing\guarantee 
products. The project will aim to engage MIGA and IFC to support the lead transactions targeted 
Page  4
by the Government over the short-term which will also constitute the focus of pipeline support 
for the project.  
 
A
decision by the World Bank on the extent of possible FIL or VGF support to be provided will 
be determined during the course of project preparation as more thorough economic and financial 
analysis on pipeline lead projects is concluded. This analysis will provide the essential 
information required to best determine the key funding priorities for Bank support and relative 
importance of WBG funding to FILs and VGF instruments. Additional further consideration will 
need to be given as to the potential to utilize IBRD versus IDA funds for potential FIL and VGF 
support.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US $ 3 million)  
 
This component will finance specialized consultant services (see para 35 below) to assist 
MOFEP-PID in project implementation and to develop a comprehensive monitoring and 
evaluation system to track cost effectiveness and development impact of PPPs that are supported 
under the GOG PPP Program.  
 
The project would be designed as an Adaptable Program Lending (APL) project comprising 
two phases: (i) a first phase of $45 million, covering pipeline development work (Component 1 - 
appraisals, transaction advisory services), capacity building (Component 2 # legal, institution 
building) and project management/monitoring and evaluation, which it is anticipated would be 
IDA funded and, (ii) a second phase of APL that is currently estimated up to $180 million, 
subject to access to IBRD in the later stages of the project.  This figure will be revised further as 
preparation work proceeds and more definitive picture is available of the bankable PPPs projects 
that can be financed over the timeframe of the overall APL and feasibility of drawing down 
IBRD as well as IDA funding.  This current estimate is based on preliminary pipeline set out in 
Annex 1.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
For APL (1): Accra, Ghana .  
 
For APL (2): The part of the project will span all core infrastructure sectors. These sectors most 
likely include road and bridges, airports, ports, urban development such as water and sanitation, 
and rail. The #first-mover# transactions will most likely be in the transport sector- roads, ports, 
airport, water and power that are located in all different geographical locations in Ghana. As 
such, safeguards analysis must take into consideration all salient physical characteristics at each 
intervention site. These include, inter alia, waterways, rivers, canals, flood plains, at-risk and 
environmentally vulnerable locations that are associated with the anticipated areas of 
intervention.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The lead implementing Agency will be the Public Investment Department (PID) within the 
Ministry of Finance. The project will be implemented with support of a program management 
unit (PMU) within this unit that will be composed of five positions: Financial Management 
specialist, Procurement specialist, Monitory and Evaluation (M&E) specialist, and Safeguard & 
Environmental specialist. Currently PID does not have any capacity to undertake safeguard 
policies, although it is anticipated the Ministry of Environment will play an active role in 
Page  5
supporting PID in preparation of project assessments. If this is the case, then the focus would be 
on specialist social safeguards specialised housed in PID. More generally, certain of these 
positions may eventually be filled by Government staff re-assigned from host departments, 
where feasible.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaogang Wang (SDV) 
Mr Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The planned activities under this project particularly infrastructure projects such as roads, 
ports, airport, power, railways, irrigation and water supply, are likely to trigger bank#s 
environmental policy (OP 4.01). At this stage of the project preparation where the locations and 
types of activities to be supported by the project are unknown, the project will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  Upon project initiation, Strategic 
Environmental Assessments (SEAs) of potential target sectors will be prepared to accompany the 
ESMF. The ESMF and the Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEAs) will guide the 
preparation of project specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) that will 
be prepared before any decision is made on financing the projects that have been identified for 
possible financing under component 3 of this project.  
 
These products will be prepared by the borrower, and then reviewed and cleared by the 
borrower and the bank. The ESMF will be disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop prior to 
appraisal. The SEA and any project specific ESIAs will be disclosed in-country and at the 
InfoShop as they become available during implementation, but prior to final decisions regarding 
financing of specific infrastructure investments.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
As the project sites are not yet known, this OP is TBD. The ESMF will provide guidance on 
addressing project impacts in critical natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
As the project sites are not yet known, this OP is TBD. The ESMF will provide guidance on 
addressing project impacts involving forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
As the project sites are not yet known, this OP is TBD. The ESMF will provide guidance on 
addressing impacts on physical cultural resources, including a #chance finds# procedures.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Since the Component 3 would support some infrastructure projects such as roads, ports, 
airport power, and water supply, land acquisition/involuntary resettlement are likely. The project 
would trigger Bank#s policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12.  As the exact locations of 
projects cannot be determined prior to appraisal, the project will prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF). Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) for specific sub-projects will be prepared in 
advance of project approval to mitigate the adverse impacts and enable the affected people 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
improve or retain their livelihood.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The project could involve the rehabilitation/upgrading/construction of dams. The ESMF will 
provide guidance on dam safety procedures.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/21/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
From an environmental and social safeguard point of view, the Public-Private Partnership 
(PPP) Program, falls into Category This is because although the current program (APL 1) is 
likely to be Category B, some of the candidate projects in the future under APL2 (e.g. road 
and bridges, airports, ports, urban development such as water and sanitation, and rail) may 
have significant adverse environmental impacts that are sensitive, diverse, cumulative, 
irreversible or unprecedented typical of Category A projects.  The ESMF will address the 
potential triggering of the safeguard policies that are checked "TBD".   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peter J. Mousley 
03/29/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/29/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paul Noumba Um 
03/29/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
