Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/15/2011 
Report No.:  AC5786
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P124775 
Project Name:  Ghana - West Africa Regional Fisheries Program 
Task Team Leader:  John Virdin 
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters 
Global Supplemental ID: P124812 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (50%);Other environment and natural 
resources management (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.30 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
3.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds 
3.50
3.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to sustainably increase the overall wealth 
generated by the exploitation of Ghana's fisheries resources, and the proportion of that 
wealth captured by the country. The project would achieve this objective by: (i) 
strengthening the country's capacity to sustainably govern and manage the fisheries; (ii) 
reducing illegal fishing; and (iii) increasing the value and profitability generated by fish 
resources and the proportion of that value captured by the country.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have five components:  
 
Component 1:  Good Governance and Sustainable Management of the Fisheries. This 
component aims to build the capacity of the Government and stakeholders to develop and 
implement policies through a shared approach that would ensure that the fish resources 
are used in a manner that is environmentally sustainable, socially equitable and 
economically profitable.  
Page  2
Component 2: Reduction of Illegal Fishing. The component aims to reduce the illegal 
fishing activities threatening the sustainable management of the country's fish resources.  
 
Component 3: Increasing the Contribution of the Fish Resources to the Local Economy. 
The component aims to identify and implement measures to increase the benefits to 
Ghana from the fish resources, by increasing the share of the value-added captured in the 
country.  
 
Component 4:  Aquaculture Development. This component aims to set the framework 
for increased investment in inland aquaculture.  
 
Component 5: Regional Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation and Project 
Management. The component aims to support project implementation and regional 
coordination with the WARFP, ensuring that regular monitoring and evaluation is 
conducted, and the results are fed back into decision-making and project management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project is for Ghana, and will cover both marine and inland fisheries, as 
well as the coastal and inland fishing communities.  The project will include investments 
in both physical goods, works and services as well as soft activities such as technical 
assistance.  The safeguard analysis therefore takes into account the current situation of 
overexploitation of the resources and excess fishing effort by these communities, as well 
as the possible social ramifications of capping and reducing fishing effort in certain cases 
to allow the fish stocks to rebuild and bring profitability back into the sector.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ellen J. Tynan (AFTEN) 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The key safeguard issue for the project is the social risk arising from the potential 
restriction of traditional access to fish resources that may be introduced by the project in 
targeted fisheries. Currently in Ghana, fish resources are utilized through a system of 
open access that has allowed essentially more fishers and fishing pressure than the 
resources can sustain, or are economically viable. The project addresses fundamental 
constraint to the sector's contribution to economic growth and poverty reduction, by 
supporting the introduction of fishing rights through a licensing process to manage access 
to the resources, as well as gradually reducing the semi-industrial and industrial trawl 
fleet to reduce current overexploitation and allow the fish stocks to recover to healthier 
and more economically productive levels. It is from this transition away from open to 
managed access to the fisheries, as well as from the gradual reduction in the semi-
industrial and industrial trawl fleet that will impact livelihoods for the crew on those 
vessels and some associated fish buyers, that the key social risks are created.  
 
The instruments to address the social risk arising from a transition to managed access to 
the fisheries are: (i) support for community participation in the resource management 
process in targeted pilot sites in component 1.2.6, and (ii) extensive social marketing and 
consultation campaigns with stakeholders throughout the country in component 1.4. The 
first activity (1.2.6) will aim to advance the roll out of licensing in pilot sites, in order to 
provide a demonstration effect of the benefits, while the second (1.4) will aim to 
implement a national communications strategy and dialogue on the benefits of this 
transition away from open access.  
 
To address the social risk arising from the gradual reduction of the semi-industrial and 
industrial trawl fleets through increased enforcement of existing laws and regulations, 
component 1.3.2 of the project will finance re-training and compensation packages for 
crew members and fish buyers who would lose their livelihoods as a result of a reduction 
in the fleet. These packages would aim to help the affected crew and fish buyers move 
out of the fishing sector to pursue alternative, potentially more profitable and sustainable 
livelihoods.  
 
To guide both the process of community decision-making in the targeted pilot sites in 
1.2.6, and the support for alternative livelihoods in component 1.3.2, the project has 
developed a Process Framework, in accordance with OP 4.12 requirements.  
 
Additionally, when the specific sites for the infrastructure have been confirmed during 
implementation, and the necessary screening has been completed, the project will 
develop as necessary resettlement action plans to mitigate any social impacts including 
livelihood restoration. In accordance with OP 4.12, this process will be guided by a 
Resettlement Policy Framework that has been prepared, based on the model of the 
regional Resettlement Process Framework approved for the West Africa Regional 
Fisheries Program.  
Page  4
While the social risks are the key safeguards issue for the project, there are also possible 
environmental impacts which relate to the construction of infrastructure as per activities 
in components 2 and 3 of the project. To mitigate any possible negative environmental 
impacts, the project has prepared an Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework 
(ESMF). The ESMF provides a framework for the preparation of Environmental 
Management Plans as the specific sites are confirmed for a number of project activities. 
This will ensure that any potential impacts arising from the construction or rehabilitation 
of small-scale landing site infrastructure will be mitigated, in accordance with the 
environmental assessment safeguard (OP/BP 4.01) and the frameworks on environment 
prepared for the project.  
 
Although the fisheries management and small to medium-scale aquaculture 
development activities that the project will support on the lower reaches of the Volta 
River are entirely within Ghana#s borders, because the river is part of the internationally-
shared Volta Basin the project has triggered OP 7.50.  All of the project#s activities are 
downstream of the riparian countries to the Basin, and none are expected to have any 
appreciable or negative impacts on the Basin or these countries.  The countries were 
notified according to the policy, and no comments have been received.  
 
Lastly, the maritime boundaries and OP 7.60 were also considered during the 
preparation.  Ghana entered into bilateral negotiations with Cote d'Ivoire in 2010 to 
define the parameters for delimiting the maritime boundary, particularly as concerns parts 
of the Djata Oil Fields at Cape Three Points where the latest oil discoveries were found. 
There are currently no further developments on record, and no dispute has been formally 
registered with any tribunal. Similarly, in late 2009 the Ghana-Togo Permanent Joint 
Commission for Cooperation met for the third time to discuss minor land boundary 
problems and to explore ways to bilaterally delimit their maritime boundary. As with the 
border with Cote d'Ivoire, there are no later developments on record, and no disputes 
have been registered with any tribunal. For these reasons, OP 7.60 was not triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term impacts could include the reduction of fishers in targeted fisheries that are 
currently overexploited, as a result of increased resource management and the 
encouragement of alternative livelihoods to fishing.  Environmentally, no permanent 
indirect impacts are envisaged.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower will implement the safeguards instruments which have been prepared for 
the purposes of applying contents to address impacts. These instruments include a 
Page  5
Process Framework, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF). These frameworks have been developed to 
outline broad areas for mitigating any potential social impacts due to land take or 
livelihood impacts, restriction of access to natural resource- sea/rivers for economic 
activities and for potential environmental and other social impacts. During 
implementation, resettlement action plans (RAP) will be developed for all subprojects 
which may be identified as having resettlement impacts, as well as environmental and 
social impact assessment and management plans. The resource management measures 
and reductions in fishing effort will be decided by a consultative process with the 
communities and stakeholders, which will be informed by a national plan of action to 
implement the safeguards instruments mentioned above and prepared by the borrower.  
 
The capacity of the borrower is at an acceptable level. The Ghana Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) has adequate experience working on World Bank projects. In 
spite of this, there will be capacity building for designated staff of the Secretariat 
Fisheries Commission within the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) on 
safeguards to enhance effective implementation and monitoring of the safeguards action 
plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the project are the fishers and fishing communities in Ghana, as 
well as local processors and persons involved in fish marketing especially women. At the 
institutional level, the stakeholders include the EPA, MOFA, the respective 
district/municipal and metropolitan assemblies and Non-Governmental Organizations 
(NGOs). Consultations on the draft EA, EMP, PF and RPF were carried out from 
December 2010 February 2011 with different categories of stakeholders. Some of the key 
issues raised by stakeholders involved both the appreciation for the need to reduce 
pressure on the fish stocks, and caution in how fast the Government moves to do so. 
More specifically, the various stakeholders are willing to work with the Government in 
this effort, but clearly want a voice into the process for how reductions in fishing pressure 
and fishing fleets take place. The Project Implementation Unit will continue to work 
together with these stakeholder groups to ensure that compliance with safeguard issues 
are monitored throughout the project. Disclosure of safeguards documents in country and 
at the Bank infoshop occurred in March and April 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/08/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/25/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  6
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/08/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/04/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  7
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Virdin 
04/06/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ellen J. Tynan 
04/06/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah 
04/07/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/15/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
04/15/2011 
Comments:   
