Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/08/2011 
Report No.:  AC6039
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P122692 
Project Name:  Ghana Local Government Capacity Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Rumana Huque 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 4, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
175.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overarching goal of the project is to strengthen institutions that support accountable 
local governance for improved service delivery.  The specific Project Development 
Objectives are to:  
 
i. 
Strengthen the intergovernmental fiscal framework;  
 
ii. 
Strengthen local public financial management and accountability for improved 
infrastructure and services in urban assemblies; and  
 
iii. 
Improve citizens' engagement with urban assemblies and their perceptions of 
urban management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has four components as follows:  
 
a) Strengthening the fiscal framework for decentralization: This component will support 
the establishment of a predictable and transparent fiscal framework for local governance 
through assisting MoFEP to develop and manage specific aspects of the fiscal framework 
for local governance.  
 
Page  2
b) Enhancing decentralized urban service delivery: This component will support 
selected urban local governments to improve their management capabilities in the 
identified key reform areas through 2 sub-components.  
 
i)Performance-based Urban Development Grant to urban assemblies:  
 
The core of the component is an annual performance-based grant to urban assemblies. 
All 46 urban assemblies (6 metropolitan and 40 municipal assemblies as per the official 
classification of MMDAs) are technically eligible. In order to access the grant each year, 
the MMAs will need to meet DDF minimum conditions, achieve at least the average 
score (of all MMDAs) on the DDF annual assessment (FOAT)each year, and have signed 
a
Grant Participation Agreement confirming their agreement to abide by the terms and 
conditions of the Grant. Funds will be provided in addition to existing DDF allocations, 
weighted in accordance with population size and the results of an assessment focused on 
the key reform areas targeted by this project (the assessment would be carried out with 
the regular FOAT exercise, as an additional "chapter" to the FOAT).  Assessment, 
operational and fund disbursement procedures will be closely aligned with the existing 
DDF mechanism.  
 
ii) Targeted capacity support to urban assemblies:  
 
The component will also support a program of targeted capacity support to urban 
assemblies to assist them to enhance their performance. Support will be provided through 
two means: (i) training and technical assistance support that will be managed centrally; 
and (ii) a Capacity Support Fund that will be made available directly to MMAs.  The 
centrally managed capacity support will finance: (i) training on the key PFM reform areas 
(conventional training on PFM as well as training on the preparation and dissemination of 
user-friendly formats that will make financial information such as budgets and audits 
more accessible to citizens and civil society); and (ii) regional teams of technical advisors 
who will provide hands-on support to staff of MMAs on a rotating basis. The Capacity 
Support Fund will be in the form of an allocation (or a drawing right) to only the MMAs 
receiving the Urban Grant.  It aims to incentivize the achievement of specific outcomes in 
the key reform areas through the use of strategic consulting services (e.g. street 
addressing to improve revenues) and advisory support for transactions (e.g. assistance for 
setting up management contracts for revenue collection).  Funds will be transferred to the 
MMAs based on applications, subject to quality assurance of the proposed contracts.  
Once transferred, the funds will be managed by the MMAs who will carry out the related 
procurement.  
 
c) Stimulating demand for accountable governance and service delivery: This 
component will generate civil society demand for financial information from urban 
assemblies (e.g. budgets and audits); foster more effective engagement of civil society 
with assemblies on this information (i.e. helping civil society to understand the 
information and provide a forum for exchange and debate around the information); and 
strengthen the capacity and engagement of citizens' representatives on the budget and 
service delivery issues. The activities supported under this component will directly 
complement and underpin the "supply-led" accountability initiatives introduced under 
Components 1 and 2. Activities to be supported will include i) a social audit that will 
Page  3
encourage civil society to engage with their local government on PFM issues; ii) the 
establishment of a media network which can report more frequently and more effectively 
on local government PFM issues; and iii) support for the existing Ministerial Advisory 
Board to MLGRD to deepen its engagement on social accountability for PFM and to 
provide advice on broader policy development on local government PFM.  
 
d) Project management and evaluation: This component will provide support to 
MLGRD in fulfilling its role in supporting the decentralization process specifically 
related to fiscal decentralization and urban development.  Support will be provided in 
three broad areas: (i) technical assistance and operational support to the Urban 
Development Unit, the Fiscal Decentralization Secretariat (FDS), the Inspectorate 
Division, and the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit of the Planning, Budgeting, 
Monitoring and Evaluation Department; (ii) strengthening the functions and capacity of 
the Urban Development Unit (UDU); and (iii) support for project management and 
implementation support, including support for procurement and FM, project audits, 
project evaluations, citizen surveys, project communications activities, training and 
workshops, and operating costs.  
 
Out of the four components, the urban grant (component 2a) includes physical 
investments at the MMA level, which are of most relevance for environmental and social 
safeguards.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Forty-six metropolitan and municipal assemblies across the country are eligible to receive 
the performance grant, but each assembly will be assessed annually to ensure it meets the 
required criteria before getting an allocation. Therefore, the specific geographical 
location for the project is not known, and the specific use of the grant funds is also not 
known apriori.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
Mr Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large scale impacts are envisaged under this project. The size of the grant received by 
each MMA will be limited to between US$ 500,000-1,000,000 per year. The project will 
make  grant transfers to MMAs based on performance in key focus areas of the project 
related to public financial management and accountability.  The grant can be used by 
MMAs for infrastructure and services that they have a mandate to deliver (with a simple 
negative list).  These could be small scale civil works, whose potential impacts are likely 
to be minor and site specific, typical of category B projects.  
 
The project is not expected to result in resettlement due to large scale land take or 
restriction of access to sources of livelihood.  However, small pieces of land may be 
required for investments involving construction or rehabilitation as the MMAs do not 
own land of their own. Since the exact location, nature and number of investments and/or 
services are not known, the Borrower has prepared an ESMF and RPF to guide project 
activity implementation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term or indirect impacts foreseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an ESMF and an RPF to address any potential adverse effects 
of the project interventions under the Urban Grant at MMA level, including adverse 
environmental effects, impacts on livelihood, resettlement, restriction of access and land 
take. During implementation and where required, ARAPs, RAPs and ESIAs will be 
prepared.  
 
At the national level, the borrower's capacity for safeguards is acceptable and there is an 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) that is familiar with the Bank's safeguards 
policies and has good working relationships with the Bank and Bank-funded projects. 
The project coordination team in MLGRD will hire an environment and social specialist 
or a consultant(s) who will follow up on environmental and social issues, especially 
implementation of the safeguards instruments during project implementation. Other 
capacity building initiatives will be launched for MMAs to upgrade their knowledge on 
safeguards. In addition, the safeguards specialists in the Bank team will provide guidance 
during implementation.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the MLGRD who will work in collaboration with MMAs 
and other implementing agencies. The RPF and ESMF have been developed through a 
consultative process with stakeholders in selected representative MMAs and disclosed in 
the country as well as at the World Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal. These documents 
have been disclosed through newspaper advertisements, consultation meetings and public 
notices. Issues raised during the consultation processes have been incorporated into the 
documents. Some of the issues raised include compensation payments, land acquisition, 
weak safeguards capacity of staff who will implement the project at the local level and 
awareness and sensitization of the public on safeguards issues. Among the stakeholders 
are Metropolitan and Municipal Chief Executives, Metropolitan and Municipal 
Coordinating Directors, Development Planning Officers, EPA officials, traditional 
leaders and NGOs/CSOs.  
 
Potentially affected people may include individuals who may suffer minor losses or 
disturbances of livelihood as a result of project activities. The RPF and ESMFs outline 
broad guidelines for addressing any such minor impacts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/27/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/26/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rumana Huque 
02/08/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Joseph Ese Akpokodje 
02/08/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah 
02/08/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Moses Yao Duphey 
02/08/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
02/08/2011 
Comments:   
