Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/02/2010 
Report No.:  AC5759
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guatemala 
Project ID:  P112011 
Project Name:  Enhancing SME Productivity 
Task Team Leader:  Michael J. Goldberg 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: January 25, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (75%);Regulation and competition policy 
(25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
32.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
6.00
6.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to stimulate the growth of SMEs in selected 
value chains. This will be achieved by supporting investments and technical assistance to 
enhance their productivity, improve the quality of their products and processes, and 
facilitate their integration into the national and international markets.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would be a US$32.0 million Specific Investment Loan (SIL) over a 
five year period. The project can be summarized as follows:  
 
Component 1: Improving Coordination of Public and Private Support for SMEs (US$ 
9.7 million)  
 
Component 2:  Creating More Productive Value Chains (US$19 million)  
 
Component 3:  Project Management and National SME Policy monitoring (US$2 
million)  
Page  2
Unallocated Funds (US$1.3 million)  
 
Component 1: Improving Coordination of Public and Private Support for SMEs (US$9.7 
million)  
 
Under component 1, MINECO will lead and coordinate development efforts of the 
public and private sectors in support of SMEs, including improving existing business 
development services (BDS) and quality services and conducting pilots to develop new 
approaches to increase access to BDS and financial services.  
 
This component will finance selected activities under the National Policy for MSME 
Development (2005) which coordinates various government efforts. The National Policy 
includes improving access to financial services that are appropriate for SMEs, improving 
business development services, and improved quality and access to technologies with 
business applications. This component will help inform national policies on SMEs and 
value chains will benefit from improved business support services. The project will 
finance parts of the Policy not covered by existing government financing and support 
from donors. The component will finance MINECO's participation in national, regional 
and international seminars related to SMEs, so that the Ministry can improve its plans 
and implement innovative pilot programs. The component will not finance a survey of the 
SME sector because the Inter American Development Bank (IADB) is financing such a 
survey in its Trade and Integration Support Program with MINECO.  
 
Component 1 will coordinate closely with Component 2, as value chain working group 
action plans inform national policies on SMEs. The component consists of three 
subcomponents.  
 
Subcomponent 1: Promoting Quality and Improving Quality Services.  
 
The subcomponent will strengthen the supply and demand of quality services that are 
relevant to SME needs. On the demand side, this subcomponent will provide consultant 
services, publications, and non-consultant services to support the design and 
implementation of a communication strategy that targets SMEs and aims to promote 
understanding of the importance of quality in processes and products. The strategy will 
include inter alia, trainings to associations, conferences, publications, and coordination 
activities with other relevant agencies such as certifying entities and other government 
agencies that promote standards.  
 
These activities, along with the value chain activities in component 2, will likely 
increase demand for quality services. However, several studies  have identified 
deficiencies in the supply of quality services in Guatemala. The subcomponent will build 
off of existing national plans and studies to strengthen MINECO's ability to lead a 
national quality system covering accreditation, certification, metrology, and standards 
work.  The subcomponent will provide support for training activities and additional 
technical personnel for, inter alia, the metrology lab and the accreditation agency. The 
project will also finance the capacity building and equipment maintenance needed to 
Page  3
increase the coverage of the quality system services. Lastly, this subcomponent will 
finance a consultancy to develop a sustainability plan of the national quality system with 
the aim of improving its institutional capacity and the generation of income from fee-
based services and other sources to cover the costs of technical personnel.  
 
Subcomponent 2: Strengthening Business Development Services.  
 
The subcomponent will provide consultant services, goods and non-consulting services 
to improve the supply of business development services. It will carry out an inventory of 
existing business development services (BDS) and expand the information available in 
MINECO's current directory of BDS providers. BDS providers offer assistance to SMEs 
in areas that range from initial business planning to training to accessing new markets. 
The providers could assist in variety of topics including, inter alia, technology transfer, 
legal and financial assistance, market intelligence, certification, and management 
training. The subcomponent will finance an evaluation of existing BDS providers and 
assess the level of services provided. Based on these evaluations and the productivity 
barriers identified by the selected value chain working groups, this subcomponent will 
finance consultancies, goods, and conference services to provide technical assistance to 
BDS providers to address identified weaknesses. Technical assistance will include, inter 
alia, training of trainers, expansion of certification services, and promotion of alternative 
dispute resolution mechanisms.  
 
Subcomponent 3: Supporting Pilots for New Product Development  
 
Subcomponent 3 will finance research pilots and feasibility studies to identify the most 
useful solutions to overcoming barriers to growth and productivity faced by SMEs. 
Examples of new instruments to be studied could include a partial credit risk guarantee 
for banks lending to SMEs, a feasibility study of a second tier bank, and the development 
of new microfinance products (such as microleasing and microinsurance). To measure 
their impact and decide if a particular pilot should be expanded, the pilots will include a 
monitoring plan and indicators. These pilots will be discussed with the Bank and included 
in the annual operational plan, with direct monitoring and reporting undertaken by 
MINECO.  
 
Component 2:  Creating More Productive Value Chains (US$19 million)  
 
Component 2 will improve SME competitiveness through the development and partial 
financing of prioritized action plans for selected value chains in the tourism and 
agribusiness sectors, both of which were identified in the Country Economic 
Memorandum. The component will select two value chains each from these sectors. The 
selection process will be transparent and competitive, based on technical criteria that 
reflect economic, social, and environmental feasibility as well as SME participation in the 
value chain. In cases when a value chain working group is not selected for project 
support, the value chain working group leaders will be informed of the specific reasons 
for the decision in writing. Such value chains can be reconsidered in future selection 
rounds.  
 
Page  4
The Component 2 coordinator in the PIU and the technical expert(s) will use a variety of 
sources of information to select potential value chains in a transparent process. Sources of 
information should include available statistical information on demand for a product, 
interviews with key sector actors, specific statistics on SME participation in the sector, 
and productivity information if available. This process will identify 20 to 30 candidate 
value chains. Through in-country consultations and interviews, the PIU and the experts 
will create a short list of 10 or more value chains. Next, the selection team will conduct 
field visits to assess institutional readiness (such as presence of organized groups, e.g. 
associations) and receptivity, and identify possible champions. Based on the PIU's 
recommendations, the steering committee will select the initial value chains to participate 
in the project (up to four). The steering committee will also approve the action plans, 
upon no objection from the Bank, and make all final decisions regarding funding and 
project implementation. The PIU will use available subsector information, data provided 
in the diagnostic work, and benchmarking information from other countries, to facilitate 
the organization of the value chain working group, provide technical assistance as need 
arises, and develop prioritized action plans.  
 
To ensure maximum SME participation, the project has set a target of around 80 percent 
SME participation in the value chain. Value-chain working groups will be formed to 
generate priority action plans, supported by specialized facilitation and technical 
assistance as needed.  
 
To ensure momentum for the project, the working groups will identify "quick wins" 
before generating priority action plans, such as supporting farmers to meet phytosanitary 
pre-certification (thus increasing their net income). The working groups will submit these 
quick wins to the steering committee's normal review and approval procedure, which 
includes reviews by MARN to ensure compliance with the environmental and other 
safeguards.  
 
To develop the action plans, the project will employ a public-private partnership 
approach that encourages strong SME participation. The approach will begin with 
working groups composed of key stakeholders in the value-chain, and include relevant 
associations, chambers of commerce, representatives firms, and such supporting 
institutions as research agencies and input providers. The MINECO-led steering 
committee will be composed of the Minister of Economy, the Vice Minister of MSMEs, 
representatives from relevant government agencies, and various private sector 
organizations (although not from the specific value chains represented in the working 
groups). The steering committee will provide overall guidance, reviews, and final 
decisions (upon Bank no objection) concerning of recommendations made by technical 
staff in the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). For environmental and natural resource 
safeguard issues, MARN will review relevant proposals and action plans before final 
approval by the steering committee.  
 
The formal action plan will include a baseline and key performance indicators and will 
be subject to approval by the steering committee and World Bank no-objection. The PIU 
and the value chain working group will refine the intermediate outcome and output 
Page  5
indicators and track the performance in the project monitoring system. The PIU will 
monitor the impact of the interventions on cost, time, and value added (or another 
productivity measurement) within the respective value chain. Where necessary, the 
monitoring and evaluation expert within the PIU will commission limited survey work to 
complement existing information.  
 
Trade facilitation issues, such as regulatory and administrative barriers, as identified by 
the working groups, will be addressed in coordination with existing programs in 
Guatemala, including the Inter-American Development Bank, USAID, and Agexport.  
 
Selected value chains will become eligible for graduation after about two years, at 
which time, a new round of selection will take place, as conditions permit.  Graduation 
means that successful value chains will not need further project support because they 
successfully completed the action priorities and have the internal organization to identify 
other resources. However, during the mid-term review, value-chains can also lose 
eligibility for further funding due to a lack of momentum or demonstrated progress. The 
project is aimed at building public-private sector ownership of the project through 
specialized facilitation and technical assistance. Sustainability and institutionalization 
mechanisms include building public and private capacity to facilitate working groups 
using international best practices, and a seminar to transfer lessons learned after year two. 
A
preliminary institutionalization plan for the working groups will be included before the 
formation of the working groups, and updated as part of the working group deliverables 
during mid-term review.  
 
Project financing will decline as private sector financing increases and the value chain 
approaches graduation.  
 
The component will improve the sustainability of the productivity and income gains 
with ex-ante risk management tools and practices as an integral part of the selected value 
chains' action plans. For example, risk management activities for the agribusiness value 
chain would include the use of disease resistant seeds, natural disaster preparedness 
through targeted infrastructure investments, insurance instruments, and integrated pest 
management. Environmental expert consultants contracted for the selected value chains 
will similarly ensure pro-active environmental solutions in action plans in coordination 
with national entities such as the Clean Production Technology Center of the Guatemalan 
Chamber of Industry.  
 
Tourism. The project will work with SMEs, other members in the selected value chains, 
and the relevant stakeholders, to improve the competitiveness of tourism services and 
assets. As part of this process, the component will develop activities that address 
physical, marketing, regulatory, and other constraints. The value chain working group 
will determine the final list of activities, which could include, inter alia, development of 
new tourism packages with high SME participation, upgrades of heritage assets (such as 
small on-site infrastructure improvements), creation of safe zones for targeted routes, 
training of guides, strengthening of tourism organizations, introduction of clean 
production technologies in small hotels, creation of a joint web site, and familiarization 
Page  6
trips by international tour operators. The component will also directly address security 
concerns, drawing lessons from the Tourist Assistance Program, Taxi Seguro, and 
international experience.  
 
Agribusiness. The project will work with SMEs, other firms in the selected value chains, 
and relevant stakeholders to trigger productive private investments and job creation. 
Activities could include, inter alia, the development of new products, market intelligence 
research, cold chains or other small infrastructure improvements, and niche marketing 
schemes, as well as the relevant certifications and seals (such as organic or Fair Trade 
certifications).  
 
Component 3 # MINECO Project Implementation and Capacity Building (US$ 2 
million)  
 
This component will finance the cost of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in 
MINECO, which will manage all technical, fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the work. 
The consultants serving as technical staff in the unit should be absorbed into the Vice 
Ministry of MSMEs and the administrative and financial team should become part of 
MINECO's Finance and Administration Unit. The Director of the Finance and 
Administration unit will manage the fiduciary team while the project coordinator will 
report on technical and strategic issues to the Vice Minister of MSMEs. The consultants 
for this unit will be selected on a competitive basis and will include the following:  
 
#
For Component 1: One component coordinator and a technical expert.  
 
#
For Component 2: One component coordinator and a technical expert.  
 
#
For Component 3: One project coordinator, one administrative support staff, two 
procurement staff (one expert and one analyst), two financial management staff (one 
expert and one analyst) and two staff responsible for monitoring and evaluation.  
 
A
specific annual budget and set of activities will be established for technical assistance 
and capacity building activities for MINECO staff in technical, fiduciary, and safeguards 
issues, including indigenous peoples' issues and social issues.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will have national coverage. Given that the Project's scope may include 
environmentally and socially sensitive areas and the nature and exact location of Project 
investments will only be determined during implementation, an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF), including an Indigenous Peoples Planning 
Framework and Involuntary Resettlement Framework has been developed by the World 
Bank team and consultants in conjunction with MINECO and MARN to ensure proper 
safeguards management.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Johannes Werner Christia Schuster (LCCGT) 
Mr Oliver James Rogers (LCSPF) 
Page  7
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), 
and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): There are no large scale, significant, 
and/or irreversible impacts expected from this project.  However, given the large 
potential universe of productive activities that this project will support, including specific 
interventions to counter value chain threats (e.g. pests) and providing support to 
productive infrastructure (such as warehouses and cold chains), potentially slightly 
adverse environmental effects could occur with component 3 if proper safeguards are not 
put into place.  
 
Without prevention measures, the matching grants offered in this component could lead 
to some adverse environmental effects. If no safeguards are implemented, the grants 
could fund investment activities with negative spillover effects on the environment. 
However, since the recipients of these grants are mostly small and medium enterprises, 
the potential adverse environmental impact will be limited.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): Adverse effects are not expected for indigenous 
peoples with this project, but indigenous peoples are present in and may have a collective 
attachment to project areas.  Since many indigenous peoples own enterprises and the 
geographic reach of the project includes indigenous regions, the project's activities should 
benefit indigenous peoples.  The project is committed to ensuring that the positive 
benefits of the project.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project is not expected to fund any projects 
that could potentially lead to voluntary or involuntary resettlement. However, since there 
is a remote possibility of such issues arising during project implementation, the project 
will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF will include screening 
criteria to identify and mitigate or eliminate resettlement impacts.   
 
Page  8
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term negative environmental issues or impacts are anticipated, since all value 
chain working group action plan activities financed by the project and by other sources of 
financing will have been reviewed before implementation by an independent 
environmental consultant as well as MARN. In fact, on the positive side, the project will 
promote a greater understanding of risk management (including environmental and social 
risks) as well as clean production technology options and investments among 
participating and other SMEs.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project's design builds on the work of the Clean Production Technology Center of 
the Chamber of Industry in Guatemala City. This should ensure a proactive approach to 
environmental safety issues at the sectoral and regional level. The Borrower's capacity 
will be reviewed during appraisal to determine what special capacity building issues may 
arise due to the nature of this project. Ongoing coordination mechanisms will be 
established (through a memorandum of understanding or another form of inter-
institutional agreement) to ensure that the Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources joins the Ministry of Economy in the development, review and approval of the 
action plans of selected value chains, as well as monitoring and evaluation of this 
component's activities and investments. An independent social expert will be contracted 
on a retainer basis to ensure that action plans created by value chain working groups will 
not generate adverse social impacts, and that to the extent possible, they are inclusive of 
indigenous peoples and other marginalized groups. Also, the project team is currently 
carrying out a social assessment to determine the extent of institutional capacity building 
necessary for the PIU to manage social safeguard issues. If deemed necessary during 
preparation, a social expert, with relevant experience, and will be hired to work for the 
Project Implementation Unit of the Ministry of Economy to ensure proper execution of 
the Project's social safeguards frameworks, namely the IPPF and RPF. This specialist 
would be charged with the evaluation of potential resettlement impacts and/or affects 
(both adverse and positive) on indigenous peoples of activities financed under the Action 
Plans in addition to ensuring proper monitoring and evaluation of Safeguards Plans. In 
addition, they would be charged with ensuring ongoing consultation with indigenous 
groups and the promotion of social inclusion within the value chains.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project's social assessment and indigenous peoples framework have a long list of 
specific measures to ensure that potentially affected people will be safeguarded in 
agreement with existing Bank policies and practices.  Examples of these measures 
include ongoing consultation, the use of local languages in project promotion and 
Page  9
reporting materials, and the due consideration of indigenous practices and sectoral 
participation in the selection of the value chains to be supported under the project.  
 
The value chain should provide information on socioeconomic indicators of SMEs of 
the value chain.  
 
The project has a communication strategy that aims at mainstreaming gender 
perspectives and multiculturalism in the Communication Strategy Project, which will 
include actions such as the translation of messages, invitations, announcements, and other 
materials to allow access to most of the indigenous population of the 22 linguistic 
communities in the country.  
 
The Business Development Services provider should take into account both gender 
issues and indigenous peoples-related issues, to ensure the rapid acceptance and highest 
possible impact from the technical interventions. Characteristics of the clients may also 
affect the decision to provide individual or group-based services and related training.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/05/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/05/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/01/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/30/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/05/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/05/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2010 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  10
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  11
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael J. Goldberg 
11/29/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Johannes Werner Christia Schuster 
11/29/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Oliver James Rogers 
11/29/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lily L. Chu 
11/29/2010 
Comments:   
