Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
RESTRUCTURING STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/18/2011 
Report No.:  AC5698
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guatemala 
Project ID:  P094321 
Project Name:  Project to Support a Rural Economic Development Program 
Task Team Leader:  Marie-Helene Collion 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (25%);Agricultural marketing and trade (22%);Roads and 
highways (22%);Information technology (22%);General public administration sector 
(9%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (29%);Indigenous peoples (29%);Other 
financial and private sector development (14%);Managing for development results 
(14%);Rural policies and institutions (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Inter-American 
Development 
Bank 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives (PDO) remain (i) to improve the competitiveness of 
rural productive supply chains with strong indigenous participation; and (ii) to strengthen 
the institutional capacity of the public entities participating in the program through the 
adoption of a territorial management model with indigenous participation.   
 
3. Project Description 
After the proposed restructuring, the project has three components as described below: (i) 
investments in productive supply chains; (ii) strengthening of territorial public 
management capacities for competitiveness; and (iii) management, monitoring and 
evaluation.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Investment in Productive Supply Chains (US$ 67.5 million; IBRD US$ 
41.2 million). The objective of this component is to increase the incomes of mostly 
indigenous rural populations through time and space coordinated investments in favor of 
productive rural organizations including: market access, technical assistance, seed capital, 
financial services, and productive infrastructure investments in the program area. To 
achieve this objective, the component has the following subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Entrepreneur Development Services (US$ 13.5 million of which 
US$ 5.4 million financed by IBRD) which will allow rural productive organizations to 
get access to markets and to link up with productive chains through market intelligence, 
technical assistance and seed capital. The Minister of the Economy (MIN ECO) - Vice 
Ministry for the Development of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises through 
PRONACOM (National Competitiveness Program) and assisted by private professional 
organizations would implement the subcomponent. The subcomponent would: (i ) 
finance consulting services for market intelligence and access, pre-investment studies, 
technical assistance in production, organization, administration, processing and 
commercialization, and formalization, certification and association of small enterprises; 
and (ii) provide seed capital to eligible producer organizations for investments and 
variable costs supporting the supply chain.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Access to Financial Services (US$ 8 million financed entirely by 
IADB) of rural productive organizations by: (i) strengthening the capacity of MINECO to 
help micro-enterprises access financial services; (ii) technical assistance and incentives to 
intermediary financial institutions (IFI) to adjust their services to the needs of rural 
productive organizations; (iii) technical assistance to rural productive organizations to 
comply with the requirements of financial intermediaries; and (iv) a line of credit to 
eligible financial intermediaries at market interest rates.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3: Access to Productive Rural Infrastructure (public and collective) 
(US$ 30.3 million of which US$ 20.1 million financed by IBRD) by financing public 
rural infrastructure investments or collective investments needed to improve the 
competitiveness of the rural productive organizations participating in the program. This 
subcomponent aims to provide productive infrastructure to support both the development 
of new supply chain partnerships and the improvement of existing partnerships. This 
covers both: municipal economic infrastructure such as small irrigation systems, 
rehabilitation of existing roads and communications, construction of small public tourism 
infrastructure, business zones, telecommunication centers and markets, and improvement 
of electricity connections ; as well as collective (private but owned by groups of people) 
investments in economic infrastructure such as storage facilities and distribution centers, 
both of which are needed to improve the competitiveness of supply chains. The 
subcomponent is to be carried out by FONAPAZ (National Peace Fund). The demand for 
such investments would be generated by the private sector (sub-projects involving supply 
chains) and/or by the municipalities in the program area. The municipal investments 
would be financed on a matching grant basis with municipal authorities and each 
investment would be required to have a maintenance plan. In addition to the above, with 
Page  3
project restructuring, sub -component 1.3 will rehabilitate rural bridges and entry points 
of bridges damaged by Tropical Storm Agatha, on May 29, 2010.  
 
The above technical assistance and investments will be mostly coordinated through sub-
projects that produce "business plans". These plans will be drawn up by the rural 
productive organizations and their commercial partners. The business plans will stipulate 
the needs for entrepreneur development services, financial services, and public and 
associative infrastructure. They will be evaluated on the basis of technical, economic, 
financial, social, and environmental criteria by the Government and once they are 
approved they will also contain the commitments of the implementing agencies in terms 
of technical assistance and investments. Hence the different elements of the component 
will be coordinated into single business plans. Those plans will be instruments of demand 
capture, for feasibility studies, approval and planning of the project financed investments, 
and monitoring and evaluation of the integral program.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening of the territorial public management capacities for 
competitiveness (US$4.9 million of which US$ 2.8 million financed by IBRD). The 
overall objective of this component is to introduce in the institutions involved in this 
program a new model of public management focused on territorial development. This 
management model will be expected to influence national and sector policies as well as 
public investment priorities so that they can contribute in a more efficient way to 
mobilize the territorial resources as a function of the development of strategic objectives 
and competitive advantages. Moreover, this territorial management model (TMM) will be 
based on participation principles and the development of public-private partnerships. 
These spaces of collaborative interchange constitute mechanisms favoring the collective 
ownership of local knowledge, the establishment of a local consensus for the 
development of territorial advantages and a long-term development strategy.  
 
The specific objectives are:  
 
(i) To develop under SEGEPLAN a new Territorial Management Model (TMM) and 
establish the institutional and operational basis to implement it;  
 
(ii) To incorporate the new model in public policies and investment programs;  
 
(iii) To give public and private actors access to key territorial information needed for 
decision-making processes; and  
 
(iv) To strengthen the capacity of those institutions that will be strategic for the success 
of the new model.  
 
The TMM builds on and better articulates already existing processes within 
SEGEPLAN, but under a new territorial approach, such as: (i) the National System of 
Strategic Territorial Planning - SINPET; (ii) the National System of Pre-Investment 
Support - SINAPRE; and (iii) the National System of Public Investment SNIP. 
Furthermore, these systems need to fit in with the processes of economic and social 
sector policy coordination and international aid orientation that also fall within the 
activities of SEGEPLAN.  
 
Page  4
The component has four subcomponents: (i) development of the TMM for rural 
development; (ii) implementation of the model in all Departments; (iii) access to 
territorial strategic information through an integrated and decentralized territorial 
strategic information system; and (iv) disclosure, awareness and training.  
 
Component 3: Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 2.6 million of which US$ 
1.0 million financed by IBRD). The objective of this component is to ensure program 
management capacity is in place and that an effective monitoring and evaluation system 
is established and maintained. Towards this goal, SEGEPLAN would lead an Investment 
Coordination Committee comprising representatives from the Ministry of Finance, the 
implementing agencies (SEGEPLAN, MINECO, and FONAPAZ) and the Commission 
against Discrimination and Racism (CODISRA). T his specific component would finance 
a
general management system, including monitoring and evaluation activities.  
 
4.   Project Restructuring  
 
The main reason for project restructuring is the rehabilitation of the infrastructure 
damaged by Tropical Storm Agatha, on May 29, 2010. One of the financing strategies of 
the Government of Guatemala (GOG) for reconstruction is to partly reorient existing 
loans towards the rebuilding efforts, when feasible. Resources from subcomponent 1.4 
(Information and Communications Technologies) will be real located to the 
subcomponent 1.3 (Access to Productive Infrastructure) without imp acting the 
development objective of the project. The project can take on infrastructure rehabilitation 
through the scale-up of this subcomponent implemented by FONAPAZ, so restructuring 
implies minimal changes in project implementation.  
 
The safeguard implications of this and another relevant change, expansion of the 
geographical coverage of the project to the entire country, are discussed under item 4 of 
the ISDS part II below. The geographical expansion is required by the rehabilitation 
efforts. In addition, the GOG would like indigenous people in ll departments to benefit 
from the investments under the whole of component 1 (Productive Supply Chains) and all 
rural municipalities to have access to support for implementation of the territorial 
participatory planning process (Component 2 ).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project covers rural areas of the entire country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO) 
Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental impacts are generally expected to be modest - no Category A sub-projects 
can be undertaken. In order to engage the 80% of project beneficiaries required to be 
Indigenous Peoples, the Government of Guatemala (GOG) conducted a social assessment 
that involved three separate public consultations and the preparation of an Indigenous 
Peoples Planning Framework (see Section 4 below). Project support for increased 
indigenous participation in productive activities during both planning and implementation 
is expected to lead to higher incomes in a sustainable and culturally appropriate manner.  
 
The restructured project component 1.3 (Access to Productive Infrastructure) could 
require some minor land acquisitions in order to allow restoration of road connectivity of 
bridges damage d by Tropical Storm Agatha (May 2010). If needed, the GOG has 
prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (see Section 4 below) to guide planning and 
implementation of additional measures to avoid, mitigate and/or compensate for the 
adverse impact s related to involuntary resettlement potentially associated with the 
project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Although the project does not support implementation of the land use plans developed 
through Component 2, the GOG has conducted social and environmental due diligence in 
order to recognize  potential impacts and recommend specific benefit enhancement and 
risk mitigation measures. Inclusion of  such measures in the participatory planning 
process has helped to enhance the sustainability of the components outcomes, and also to 
ensure that the eventual implementation of these land use and development plans will not 
result in any harm to affected parties.   
 
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project will not finance any Environmental Category A sub-projects, including sub-
projects that would involve significant conversion or degradation of forests or critical 
natural habitats.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A. 
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK  
 
Since the objective of the Program is directly linked to Indigenous Peoples, the GOG 
conducted a social assessment under terms of reference agreed upon with the World 
Bank. The goal of this social assessment was to evaluate the projects potential impact on 
the Indigenous Peoples, to examine project alternatives where adverse effects may be 
significant and to prepare proposal to increase the involvement of indigenous people into 
the program. One of the key results of this process is the Indigenous People's Planning 
Framework (IPPF).  
 
The IPPF provides information on the indigenous population in the Project area, 
summarizes the legal framework related to indigenous peoples, describes the positive and 
negative impacts that potential beneficiaries perceive from the Project , and proposes 
some organizational arrangements to ensure their access to the benefits of the Project. 
This document has been included as a core appendix to the Operational Manual, and is 
also available in the project files, SEGEPLANs web site, and the Banks InfoShop.  
 
In order to describe the perception of potential beneficiaries towards the Program, 15 
randomly selected indigenous entrepreneurs were individually interviewed, and two focal 
group interviews in Quetzaltnenago and Coban were conducted. Under IA DB financing, 
a
very extensive study and consultation process was carried out in the Solola, 
Totonicapan areas. Indigenous peoples expressed some concerns about implementation, 
due to past experiences where the Government did not comply with its commitments. 
Employment and income generation are very high on their agenda. Indigenous 
entrepreneurs also stated that some indigenous groups have a negative attitude towards 
some professional organizations of entrepreneurs (gremiales) and that there is often a lack 
of real partnerships between producers and middle-persons ( where supply chains are 
operating, they depend heavily upon outside individual entrepreneurs with weak l ink s to 
the regions).  
 
Other specific areas which need to be addressed are:  
 
(i) Government should take into account their suggestions and wishes during design, 
execution and evaluation;  
 
(ii) Don't pose high barriers towards indigenous participation (red tape, offices far from 
their locations and legal requirements that they cannot comply with, specially relating to 
credit and legal property);  
 
(iii) Don't impose productive techniques not in accordance with their traditions;  
Page  7
(iv) Reach communities located in distant rural areas, using local radios and local 
languages; and  
 
(v) Program to last long enough to support the necessary long term processes indigenous 
people need.  
 
In order to ensure access of indigenous peoples to the benefits of the Program, the GoG 
adopted the following recommendations: i) Creation and monitoring of the Component 1 
indicator that 80% of the beneficiaries who receive project support should be indigenous; 
ii) Private technical assistance ( SDE) provided to producer organizations must be 
composed of at least one member who speaks the local indigenous language; iii) All work 
s
carried out by FONAPAZ through Subcomponent 1. 3 require signatures of local 
authorities to ensure that investments in public infrastructure respond to local needs.  
 
Furthermore, Component 2 of the project has a large consultative element with local 
populations. The project ensures that there is prior and informed consultation with 
indigenous peoples to ensure their interests are taken into account, they participate in the 
project, and that the benefits are culturally appropriate. Other measures to increase 
indigenous participation include : the economic activities supported by the Project are 
activities in which indigenous people have a comparative advantage (agriculture, textiles, 
artisan activities); the Investment Coordination Committee (CCI) includes representation 
of the Commission against Discrimination and Racism; FONAPAZ staff underwent 
specific training in cultural sensitivity; the invitations to submit proposals for the project 
(MINECO subcomponents 1.1-1 .2) are being done in indigenous languages; 
SEGEPLAN has organized a specific program information campaign focusing on 
indigenous people; and the eligibility criteria for participation in the project are biased in 
favor of indigenous people.  
 
B. INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT FRAMEWORK  
 
The restructured project is not expected to require any land acquisition or involuntary 
resettlement. However, because the exact scope and design specifications for the 
proposed rehabilitation to be financed remain unknown at this time, the GOG prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF will guide the resettlement process 
should any land acquisition prove necessary during the preparation of detailed 
engineering designs. The RPF has been included as a core appendix to the Operational 
Manual, and is also available in the project files, SEGEPL AN's web site, and the Banks 
InfoShop.  
 
With the participation of the national resettlement specialist who helped prepare the 
RPF, the GOG organized two sensitization workshops on the scope and content of the 
resettlement framework. The workshops focused on particular issues such as : (i) How 
can displaced individuals be identified ex- ante?; (ii) What information is needed about 
displaced persons?; (iii) What are the eligibility criteria for a person to be considered a s a 
displaced person?; (iv) How can the cost of lost assets be calculated?; (v) How can 
satisfactory consultations with displaced persons be conducted?; and (vi) What 
institutional capacities are required to adequately implement the involuntary resettlement 
Page  8
framework? The project Social Specialist will coordinate the resulting commitments 
adopted in the form of the RPF with municipal authorities, community groups, and the 
private contractors hired to design and build the project sponsored infrastructure. This 
includes a public information and consultation process that seeks to obtain feedback and 
suggestions from local beneficiaries.  
 
C. 
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK  
 
In order to help ensure the environmental and social soundness and sustainability of the 
project, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was originally prepared for 
the project by the GOG under terms of reference agreed upon by the Bank.  The 
framework is available in the Project files, SEGE PLAN#s website and the Bank#s 
InfoShop. The framework was presented to a group of environmental NGOs and 
institutions that provided comments on it.  
 
After the project hired an Environmental Specialist in PRONACOM in early 2010, the 
environmental management procedures of the EMF were revised and operationalized in 
detail into Annex 9 of the Operational Manual (OM).  
 
The EMF is consistent with the Bank safeguards and follows the environmental 
categorization of the Guatemalan legal framework. The Ministry of Environment and 
Natural Resources (MARN) is the responsible agency for environmental supervision and 
enforcement in Guatemala. The Government has the following environmental categories: 
category A (high environmental impact potential or risk: not financed under this 
program), B1 (moderate to high impact), B2 (moderate to low impact) and C (low 
impact). The project will follow the same categorization and will only finance 
investments of category B 1, B2 and C, thus allowing the project an overall 
environmental category B rating.  
 
The EMF procedures described in the OM consist basically in:  
 
(i) Sub-project proposals (profiles) include filling of an environmental screening 
document (Initial Questionnaire, see Operational Manual Annex 9; Annex 7) by the rural 
productive organization assisted by its entrepreneurial services provider. The project 
technical committee, consisting of qualified representatives of PRONACOM and 
FONAPAZ and open to outside invitees, reviews the Initial Questionnaire to determine a 
categorization of the sub-project based on its potential environmental and social impacts 
and sensitivity of the proposed sub-project location in terms of fragile environmental 
areas or territorial planning zones. The categorization by sub-project/activity type and 
environmental sensitivity of the location is described in Annex 2 of the EMF.  
 
Eligible infrastructure can include warehouses, processing facilities, irrigation systems 
including well drilling, electrification (network connection, mini power stations and 
renewable power sources), telephone and internet connections, improvement, 
rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads and bridges, construction and equipment of 
labor training facilities, nurseries, tourism facilities ( trails, viewpoints, hostels, etc.) , and 
Page  9
other possibly demanded projects compatible with the eligibility criteria. All these sub-
projects are to be classified under the four environmental categories.  
 
(ii) Each sub-project needs to present an Initial Environmental Assessment to the 
departmental level office of MARN in order to confirm the respective environmental 
category and proceed accordingly with the necessary documentation and licensing. In 
case of sub-projects that have been approved without the respective environmental 
instruments in place (see part D below on safeguards compliance), the rural productive 
organization needs to prepare an environmental diagnostic and submit it to MARN as 
soon as possible in order to catch up with the necessary instruments of environmental 
management .  
 
(iii) After screening, sub-projects of Category B1 will issue an Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) to estimate the environmental impacts and enclose an Environmental 
Management Plan (E MP). For category B2 and C sub-projects, an EMP is required. 
Proponents of category B1 sub-projects would, assisted by the entrepreneurial services 
provider, submit the EIA to MARN central that would inform the public about the 
contents of the EIA and give 20 days to receive any observations or complaints. MARN 
will make a final resolution approving or disapproving the EIA. For category B2 and C, 
the respective EMP is submitted to MARN offices at departmental level.  
 
(iv) Compliance with sub-project EMPs is responsibility of the rural productive 
organizations supported by their entrepreneurial services provider and PRONACOM, 
which organizes related training in collaboration with MARN. EMP follow-up is carried 
out at different levels through monitoring by entrepreneurial services providers and the 
project M&E system. EMP compliance by Category B1 sub-projects is audited by 
MARN.  
 
Pest Management  
 
The procedures for integrated pest management to be applied within the project 
framework have been established in the EMF and explained in more detail in Annex 9 of 
the Operational Manual.  
 
Where a sub-project would introduce new technologies that involve introduction of 
insecticides and pesticides, the Unit for Norms and Regulations of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock and Food would have to review the proposed sub-project on the 
basis of the following criteria:  
 
a. Respect for the norms and regulations of unprocessed agricultural products and 
animal health;  
 
b.
Integration of environmentally acceptable pest and insect control; and  
 
c. The type and quality of insecticides and pesticides.  
 
Page  10
The Bank will not finance pesticides or insecticides, and the project supports 
dissemination of a national plan to reduce agropecuary related use of persistent organic 
pollutants (POPs).  
 
D. 
SAFEGUARDS COMPLIANCE  
 
Overall safeguards compliance for the project is moderately satisfactory to date, though 
compliance with the OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment at sub-project level has 
been lagging behind and generation and approval of EMPs for already approved sub-
projects is yet an ongoing and slow process.  
 
This situation is mostly a consequence of a late inclusion of an environmental specialist 
into the PRONACOM project team, but it also relates with the generally congested 
situation of environmental licensing at the country and departmental level. Since spring 
2010, PRONACOM and the Bank team are have been working to correct the situation: 
requested environmental management procedures have been described in detail in Annex 
9
of
the Operational Manual; environmental and social safeguard indicators have been     
added to the project monitoring system; PRONACOM is providing related training to the 
participating entrepreneurial services providers and rural producer organizations together 
with MARN; PRONACOM is leading a shared effort on generation and approval of 
pending EMPs as quickly as possible in close and proactive cooperation with MARN; 
and the already approved sub-projects have access to retroactive budget allocations to 
implement required activities of environmental management.  
 
However, the delays in generating and approving EMPs do not affect the quality of the 
implementation in the field with regard to environmental safeguards.  All sub-projects 
revised on paper and/or visited in the field by the Bank include environmentally and 
socially sound practices.  Production of the participating rural organizations is often 
organic simply by nature or for certification purposes, involving international organic 
and/or fair trade certifications. Further, the exporting producer organizations hold a 
GLOBALGAP certification.  
 
The compliance with the Indigenous Peoples Framework is rated satisfactory.  
 
Both the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and the Indigenous Peoples 
Framework have been reviewed in light of the proposed project changes, and have been 
found to be satisfactory and adequate for the proposed restructured project. There are no 
impediments to apply the EMF to cover the two restructuring aspects: expanded 
geographical coverage and scaling up of the subcomponent 1.3.  
 
In terms of the bridge rehabilitation works to be implemented by FONAPAZ, both a 
simple emergency type of environmental and social impact screening and a more 
thorough impact analysis will be conducted. The latter, in form of an EIA and/o r an 
EMP, is attached to the final work design. Based on the results of a Bank review of the 
first five bridge rehabilitation works, a further review protocol (whether to use ex 
Page  11
post/ante review possibly depending on the specific impact category of the works 
according to GoG legislation) will be agreed upon with FONAPAZ.  
 
The Involuntary Resettlement Framework has been developed by the GoG and reviewed 
by the Bank. It has been found to be satisfactory to Bank standards in the unlikely event 
that resettlement occurs.  
 
Both the national and the Bank project teams assess closely the implementation of the 
three safeguard frameworks, and necessary guidance and safeguards training are provided 
on an as-needed basis.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Wide ranging consultations took place in the preparation of the Indigenous Peoples 
Participation Framework, these included focal group interviews and community 
assemblies in the Quetzaltnenago, Coban, Solola, and Totonicapan areas. In addition they 
and other population groups in the participating departments have been involved in the 
new territorial based development planning process to be introduced through the project. 
This is a participatory mechanism which increases the involvement of the population in 
investments and other decisions which affect their livelihood. To increase stakeholder 
participation, the GOG has designed a multiyear communication strategy that uses 
posters, pamphlets, road signs, websites , news paper articles, radio spots,   etc. to 
broadcast information about the program, how to participate, where to get more 
information, etc. A consultation with environmental NGOs was also organized and the 
recommendations of the meeting are included in to the environmental assessment.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/12/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/12/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/01/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2006 
 
Page  12
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  13
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Marie-Helene Collion 
03/21/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Tuuli Johanna Bernardini 
03/07/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jason Jacques Paiement 
11/19/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
03/17/2011 
Comments:  This is the new ISDS corresponding to the additional safeguard for ressettlement. 
