Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/22/2011 
Report No.:  AC6181
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P120910 
Original Project Name: Guinea-Bissau: 
Emergency Electricity and Water 
Rehabilitation Project 
Country:  Guinea-Bissau 
Project ID:  P125374 
Project Name:  Emergency Electricity and Water Rahabilitation Project - Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Moez Cherif 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (80%);Central government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (60%);Other urban 
development (25%);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (15%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
2.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective of the proposed additional financing remains the same 
as for the original project (EEWRP), i.e. to assist the Government of Guinea-Bissau 
(GoGB) in the rapid restoration and improvement of electricity and water supply services 
in its capital city.   
 
3. Project Description 
The EEWRP has four components: (i) technical assistance to prepare EAGB#s 
transformation and manage the company during the restructuring phase (US$1.5m); (ii) 
power generation scale up through the acquisition of a 5 MW generator, and commercial 
operation improvement through pre-payment meters (US$8.5m); (iii) construction of a 
700m3 water reservoir to improve water supply reliability (US$1.2m); and (iv) project 
management, monitoring and evaluation (US$0.5m).  The AF will cover an unanticipated 
Page  2
cost overrun arising in the course of procuring power generators of 5 megawatt (MW) 
capacity (component 2).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project activities will take place in the city of Bissau. The power generation 
capacity to be purchased by the EEWRP will be located on the existing power utility 
plant site as planned.  Similarly, the water reservoir will be built as originally planned on 
a
government owned piece of land allocated to EAGB, within the premises of the current 
August 3rd military hospital.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main environmental and social issues under the project relate to (a) existing 
environmental and social liabilities (soil contamination, water pollution, air and noise 
pollution) at Bissau#s power utility and their potential negative impacts on the power 
generation equipment to be purchased under the project and located within the power 
utility premises; and (b) potential negative environmental and social impacts (soil 
erosion, soil and water pollution) due to limited rehabilitation activities in the water 
sector. The construction of a new reservoir with a total capacity of 700 m3 will take place 
on a government-owned piece of land allocated to EAGB, within the premises of the 
existing August 3rd military hospital. As such, the planned construction activities will 
require no additional land or loss of socio-economic assets. Nonetheless, to adequately 
comply with the Bank safeguard policies, the Borrower has prepared, consulted upon and 
disclosed an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment/Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) of the new water tower/reservoir of 700m3.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There will be no potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to the anticipated future 
activities in the project area. Nonetheless, the Borrower has prepared an ESMP for the 
planned water reservoir, which explains: (i) potential impacts both during construction 
and exploitation of the reservoir; (ii) mitigation measures commensurate with those 
impacts; as well as (iii) institutional arrangements for implementing and monitoring the 
mitigation plan.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to the project are the continued deterioration of power supply in Bissau, with 
some end-users substituting expensive small diesel generators for grid power, with higher 
social and environmental impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To mitigate the environmental and social liabilities at the power utility and to ensure the 
safety of power generation equipment at its only power plant, the Borrower prepared an 
Environmental and Social Audit (ESA) Report in January 2006 for the purpose of the 
Multisector Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (MIRP). The same report was re-
disclosed and its recommendations applied to the EEWRP#s relevant activities.  The ESA 
report outlines specific technical and institutional mitigation measures which  are being 
implemented under the EEWRP, and it proposes environmental and social monitoring 
standards (for industrial waste, water and soil contamination and emissions values). At 
the utility power plant, all dilapidated power generators are no longer in operation and all 
currently operating generators comply with Bank guidelines. Moreover, an environmental 
clean-up of the power plant site is planned under the MIRP. The EEWRP has made 
provisions designed to strengthen the Borrower#s capacity to implement and monitor the 
environmental and social mitigation measures. To mitigate the potential negative 
environmental and social impacts of limited rehabilitation activities in the water sector, 
the Borrower is including Environmental and Social Clauses/Guidelines for Contractors# 
consideration in their bidding documents. The release of contractors# payments will be 
contingent upon full implementation of defined environmental and social clauses.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the project are the population of the city of Bissau. The 
Environmental and Social Audit report was prepared in consultation with operators and 
personnel at the power utility, people living in the vicinity of the power utility, as well as 
representatives of public agencies and civil society organizations; it also drew on 
information contained in environmental and social assessments that were carried out prior 
to the period of civil unrest.  
 
The Environmental and Social Audit report was publicly disclosed in-country on 
January 24, 2006 at the offices of the Government (Project Preparation Unit and at the 
Page  4
General Environmental (and Social) Directorate), at the office of the International Union 
for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and during a validation workshop held in Bissau, 
as well as at the Bank#s Infoshop on January 27, 2006. It was re-disclosed for the 
purposes of the EEWRP and for its Additional Financing. Additionally, the ESMP has 
been disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop on April 15, 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/24/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/24/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  5
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Moez Cherif 
04/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
04/22/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
04/22/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/22/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
04/22/2011 
Comments:   
