Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5061 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/14/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea-Bissau 
Project ID: P114115 
Project Name: Education for All - Fast Track Initiative Program 
Task Team Leader: Geraldo Joao Martins 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTED 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (80%);Secondary education (20%) 
Theme: Education for all (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.50 
 
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative 
16.50
18.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to increase access and retention, improve quality of 
teaching and learning in primary education, and strengthen management capacity of the 
education sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will consist of three components:  
 
Component 1: Increased Coverage and Retention (US$7.3 million)  
 
This component will support construction and equipment of classrooms and related facilities 
(latrines); More specifically it will support: i) the construction and equipment of 500 classrooms 
(50 classrooms in year 1; 200 classrooms in year 2; and 250 classrooms in year 3); to improve 
coverage of primary education, particularly in rural areas, and substantially increase the 
proportion of schools offering the full cycle of primary education (1-6 grades), and to reduce the 
number of classrooms built with non-durable materials.  
 
Component 2: Improved Teaching Quality (US$5.4 million)  
Page  2
The aim of this component is to improve the quality of teaching in all three cycles of primary 
education. This component will have three sub-components as follows: Sub-component 2.1 will 
support i) the costs of re-printing of textbooks for the first and second cycles of primary 
education (about 280,000 students). Textbooks for those cycles already exist and can be easily 
re-printed,  and ii) the review of curriculum of the first cycle of primary education, and Sub-
component 2.2 will support pre-service and in-service teacher training, including the expansion 
of the capacity of teacher training schools through the construction of three new teacher training 
schools in the North, East and South of the country. Sub-component 2.3 will support the 
provision of selected pedagogical materials to primary schools, for which a list of eligible items 
have been elaborated and approved.  
 
Component 3: Strengthened Management Capacity (US$3.8 million)  
 
The aim of this component is to ensure normal and smooth functioning of the education system, 
by strengthening the management capacity of the Ministry of Education and communities. Sub-
component 3.1 will support capacity development of central and decentralized structures, by (a) 
better defining the role and functions of these structures; (b) recruiting approximately 60 young 
professionals to fill vacancies in the MoE; (c) training key education staff at different levels; (d) 
enhancing teacher management system; and (e) improving the monitoring and evaluation 
functions of the MoE. Sub-component 3.2 will finance implementation of selected sector studies 
necessary for the preparation of a fully-fledged 10 year Education Sector Plan (2014-2024), 
including development of studies and strategies on pre-school education, inclusive education and 
technical and vocational education strategy, as well as the development of  students learning 
assessment system in primary education. The sub-component will also support implementation 
of the communication strategy of the MoE. Sub-component 3.3 will cover the costs associated 
with management of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented throughout the territory of Guinea-Bissau.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Though the client has gained some experience in implementing Bank funded project, its 
institutional capacity on safeguard operational policies is still weak.  However, as part of the 
project implementation process, tangible steps will be taken to strengthen their capacity, 
particularly through technical assistance and training. The project will support training of 
stakeholders like the PIU, the National Environmental and Social Agency (NESA/CAIA), the 
Institute of Biodiversity (IB), Regional Education Directorates (RED) and members of the 
General Directorate of School Infrastructures (GDSI) on Bank safeguard policies, particularly at 
the beginning of project implementation. Training themes will include inter alia implementation 
and monitoring of environmental and social management and reporting requirements. To ensure 
good and timely compliance with Bank safeguard policies core requirements as well as effective 
implementation of safeguard instruments, the project will have a Social and Environmental Focal 
Point (SEFP) as part of the core team of the PIU to properly handle social and environmental 
aspects of the project.  The SEFP will work collaboratively with both the NESA/CAIA and BI 
and arrange, for the environmental and social screening as well as the environmental and social 
Page  3
impact assessment of all sub-projects. The SEFP will also work collaboratively with local service 
providers selected among the existing NGOs and trained subsequently to ensure tangible 
monitoring of social and environmental aspects of the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The foreseen construction of the new 500 classrooms and three teacher training centers are 
expected to have before, during and after any works some minimal, site specific and amenable 
environmental and social impacts (i.e. preparation of sites/land and vegetation clearing, digging 
of small borrow pits for construction materials [gravels, sand] or burning of construction 
garbage; temporary pollution of air and/or surface waters; noise and access limitation, etc.) 
Given that the physical locations of these schools and training centers have yet to be identified, 
the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which 
sets forth the basic principles and operational guidelines to be followed when these locations are 
made known, during which time the Client will prepare for each construction site a focused 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (Formulaire de sélection environnementale et 
sociale) to suggest implementable mitigation measures. The ESMF will be submitted to the Bank 
for review and approval. Once approved, it will be publicly disclosed at accessible places both 
in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The foreseen project activities (construction of the 500 classrooms and the 3 teacher training 
centers) may likely disturb some socially valuable cultural resources that may have a negative 
impact on the community. The ESMF will include a deeper assessment of physical cultural 
resources issues pertaining to the project sites, and suggest the best way to minimize the 
intangible risks associated.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Project activities are expected to have some minimal, site specific social impacts (i.e., land 
acquisition that could lead to loss of access to livelihood support resources, loss of agricultural 
lands and/or of valuable socio-economic assets that may result in either physical involuntary 
resettlement and/or financial compensation of project affected persons (PAP). Given the fact that 
till now the physical locations of these schools and training centers are still unknown, the 
borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which sets forth the basic 
principles and operational guidelines to be followed when these locations are made known and 
RAPs are prepared. The RPF will be reviewed and disclosed both in country and in Bank#s 
InfoShop prior to project appraisal.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/16/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Government will prepare an ESMF and a RPF.  Both instruments will be disclosed in-
country and at the World Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Geraldo Joao Martins 
04/14/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/14/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter Nicolas Materu 
04/14/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
