Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/18/2011 
Report No.:  AC5983
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea-Bissau 
Project ID:  P122047 
Project Name:  Guinea-Bissau Biodiversity Conservation Project 
Task Team Leader:  John Virdin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 12, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.90 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to support the country to (i) strengthen IBAP's 
management of Guinea-Bissau's existing five national parks, and (ii) pilot the 
establishment and operation of a sustainable financing mechanism for these parks. This 
objective is consistent with the grant recently approved by the GEF for the Guinea Bissau 
Biodiversity Trust Fund Project, which will provide parallel financing to the proposed 
project.  
 
The rationale underpinning the project is to provide transition funding for the 
management of Guinea-Bissau's national parks while the establishment and operation of a 
sustainable conservation financing mechanism, the Bioguinea Foundation (FBG) is 
piloted. Successful attainment of the GEF and IDA financed project objectives will pave 
the way for a third strategic phase, namely capitalization of the future endowment fund 
FBG.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will comprise three components supporting, respectively: (i) strengthening 
capacity for and management of coastal and marine protected areas and biodiversity; (ii) 
Page  2
the establishment and  pilot operation of a conservation trust fund, the Bio-guinea 
Foundation; and (iii) project management and monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Component 1:  Strengthened capacity for and management of coastal and marine 
protected areas and biodiversity. This component, in coordination with other donor-
financed projects, aims to enable IBAP to continue the participatory management and 
conservation of Guinea-Bissau#s protected areas and biodiversity during the first phase 
of the transition to more sustainable financing sources. It will focus on implementing 
select activities in the existing national park management plans with a view to 
strengthening the management of five coastal and marine national parks and increasing 
the monitoring and conservation of globally significant biodiversity.  
 
Component 2: Establishment and operationalization of the Bioguinea Foundation The 
component aims to support the establishment and pilot the operation of the Bioguinea 
Foundation in Guinea-Bissau (FBG) as a mechanism that would eventually be capable of 
financing at least two of the country#s existing national parks. It will comprise the 
following two sub-components: (i) establishment of the FBG; (ii) piloting the initial 
operation of the FBG.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation This component 
aims to ensure effective and efficient implementation of project activities, in coordination 
with the other related donor initiatives. It will comprise two sub-components: (i) project 
implementation support and audits; and (ii) monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will target the areas in and around Guinea-Bissau#s network of coastal 
protected areas, including: Cacheu Mangrove Forest National Park, Cantanhez Forest 
National Park, Cufada Lakes National Park, Joao Vieira and Poilao National Marine 
Park, Orango National Marine Park and Cantanhez National Park.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project aims to continue and strengthen a participatory process for the management 
and conservation of parks and biodiversity in Guinea-Bissau, most of the activities are 
expected to have positive impacts on the environment.  The project is designed to help 
protect critical habitats for key species within the five national parks, and to monitor and 
evaluate park performance in this effort.  It will support the implementation of selected 
elements of the participatory park management plans prepared under the CBMP, 
including ongoing monitoring of compliance with park rules by local IBAP staff, as well 
as biodiversity monitoring and awareness-raising for communities living in and around 
the parks about biodiversity-friendly technologies and livelihoods . Although potential 
environmental impacts associated with implementation of the park management plans are 
expected to be nil, World Bank OP 4.01 was triggered as the project will support 
implementation of specific activities contained within the existing park management 
plans that may include very limited civil works, more specifically the installation of 
limited park signage which could generate small, reversible, limited and time-bound 
environmental impacts .  Given the limited number and low-risk topology of the works 
expected to be supported by the BCP, a simple ESMP has been prepared in line with the 
streamlined EMP checklist format designed to meet the World Bank Environmental 
Assessment requirements under OP 4.01 for civil works contracts with small, localized 
impacts. This simple ESMP reflects the principles and guidelines of an ESMF.  
 
The project builds on a base of exceptional stakeholder participation, particularly in the 
local communities and resource users that live in and around the protected areas and 
depend upon them for their livelihoods.  The existing national park management plans 
themselves are the result of a multiyear, participatory process and have been validated by 
local stakeholders in and around each park.  Their implementation is being overseen by 
the Park Management Councils, with broad representation of local stakeholders, 
including 13 out of its 26 members being drawn from the resident communities and 
resource users themselves. Given this, conflicts are not expected to arise during their 
implementation.  Nevertheless, the project will support the update/preparation of national 
Page  4
park internal regulations thus, to be sure that any potential risk of restriction to resource 
use is addressed, World Bank OP 4.12 has been triggered.  A  Process Framework for the 
BCP has consequently been prepared for use by IBAP in continued management of the 
parks.  The recommendations have been incorporated in the streamlined BCP ESMP 
below.  
 
The project ESMP and PF have been prepared, approved and disclosed prior to 
Appraisal, both in-country and at the Bank#s InfoShop.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term negative impacts are expected as a result of this project.  The nature, scale 
and scope of works foreseen under this project are limited to the installation of signage 
within/around the national protected areas supported under the BCP.  As such, the 
environmental and social impact will be limited, site specific and temporary.  
Nevertheless, to ensure that any possible impacts are mitigated and managed, the project 
team has prepared the Environmental and Social Management Plan for low-risk 
topologies to ensure that works are conducted with minimum, if any, environmental 
disturbance.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No significant adverse impacts are expected.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The guidelines to be followed and measures to be taken to mitigate adverse impacts of 
project activities are detailed in the ESMP and the Process Framework.  The two 
documents spell out specific mitigation measures, along with clear institutional 
arrangements and capacity strengthening measures to implement and monitor those 
measures effectively.  
 
IBAP is the implementing agency for the BCP. The basic capacity for implementation 
of project safeguard policies and procedures is in place.  Under the CBMP, both IBAP 
and the Cell for Environmental Impact Assessment (CAIA) staff received specific 
training in application of project Environmental and Social Management Framework and 
Resettlement Policy/Process Framework (RPF/PF) policies and procedures, and have 
gained five years of practical implementation experience in overseeing their 
implementation.  The project will provide continued funding and training for IBAP staff 
in each of the parks to (i) strengthen their capacity to identify and address any 
environmental and social issues that might arise during implementation of the park 
management plans and (ii) function as #antennas# for CAIA, in order to monitor for any 
development projects commencing near the parks that would require an environmental 
impact assessment, and report this immediately to CAIA. The procedures for this 
monitoring and collaboration with CAIA are outlined in the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan of the project.   
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Project beneficiaries include the more than 70,000 people living in and around the 
country#s parks and protected areas and who depend on these resources for their 
livelihoods.  More broadly, given the current and future contributions of the biodiversity 
and protected area network to national and regional economic growth, other beneficiaries 
include national and regional stakeholders (e.g. local and regional authorities, sectoral 
ministries, NGOS and private sector operators) and the country#s population at large.  
Lastly, international stakeholders invested in the existence value of the country#s 
biodiversity are also beneficiaries.  
 
With regard to people who might be directly affected, the project builds on a base of 
exceptional stakeholder participation, particularly in the local communities and resource 
users that live in and around the protected areas and depend upon them for their 
livelihoods. IUCN and other partners prioritized the development of a slow but vital 
dialogue with local communities throughout the 1990s, and laid the seeds for their 
ongoing participation in the creation and management of the protected areas. This has 
been further reinforced by their participation in the CBMP and the FIAL.  The park plans 
themselves are the result of a multiyear, participatory process and have been validated by 
local stakeholders in and around each park.  Their implementation is being overseen by 
the Park Management Councils, with broad representation of local stakeholders, 
including 13 out of its 26 members being drawn from the resident communities and 
resource users themselves. Their involvement, alongside local authorities and technical 
ministries in the Park Management Councils (of which they comprise half) ensures their 
continued engagement in the evolution of these parks and more specifically the project 
itself.  
 
Both the original Environmental and Social Management Plan/Framework and the 
Process Framework for the CBMP were presented to and discussed with local 
stakeholders and have been used by IBAP in continued management of the parks.  The 
updated Environmental and Social Management Plan and Process Framework have been 
made available for public consultation at IBAP#s headquarters and in each of the national 
park offices prior to being finalized. They have also been disclosed in accordance with 
the Bank#s policy and sent to the Infoshop in Washington, DC on January 18, 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/09/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/31/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  6
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/09/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/31/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/18/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  7
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Virdin 
01/18/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
01/18/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
01/18/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
01/18/2011 
Comments:   
