Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/25/2011 
Report No.:  AC6208
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guyana 
Project ID:  P125288 
Project Name:  GY UG Science and Technology Support 
Task Team Leader:  Robert J. Hawkins 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 26, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.40
1.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1.      The proposed Project would strengthen the four science and technology faculties at 
the University of Guyana through infrastructure, research and curricular improvements 
while building the basis for improved facilities management and future growth.   
 
3. Project Description 
2. 
Component 1:  Education Quality Improvement Program (EQIP) (estimated total 
cost: US$1.9 million).  This component would finance EQIP with two sub-components:  
(a) promote the revitalization and reorientation of the University of Guyana science 
curriculum toward critical needs for the LCDS; and (b) provide support for essential 
research, which would contextualize and provide a practical orientation to the curriculum, 
while contributing to global knowledge on environmental conservation and bio-diversity 
preservation.  Through both of these activities, the technical and pedagogical skills of the 
UG lecturers to develop and deliver quality teaching would be considerably strengthened.  
 
3. 
Sub-Component (a) Curriculum Reform (US$1.0 million) would support a 
standardized process for the updating of existing curricula and the development of 
entirely new curricula to support the LCDS, through the provision of targeted technical 
assistance from specialists in curriculum reform, instructional design and science content, 
Page  2
as well as through provision of stipends to UG lecturers who dedicate time, expertise and 
energy to this process. Practical assessment components would be developed for each 
course.  At least 12 new courses in electronic format (either as open courseware or e-
learning courses) relevant to the LCDS would be developed over a 3-year period via the 
following process:  
 
-
The process would begin each year with a broad-based consultation with external 
groups to identify and build consensus around the curricular domains within and across 
the four target faculties most in need of revision/development in order to support the 
LCDS. Private sector representatives, NGOs, indigenous groups, student groups, 
community leaders and parents, etc., would be invited to attend a series of workshops to 
analyze the LCDS in greater detail and brainstorm on skills, knowledge and curriculum 
domains needed by UG graduates.  Workshop participants would respond to UG 
proposals for curricula to be developed or revised, and/or propose new courses to be 
developed which the UG could take on board.  Each year at this consultation a 
satisfaction survey would be administered to solicit feedback on the curricula developed.  
 
-
Secondly, UG staff and technical assistants would search for needed curricula, 
practical assessment methodologies, and course content from international sources (on-
line courses, downloadable open courseware, traditional courses which might be offered 
through institutional twinning relationships), and assess what curricula could be 
used/adapted for use by the UG and what curricula would need to be freshly developed.  
An internationally recruited curriculum reform process manager would structure and 
oversee this work. UG staff would be encouraged to develop relationships with university 
faculty overseas working in similar academic areas to learn and share, including those 
among the Guyanese diaspora who might wish to return to UG as guest lecturers.  
 
-
Thirdly, instructional design and content specialists would work with UG faculty 
to develop new courses relevant to the LCDS, keeping in mind both applied constructivist 
instructional strategies and potential to offer courses on-line to a wider audience. This 
would be a form of on-the-job professional development for UG professors and lecturers.  
 
-
Fourthly, both adapted and new courses, which have been reviewed and approved 
by the Dean of the faculty, would be piloted over the course of a semester, and then 
carefully evaluated by students and lecturers alike.  Evaluation would feed back into 
course revision and finalization.  
 
-
Finally, following standard procedures at the UG, new curricula and courses 
would be presented for review and approval to the Academic Board, after clearance from 
the Academic/Policy/Planning Committee.  Both of these entities are long-standing 
statutory bodies at the UG.  
 
4.  
Depending on the courseware being developed (single or multi-disciplinary, use 
of on-line methodologies, etc.) 3-5 UG lecturers per course would be mobilized on a 
voluntary basis.  As this work would be beyond their normal workloads, lecturers would 
be offered incentives to participate in this process.  In addition to the hands-on training in 
Page  3
instructional design and exposure to courseware available at the international level, 
lecturers would receive stipends for their time and expertise invested in producing 
revised/new curricula.  Stipends would be based on current market rates for consulting by 
UG staff and the "level of effort" agreed to between the externally recruited curriculum 
reform process manager and the lecturer.  Finally, lecturers' efforts in this curriculum 
reform process would be taken into account as part of their annual personal evaluations 
and career development, as is standard practice at the UG.  
 
5. 
The domains of study relevant to the LCDS that the University has identified as 
requiring development include among others:  
 
-
GIS and Remote Sensing  
 
-
Climate Change and Climate Modeling  
 
-
Hydrology (Water Resource Management)  
 
-
Ground Water Management  
 
-
Alternative Energy (bio fuels, solar energy, hydroelectricity etc.)  
 
-
Agriculture Resources Management  
 
-
Sustainable Forestry  
 
-
Natural Resources Management  
 
-
Food and Nutrition Technology  
 
-
Biodiversity Inventory and DNA Analysis (in collaboration with international 
research centers)  
 
6. 
Sub-component (b) (US$900,000) would provide funding to stimulate research 
relevant to the LCDS, with the aim of (a) supporting the development of a broader 
research/knowledge-generation culture at the UG, and (b) providing concrete examples of 
UG research, which directly contribute to the LCDS.  Such examples might include: 
formulation of policy recommendations; development of LCDS-relevant services or 
products; generation of field research skills among UG graduates demanded in the labor 
market; production of industry-specific baseline information (water quality, timber 
supply, flora/fauna inventory) against which the impact of economic activities can be 
measured; studies of social groups affected by LCDS industrial development, etc.  
 
7. 
UG staff has analyzed the LCDS to identify the most promising research topics. 
This research agenda would be further defined as part of the annual external consultations 
mentioned above related to curriculum reform.  The UG Research and Publications 
Committee, an established statutory body with clear operating procedures, would review 
standardized research grant applications and apply common criteria to assess their 
relevance to the LCDS and potential for funding.  An Environmental Specialist appointed 
to the PIU would review proposals before they are sent to the Research committee to 
check for any safeguards issues and will apply a screening checklist and guidelines 
included in the Environmental Framework.  Preference would be given to research 
activities which engage students and even secondary level students in survey 
administration, data collection, data analysis, etc., as well as to research projects which 
involve external/international partners and/or generate co-financing.  Grants would be 
relatively small (average grant size US$15,000), ranging from US$5,000-$50,000, and 
would be disbursed in several tranches to UG lecturers through the UG Bursar's Office 
Page  4
(which would be responsible for financial monitoring), upon approval from the Secretary 
of the UG Research and Publications Committee (the Registrar) and the Project 
Coordinator. Over the course of the Project approximately 50 research projects would be 
funded.    In addition, at least one "researcher in residence" would be sponsored each year 
through this sub-component to conduct field-based scientific research at the Iwokrama 
Research Station, located in the heart of Guyana's rainforest.  This would be for a full 
academic year to encourage UG lecturers and professors to pursue LCDS-related research 
and knowledge generation.  
 
8. 
Implementation of this sub-component would feed directly into the Feasibility 
Study for the establishment of a larger Research and Innovation Fund (discussed in 
Component 3) that could mobilize funding from other partners, involve a broader set of 
stakeholders at the governance level, and promote the application of research for the 
development of marketable products and services aligned with the LCDS.  
 
9. 
Component 2:  Infrastructure rehabilitation (estimated total cost: US$6.2 million).  
This component would (a) improve the existing laboratory and building infrastructure at 
the four faculties, consisting of a total of 14 buildings and, as well as improve campus 
wide drainage; (b) provide these laboratories with basic scientific and multimedia 
equipment to enable the delivery of practical science education and research; and (c) 
support the establishment of a campus wide Internet network.  
 
10. 
Sub-component (a) (US$5 million) on laboratory and building rehabilitation 
would first rehabilitate 14 science laboratory buildings in the four science faculties on the 
campus by improving the physical infrastructure to allow for basic teaching and research.  
The rehabilitation would include new floor surfaces, new cupboards, new water and 
power systems, new lighting, provision of air conditioning, new furniture, etc.  The 
component would also address basic electrical, water, sewage, and roofing for the 
buildings in which the laboratories reside.  Finally, the sub-component would address the 
campus-wide issue of appropriate drainage and pumps to avoid frequent flooding on the 
campus.  
 
11. 
Sub-component (b) (US$840,000) would equip the labs with basic scientific 
equipment such as microscopes, slides, flasks, water testing kits, etc. as well as multi-
media equipment.  The equipment would be prioritized based on low operating costs, low 
level of technical skills for use and greatest benefit to students and faculty.  
 
12. 
Sub-component (c) (US$360,000) would support the establishment of a campus 
wide Internet network to connect all faculties to the Internet and prepare the University to 
connect into an international link, which would be established as part of the e-
government broadband network currently under construction (scheduled to be operational 
by end-2011).  In conjunction with the connectivity, a set of software applications would 
be developed such as e-learning tools and digital content repositories to support the 
design and delivery of the new curriculum in component 1.  
 
Page  5
13. 
Component 3:  Institutional Capacity Building (estimated total cost US$1.83 
million).  This component would support the building of institutional capacity at the 
University of Guyana to (a) improve facilities management and manage the Project; and 
(b) make strategic institutional decisions and enhance financial sustainability.  
 
14. 
Sub-component (a) (US$1.39 million) would finance technical assistance to 
implement a comprehensive facilities management plan, including consultants and 
training in civil engineering and facilities management, essential to maintain and sustain 
the investments in basic infrastructure rehabilitation and equipment.  
 
15. 
It would also support Project management by strengthening the existing capacity 
of the University with additional coordination, environmental management, and ICT 
capacities.  Environmental and ICT consultancies would be contracted on an as needed 
basis. Additional monitoring and evaluation studies to assess the progress of the 
investments in achieving the PDO Indicators would be conducted by an independent 
organization.  Also, in conjunction with the Project website, a crowdsourcing platform 
would be deployed using mapping, geo-spatial and social networking technologies to 
encourage student and community identification of challenges and progress in the 
implementation of the Project. Additional technical assistance would be provided to 
implement the Environmental Management Plan with an elaboration of a hazard 
assessment, laboratory protocols and chemical waste management guidelines. In addition, 
the financial management and procurement capacities would be strengthened at the 
Ministry of Education's Planning Unit.  
 
16. 
Sub-component (b) (US$440,000) would provide essential technical assistance 
and capacity building for making strategic institutional decisions designed to increase the 
UG's relevance and impact related to the LCDS, and to enhance its financial 
sustainability.  Four forward looking feasibility studies would be supported: (i) Viability 
assessment and Business Plan for a new Center of Excellence for the Study of Bio-
Diversity; (ii) Options and Operational Manual for a multi-stakeholder Research and 
Innovation Fund to support generation of new knowledge and marketable products and 
services related to the LCDS;  (iii) Establishment of a Business Development Unit, which 
would focus on connecting the UG's skills, expertise and facilities with external needs on 
a
fee for service basis; and (iv) A detailed review of the UG's existing human resources to 
identify areas where efficiency and effectiveness of personnel allocation could be 
enhanced.  All of these products would feed into a strategic plan for the University's 
growth and development.  The existing strategic planning process of the University 
would be supported by the Project with modest amounts of technical assistance as 
needed.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
17. 
The University of Guyana (with about 5,500 students) 
main campus ¨Turkeyen 
Campus¨ is located in Georgetown, capital of the country, in a costal floodplain (2m 
above sea level) at about 1.5 kilometres inland from the coastline.  Due to its location, the 
Turkeyen campus is subject to the effects of floods, university buildings were inundated 
Page  6
during the floods of 2005 and 2007.  The project will search for potential measures to 
reduce the effects of flooding in the campus and improve drainage and water systems. In 
the forty plus years of operation, the campus has grown from a student and staff 
population of 164 when it opened in 1970 to its current population of 6,500 students and 
staff.  The buildings from this period and the infrastructure that services (including 
sewage system) them have together deteriorated through time, coupled with an increase 
in usage that in all probability far exceeded what was originally envisaged by the 
designers. This has been further compounded by a history of inconsistent maintenance 
and repairs of variable quality. The more recent structures have their own challenges 
including but not limited to issues of design, material specification, inadequate building 
systems and services and construction quality which are further exacerbated by having to 
rely on an undersized and aging services infrastructure while accommodating increasing 
numbers of students and staff.  
 
18. 
The indigenous peoples of Guyana are collectively known as Amerindians and are 
believed to number between 40,000 and 80,000 people, roughly 5 percent to 10 percent 
of Guyana's approximately 800,000 total population. Given that the research activities 
could potentially take place in areas occupied, used or claimed by Amerindians, an 
unknown number of indigenous peoples could potentially be affected. For example, at 
least one "researcher in residence" would be sponsored each year to conduct field-based 
scientific research at the Iwokrama Research Station, located in the heart of Guyana's 
rainforest. This would be for a full academic year and encourage lecturers and professors 
to pursue LCDS-related research and knowledge generation.  
 
19. 
Iwokrama presents a number of opportunities for synergies with the Project. 
Firstly, Iwokrama is located on Amerindian lands within the jurisdiction of the North 
Rupununi District Development Board (NRDDB). Iwokrama maintains excellent 
working relations with the NRDDB that is recognized locally, nationally and 
internationally as a legitimate body that serves the purpose of consultation and 
collaboration for social and economic development in the 16 predominantly Amerindian 
communities located in the North Rupununi. Iwokrama officials have agreed to facilitate 
the process of obtaining broad community support and permits required to conduct 
research in areas occupied or used by Amerindian communities.  Finally, Iwokrama's 
experience managing its four core self-supporting businesses (selective timber harvesting, 
eco-tourism, forest management training and forest's services) - and innovative 
governance models of business development (which include private sector and local 
community participation through shareholding agreements), present excellent 
opportunities for University of Guyana researchers dedicated to developing socially 
optimal LCDS-relevant services or products.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO) 
Ms Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (LCSEN) 
 
Page  7
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
20. 
The Indigenous Peoples policy is triggered because some of the research activities 
funded through component 1 could take place in areas where Indigenous Peoples are 
present or maintain collective attachments. The Involuntary Resettlement policy is not 
triggered as none of the project activities will require the involuntary taking of land or 
restrictions of access to legally designated parks or protected areas.  
 
21. 
The proposed Education Quality Improvement Program offers the potential for 
'inclusive' curriculum development and research which benefit rural (particularly 
Amerindian) populations.  To ensure that the Amerindian communities are fully 
consulted and engaged in the planning and implementation phases of these research 
activities, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been drafted. The IPPF 
was discussed with Amerindian Peoples representatives in order to ensure that their 
concerns are effectively taken into consideration during the curriculum reform process as 
well as any potential research or activities that may be conducted in indigenous 
communities. The IPPF also includes a specific instrument designed to screen and 
classify the nature and scope of any potential impacts on Amerindians that could result 
from any proposed research activities. This tool will be included in the Operational 
Manual so as to constitute an essential element of each research proposal that the 
interested UG Faculty Members will submit to the Research and Publications Committee 
for evaluation.  
 
Environment  
 
22. 
The Project includes environmental considerations that were developed during 
Project preparation to ensure the Project's environmental sustainability and its 
compliance with Guyana national regulations and The World Bank Group's Safeguards 
policies. The Project has been qualified as 'Category B,' following OP/BP 4.01 - 
Environmental Assessment. The main environmental impacts expected from the Project 
would be those connected to the rehabilitation works planned under Component 2.  The 
Page  8
potential impacts of the civil works are going to be localized, low magnitude and possible 
to mitigate or prevent by following the measures, recommendations and guidelines 
described in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The ES will develop a training 
program (following the recommendations of the EMP) for contractors and staff 
responsible for the management of science laboratories and hazardous materials.  
 
23. 
Under Component 1-Sub-component (b) the Project would provide funding to 
research studies to stimulate the LCDS.  Research activities could involve, among others, 
the collection of flora and fauna samples and manipulation of biodiversity assets.  In 
order to prevent environmental risk, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) 
was prepared which includes environmental criteria and a checklist procedure that will be 
completed by the ES to screen out high environmental risk proposals.  
 
24. 
The triggering of OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.09 - Pest Management 
and OP/BP 4.36 - Forests, is to ensure that safeguards issues are considered during the 
screening process of research proposals and activities undertaken by this Component. 
First, for Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, under Component 1, the EQIP would support 
only proposals that would not harm these ecosystems and species or could increase its 
vulnerability to anthropogenic interventions. Although no alteration of natural habitats is 
expected, each eligible research proposal would be subject to a risk screening process to 
minimize the risks of negatively affecting these habitats.  Screening criteria will take into 
account the Guyana legal framework of national protected species as well as those 
included in the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of 
threatened species. Also the EMF will ensure compliance of research proposals with the 
Convention on Biological Diversity and its amendments.  
 
25. 
Next, for Forests OP/BP 4.36, forest lands cover about 80% of the Guyana 
territory. National efforts are underway through the LCDS to limit forest-based 
greenhouse gas emissions and protect its rainforest as an asset for the world through the 
REDD-plus mechanism.  This safeguard is activated in order to ensure that proposals 
presented to the EQIP would not promote deforestation of these lands but promote 
conservation and its sustainable use.  Finally, for Pest Management OP/BP 4.09, the pest 
management control is an integral part of the Teaching and Research activities of the 
Faculty of Agriculture. This safeguard is triggered in order to ensure adequate selection 
of proposals to avoid unintended environmental impacts. The Project cannot provide 
support for the purchase or use of chemicals listed as Class II and Class 1a and 1b by the 
World Health Organization (WHO).  
 
Other safeguards  
 
26. 
 Since only rehabilitation works are planned to be developed by the Project on 
existing science buildings, intervention of new areas or removed soil activities are not 
expected, the Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 was not triggered.  The location of 
the Project site (University of Guyana campuses) is not part of an international waterway 
or a disputed area.  Thus, the Safeguards Policies of International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 
and Projects in Disputed Areas policy OP/BP 7.60 were not triggered.  The project does 
Page  9
not include any activity related to dams or hydropower development, thus the Safety of 
Dams policy OP/BP 4.37 was not triggered.  
 
Procurement Plan  
 
27. 
In order to ensure environmental sustainability of the Project, allocation of funds 
has been secured in the procurement plan to cover the cost of implementing the EMF and 
hiring the Project Environmental Specialist (ES).  
 
Monitoring  
 
28. 
 The Project ES will perform project monitoring activities and prepare 
environmental audit reports which will be available for supervision missions.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
29. 
The environmental and social impacts of the project activities under Component 
2- rehabilitation works of Science Buildings are expected to be of low magnitude and 
localized, but these could have a duration of several years in the University campuses. 
The EMP will include a description of the potential impacts and appropriate mitigation 
measures to reduce or avoid these impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
30. Not relevant.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
31. 
An Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management Plan has been 
developed to (i) prevent, reduce and mitigate any potential impact related to the 
construction works of the Component 2 and an Environmental Management Framework 
was elaborated to (ii) guide the selection of research projects under Component 1 to avoid 
unintended environmental impacts related to these research activities and identify any 
potential safeguard issues.  
 
32. 
Also an Environmental Specialist will be named as part of the University 
Implementation Unit and this person will supervise the implementation of the EMP and 
the EMF.  Periodic reports will be prepared and will be available for review for the Bank.  
 
33. 
Currently, the University of Guyana faces important challenges related to the 
environmental management of solid, biological and chemical wastes.  The University 
lacks laboratory protocols, environmental guidelines and procedures.  The project will 
support the Borrower in improving the management of these environmental issues 
through technical assistance for the preparation of a hazard assessment, chemical waste 
management plan and laboratory guidelines.  
 
Page  10
34. 
The capacity of the University of Guyana to design and execute the Project would 
need to be further assessed and strengthened as existing management challenges exist - 
particularly with facilities management.  In addition, the University presently has limited 
capacity to implement and maintain the rehabilitation of laboratories, effectively use the 
equipment and execute research - all of which may result in poor implementation and 
subsequent impact on the Project development objective.  Capacity risks are being 
mitigated through building capacity development into the Project's components, 
including incentives/grants for professors to engage in activity-based learning and 
research; technical assistance for curriculum design, facilities management, and 
environmental management; and a set of studies to support strategic planning capacity at 
the University.  
 
35. 
Project implementation arrangements have been designed to take advantage of 
existing capacities and comparative advantages within the University of Guyana and 
Ministry of Education.  The Planning Unit of the Ministry of Education, which currently 
manages two other Bank-supported education projects, would supply fiduciary services 
(financial management and procurement). The University of Guyana would have primary 
responsibility for Project coordination and for the technical implementation of the Project 
through a Coordination and Technical Office located in the UG's Vice-Chancellor's 
office.  This would ensure that the University remains responsible for all technical 
aspects, at the same time as existing (and scarce) fiduciary management capacity within 
the Ministry of Education is tapped and strengthened.  A subsidiary agreement between 
the Ministry of Education and the University of Guyana would be prepared before 
negotiations and signed before effectiveness.  
 
36. 
The PC would be recruited on a competitive basis based on qualifications, 
experience and TORs finalized before negotiations, satisfactory to the Bank, and hired as 
a
condition of effectiveness.  A technical team located in the University's Coordination 
and Technical Office and financed by the Project, would report to the PC. This team 
would be comprised of consultants covering curriculum reform, facilities management, 
and ICT.  An Environmental Specialist (ES) would also join this team.  The ES would be 
responsible for supervising the implementation of the Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) and all aspects of the Environment Management Framework (EMF) and providing 
progress reports to the Bank.  The ES would work very closely with the facilities 
management staff in charge of the rehabilitation works.  
 
37. 
For each faculty to be strengthened by the Project, a representative would be 
appointed by the Vice Chancellor who would be responsible for preparation of that 
faculty's Annual Implementation Plan under the guidance of the Project Coordinator.  
Such a plan would include specification of that faculty's implementation objectives for 
that year in a time-bound fashion, which would comprise the technical specifications of 
materials, equipment and supplies to be procured by the Project for that faculty; key 
curricular areas and programs that require review through EQIP and names of faculty 
interested in this reform; the numbers of students affected by these investments 
disaggregated by gender; quarterly milestones for monitoring of implementation; and 
other aspects which might be devised.  
Page  11
38. 
In addition to the faculty representatives, the Vice Chancellor would name 
someone responsible within the facilities and maintenance department who would 
provide assistance to the Project Coordinator, faculty representatives and other key staff 
in the implementation of infrastructural improvements and laboratory renovation 
(including installation of equipment).  This Facilities Management Coordinator will also 
be responsible for submitting to the Project Coordinator the annual inventory of buildings 
and equipment affected by the Project as well as the annual maintenance and repair 
budget to ensure that investments financed by the Project are fully operational on a 
sustainable basis.  
 
39. 
Operational Manual (OM). The OM would include detailed guidelines for 
implementation of the Project components, TORs for all key personnel and activities, 
details for selection and functioning of the Project Steering Committee, procurement, 
financial management, safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, etc.  A draft OM would be 
prepared prior to loan negotiations and would be approved before the loan effectiveness 
date.  A Project website would be established early in Project implementation, which 
would provide full transparency on decisions taken by the Project Steering Committee, 
project supervision and results (Aide Memoires), procurement contracts, etc.  The 
website would also host mapping and crowd-sourcing functionality to support the 
monitoring and evaluation of the Project.  
 
40. 
Furthermore, the research agenda will be defined as part of the annual external 
consultations related to curriculum reform. The UG Research and Publications 
Committee, an established statutory body with clear operating procedures, would review 
standardized research grant applications and apply common criteria to assess their 
relevance to the LCDS, potential for funding and safeguards issues. The EMF will define 
a
Screening and Environmental Guide to ensure clearance of any potential environmental 
safeguards issues. The Research and Publications Committee will use the screening tool 
developed as part of the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework to identify the nature 
and scope of any potential impacts on Amerindians that could result from any proposed 
research activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
41. 
Following, the Environmental Assessment World Bank Policy (OP 4.01), an EMF 
and an EMP were prepared through strong coordination with the University of Guyana.  
Formal meetings, workshops and consultations have been carried out to inform and 
receive recommendations and inputs from the university community, representatives of 
NGOs and Environmental Authorities about these documents. Students and professors 
participated very actively and were very enthusiastic not only about the Project's 
expected results, but for a better environmental management of issues related to operation 
of science laboratories and biological and hazardous waste management.  Thus, it is 
expected that the Project can help improve environmental management of the University 
campus.  The EMF and EMP have been publicly disclosed prior to Appraisal through the 
¨Infoshop¨ in Washington and within Guyana, on the University of Guyana website.   
Page  12
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/20/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/20/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
Page  13
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  14
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert J. Hawkins 
04/21/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor 
04/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jason Jacques Paiement 
04/21/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
04/21/2011 
Comments:   
