Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6097 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/31/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guyana 
Project ID: P125288 
Project Name: GY - UG Science and Technology Support 
Task Team Leader: Robert J. Hawkins 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2011 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. The proposed Project will strengthen the four science and technology faculties at the 
University of Guyana to better prepare graduates for jobs in low carbon industries and build 
sustainable capacity to operate the University and plan for its future growth.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
2. Component 1:  Education Quality Improvement Program (EQIP) (estimated total cost: US$1.7 
million).  This component would (i) promote the revitalization and reorientation of the 
University of Guyana science curriculum toward critical needs for the LCDS; and (ii) provide 
support for essential research which would contextualize and provide a practical orientation to 
the curriculum. Through both of these activities, the technical and pedagogical skills of the UG 
lecturers to develop and deliver quality teaching would be considerably strengthened.  
 
3. Sub-Component (a) - Curriculum Reform (US$1.1 million) would support a standardized 
process for the updating of existing curricula and the development of entirely new curricula to 
support the LCDS, through the provision of targeted technical assistance from instructional 
design and content specialists, as well as through provision of stipends to UG lecturers who 
dedicate time, expertise and energy to this process. These reforms would include the 
Page  2
development of practical assessment components for each of the courses. At least 12 new 
courses relevant to the LCDS would be developed over a 3-year period.  
 
4. Depending on the courseware being developed (single or multi-disciplinary, use of on-line 
methodologies, etc.), 3-5 UG lecturers per course would be mobilized on a voluntary basis.  As 
this work would be beyond their normal workloads, lecturers would be offered incentives to 
participate in this process.  In addition to the hands-on training in instructional design and 
exposure to courseware available at the international level, lecturers would receive stipends for 
their time and expertise invested in producing revised/new curricula.  Stipends would be based 
on an hourly wage (US$10)/hour) and 'level of effort' agreed to between the curriculum reform 
process manager and the lecturer.  Finally, lecturers' efforts in this curriculum reform process 
would be taken into account as part of their annual personal evaluations and career development, 
as is standard practice at the UG.  
 
5. The domains of study relevant to the LCDS that the University has identified as requiring 
development include among others:  
 
a. 
GIS and Remote Sensing  
 
b.
Climate Change and Climate Modeling  
 
c. 
Hydrology (Water Resource Management)  
 
d.
Ground Water Management  
 
e. 
Alternative Energy (bio fuels, solar energy, hydroelectricity etc.)  
 
f. 
Agriculture Resources Management  
 
g. 
Sustainable Forestry  
 
h.
Natural Resources Management  
 
i. 
Food and Nutrition Technology  
 
j. 
Biodiversity Inventory and DNA Analysis (in collaboration with international research 
centers)  
 
6. Sub-component (b) (US$600,000) would provide limited funding to stimulate research 
relevant to the LCDS, with the aim of (1) supporting the development of a broader 
research/knowledge-generation culture at the UG, and (2) providing concrete examples of UG 
research which directly contribute to the LCDS.  Such examples might include: formulation of 
policy recommendations; development of LCDS-relevant services or products; generation of 
field research skills among UG graduates demanded in the labor market; production of industry-
specific baseline information (water quality, timber supply, flora/fauna inventory) against which 
the impact of economic activities can be measured; studies of social groups affected by LCDS 
industrial development, etc.  
 
7. UG staff have analyzed the LCDS to identify the most promising research topics (see Annex 
8
for an initial list).  This research agenda would be further defined as part of the annual external 
consultations mentioned above related to curriculum reform.  The UG Research and Publications 
Committee, an established statutory body with clear operating procedures, would review 
standardized research grant applications and apply common criteria to assess their relevance to 
the LCDS and potential for funding (see Annex 8 for the Research Grant Proposal Format and 
Evaluation Criteria).  Preference would be given to research activities which engage students and 
even secondary level students in survey administration, data collection, data analysis, etc., as 
Page  3
well as to research projects which involve external/international partners and/or generate co-
financing.  Grants would be relatively small (average grant size US$15,000), ranging from 
US$5,000-$50,000, and would be disbursed to UG lecturers through the UG Bursar's Office 
(which would be responsible for financial monitoring), upon approval from the Secretary of the 
UG Research and Publications Committee (the Registrar) and the Project Coordinator.  Over the 
course of the Project approximately 40 research projects would be funded.  
 
8. Implementation of this sub-component would feed directly into the Feasibility Study for the 
establishment of a larger Research and Innovation Fund (discussed in Component 3), that could 
mobilize funding from other partners, involve a broader set of stakeholders at the governance 
level, and promote the application of research for the development of marketable products and 
services aligned with the LCDS.  
 
9. Component 2:  Infrastructure rehabilitation (estimated total cost: US$5 million).  This 
component would (i) improve the existing laboratory and building infrastructure at the four 
faculties consisting of a total of 14 buildings; (ii) provide these laboratories with basic scientific 
equipment to enable the delivery of practical science education and research; and (iii) support the 
establishment of a campus wide Internet network.  
 
10. Sub-component (a) on laboratory and building rehabilitation would first rehabilitate 14 
science laboratory buildings in the four focal science faculties on the campus by improving the 
physical infrastructure to allow for basic teaching and research.  The rehabilitation would include 
new floor surfaces, new cupboards, new water and power systems, new lighting, provision of air 
conditioning, new furniture, etc.  The component would also address basic electrical, water, 
sewage, and roofing for the buildings in which the laboratories reside.  Finally, the sub-
component would address the campus-wide issue of appropriate drainage and pumps to avoid 
frequent flooding on the campus.  
 
11. Sub-component (b) would equip the labs with basic scientific equipment such as 
microscopes, slides, flasks, water testing kits, etc. as well as multi-media equipment.  The 
equipment will be prioritized based on low operating costs, low level of technical skills for use 
and greatest benefit to students and faculty.  
 
12. Sub-component (c) would support the establishment of a campus wide Internet network to 
connect all faculties to the Internet and prepare the University to connect into an international 
link, which will be established as part of the e-government broadband network currently under 
construction (scheduled to be operational by end-2011).  In conjunction with the connectivity, a 
set of software applications would be developed such as e-learning tools and digital content 
repositories to support the design and delivery of the new curriculum in component 1.  
 
13. Component 3:  Institutional Capacity Building (US$1.3 million).  This component will 
support the building of institutional capacity at the University of Guyana to (i) manage the 
Project; (ii) plan for future phases of its strategic plan; and (iii) monitor and evaluate the Project.  
 
14. Sub-component (a) will strengthen the existing capacity of the University with additional 
coordination, curricular supervision, civil works, ICT and facilities management capacities.  
Page  4
Environmental consultancies will be contracted in conjunction with the facilities management 
functions on an as needed basis.  As the facilities management capacities will be essential in 
order to maintain and sustain the investments in basic infrastructure rehabilitation and 
equipment, this component would establish a comprehensive and systematic facilities 
management system at the University and finance capacity building for staff in charge of 
undertaking continuous review and maintenance of infrastructure and equipment.  The financial 
management and procurement capacities would be leveraged from the Ministry of Education's 
Education Sector Development Unit (ESDU).  
 
15. Sub-component (b) would provide essential technical assistance and capacity building for 
future strategic planning to expand the science offerings of the university; improve research; and 
more effectively link knowledge to demands in the productive sector. Three forward looking 
feasibility studies would be supported: (i) Options and viability options for a new biodiversity 
institute on the campus; (ii) Research and Innovation Fund to support development of new 
knowledge; and (iii) Establishment of a Business Development Unit which would focus on 
connecting university talent with external needs on a fee for service basis.  
 
16. Sub-component (c) will support monitoring and evaluation studies to assess the progress of 
the investments in achieving the Project Development Objective.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
17. The University of
 Guyana (with about 5500 students) main campus ¨Turkeyen Campus¨ is 
located in Georgetown, capital of the country, in a costal floodplain (2m above sea level) at 
about 1.5 kilometer inland from the coastline.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
18. Given the relatively low levels of elementary and secondary enrollment in Guyana, students 
attending UG are more likely to come from better-off families who can afford the direct and 
opportunity costs of higher education.  In addition, experience suggests that many UG graduates 
emigrate in search of better employment opportunities, such that the benefits of higher education 
are captured privately as opposed to by society.  These two facts raise certain social equity 
issues.  
 
19. On the other hand, the proposed Education Quality component offers the potential for 
'inclusive' curriculum development and research which benefit rural (particularly AmerIndian) 
populations.  To ensure that the Amerindian communities are fully consulted and engaged on this 
Project it is recommended that an Indigenous Peoples Framework be developed so that the views 
and issues the indigenous communities can be taken into consideration during the curriculum 
reform process and any potential research or activities that may be conducted in indigenous 
communities.  Guidance will be provided to the client for the preparation of this document.  
 
20. The main environmental impacts expected of the Project are localized, low impact and 
possible to mitigate or prevent, and these will be connected to the rehabilitation works planned 
under Component 2. The Project can be categorized as a Project B, in terms of potential 
environmental impacts, and OP4.01 is triggered.  
 
Page  5
21. The Project requires the preparation of an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) to ensure the compliance of all its activities with The World Bank Group 
safeguards policies and Guyana's applicable legal and regulatory frameworks.  
 
22. The specific objectives of the ESMF are to:  
 
i. 
Assess the potential environmental and social impacts that the proposed Project activities 
could cause.  
 
ii. 
Assess the institutional capacity for mitigating anticipated environmental and social 
impacts, for example management of wastes and other critical environmental or social issues 
identified.  
 
iii. 
Design and implement a consultation process to facilitate stakeholder participation in the 
Project.  
 
iv. 
Assist the University of Guyana to (i) prevent potential environmental and social impacts 
due to Project activities; (ii) apply appropriate mitigation measures and (iii) monitor the 
implementation of such measures.  
 
v.
Define and outline the terms of reference for additional studies and guidelines to be 
prepared during implementation for reducing environmental and social impacts and increasing 
institutional capacity.  
 
vi. 
Develop an appropriate budget and schedule for the entire Project to facilitate the 
implementation of the ESMF.  
 
23. As the Project will also finance the purchase of laboratory equipment and products, as part 
of the ESMF, a supervisory team will oversee the adequate management of the equipment and 
products that the Project will purchase.  The Project cannot provide support in the purchase of 
chemicals that falls in the World Health Organization in the list 1A and 1B.  
 
24. The triggering of OP 4.04, OP 4.09 and 4.36 is to ensure that safeguards issues are 
considered during the screening process of research proposals and activities undertaken by the 
Education Quality Improvement Program in Component 1. (i) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04):  
Under Component 1, the EQIP will support only proposals that will not harm these ecosystems 
and species or could increase its vulnerability to anthropogenic interventions. Although no 
alteration of natural habitats is expected, each eligible research proposal will be subject to a risk 
screening process to minimize the risks of negatively affect these habitats. (ii) Forests (OP/BP 
4.36):  As indicated before, the extension of forested land in Guyana is enormous compared to its 
low population. National efforts are underway by the LCDS to limit forest-based greenhouse gas 
emissions and protect its rainforest as an asset for the world.  This safeguard is activated in order 
to ensure that proposals presented to the EQIP will not promote deforestation of these lands but 
promote conservation and its sustainable use.  (iii) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09):  Pest 
management control is an integral part of the Teaching and Research activities of the Faculty of 
Agriculture. This safeguard is triggered in order to ensure adequate selection of proposals to 
avoid unintended environmental impacts.  The Client has been informed and agreed that the 
Project cannot acquire pesticides or chemical products listed as class 1a and 1b by the World 
Health Organization (WHO).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  6
Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO) 
Ms Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The main environmental impacts expected of the Project are localized, low impact and 
possible to mitigate or prevent, and these will be connected to the rehabilitation works planned 
under Component 2. The Project can be categorized as a Project B, in terms of potential 
environmental impacts, and OP4.01 is triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Under Component 1, the EQIP will support only proposals that will not harm these 
ecosystems and species or could increase its vulnerability to anthropogenic interventions. 
Although no alteration of natural habitats is expected, each eligible research proposal will be 
subject to a risk screening process to minimize the risks of negatively affect these habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The extension of forested land in Guyana is enormous compared to its low population.  
National efforts are underway by the LCDS to limit forest-based greenhouse gas emissions and 
protect its rainforest as an asset for the world.  This safeguard is activated in order to ensure that 
proposals presented to the EQIP will not promote deforestation of these lands but promote 
conservation and its sustainable use.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Pest management control is an integral part of the Teaching and Research activities of the 
Faculty of Agriculture. This safeguard is triggered in order to ensure adequate selection of 
proposals to avoid unintended environmental impacts.  The Client has been informed and agreed 
that the Project cannot acquire pesticides or chemical products listed as class 1a and 1b by the 
World Health Organization (WHO).   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The proposed Education Quality component offers the potential for #inclusive# curriculum 
development and research which benefit rural (particularly AmerIndian) populations.  To ensure 
that the Amerindian communities are fully consulted and engaged on this Project it is 
recommended that an Indigenous Peoples Framework be developed so that the views and issues 
the indigenous communities can be taken into consideration during the curriculum reform 
process and any potential research or activities that may be conducted in indigenous 
communities.  Guidance will be provided to the client for the preparation of this document.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  7
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/23/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert J. Hawkins 
03/22/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/22/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
03/22/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
