Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/02/2011 
Report No.:  AC6300
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P125805 
Project Name:  Port au Prince Neighborhood Housing Reconstruction 
Task Team Leader:  Sylvie Debomy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Housing construction (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(20%);General public administration sector (20%);Roads and highways (10%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (60%);Other urban development 
(23%);Natural disaster management (15%);Land administration and management (2%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Haiti Reconstruction Fund 
65.00
65.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the proposed NHRP is to help residents of 
selected Port-au-Prince neighborhoods severely affected by the earthquake return to their 
communities by supporting them to repair and/or reconstruct their houses, and improving 
basic community service infrastructure.  
 
The proposed project would directly scale up, and be complimentary to, the World 
Bank-financed Urban Community Driven Development Project - Housing And 
Community Infrastructure Reconstruction (PRODEPUR-AF) ($US 30m), currently under 
implementation, and will finance activities in response to the Emergency.  
(#Emergency#, here, means the extraordinary event of limited duration which was caused 
by the occurrence of a 7.0 magnitude earthquake in selected parts of the Recipient#s 
territory, and which brought about unprecedented physical, social and economic damage 
to the Recipient, and its# population).   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed program would follow the approach developed for PRODEPUR-AF, and 
will use the same institutional, procurement and disbursement arrangements, originally 
developed under PRODEPUR.  
 
The Project consists of the four inter-related components described below. It will be 
implemented in neighborhoods already targeted by PRODEPUR and/or in other areas 
where strong community organizations are in place and functioning.  This may include, 
but is not limited to:  Delmas 32, Carrefour Feuille, Nazon and Martissant.  The scale and 
scope of each of the operations will depend on the actual needs of the beneficiary 
communities, the specific technical constraints of each site, and the nature of activities 
undertaken or contemplated by other donors for that area. Specifically, NHRP will 
finance:  
 
Component 1:  Debris Removal and Housing Repair and Reconstruction (US$38.0 
million).  
 
(i) 
Carrying out of: (i) the removal of debris from public spaces and private lots 
(subject to the relevant owner#s consent); and (ii) the safe demolition of Red-tagged 
Houses and Buildings and houses considered unfit for repair in economically justifiable 
conditions  in Selected Port-au-Prince Neighborhoods, both through the hiring of local 
contractors and/or the implementation of cash-for-work programs, and both under the 
supervision of PMCs.  
 
NHRP financing of such activities will only be used for areas where no other program 
from other donors or GoH entities is ongoing or planned to be put in place shortly. 
Removal activities will include the transport of the debris to specialized landfill sites such 
as Truitier as well as, where appropriate and timely, support to material recycling 
initiatives.  
 
In Phase 1, debris would be removed from streets and public spaces by one or several 
contractors. In Phase 2, (which may partially overlap with Phase 1, depending on 
locations) debris would be moved under output based cash-for-work arrangements from 
housing lots to designated collection points on streets and/or open spaces already cleared 
under Phase 1 for removal by the hauling contractor. Depending on its nature, some 
debris may be out of reach for cash-for-work activities for reasons of worker safety and 
may require the intervention of specialized and adequately equipped contractors. All 
collected debris would be hauled to the Truitier landfill site which is operated by 
MTPTC. A Debris Management Pilot Program at the site landfill allows the recycling of 
debris and therefore would ensure that the disposal of all debris meets the World Bank#s 
environmental safeguard requirements. Where possible, debris would be recycled to be 
used as building material for road improvements and soil works in the reconstruction 
process. Training on demolition best practices, and safety standards would be provided at 
the locally based Community Reconstruction Centers (CRCs).  
 
(ii) 
Provision of support to Beneficiaries of Selected Port-au-Prince Neighborhoods to 
carry out: (i) the repair and/or retrofitting of Yellow-tagged Houses and Buildings, 
through the hiring of local contractors under the supervision of PMC; or (ii) the on-site 
Page  3
reconstruction of Red-tagged Houses and Buildings, and houses unfit for repair in 
economical conditions, through the provision of Cash Grants to Beneficiaries.  
 
Beneficiaries will be selected based on information gathered through the community-
based mapping exercises (énumerations), which will be carried out primarily by UN-
Habitat and other organizations.  
 
All repairs and reconstruction would be done according to MTPTC#s Practical Guide 
for Construction of Small Buildings, funded by the World Bank#s Emergency Recovery 
and Disaster Management Project (ERDMP), and the MTPTC#s Practical Guidelines on 
Repairs and the pending Practical Guidelines on Seismic-Retrofit, funded by the World 
Bank#s Building Habitability Assessments, Phase II.  
 
(iii) 
Provision of technical assistance to support neighborhood communities including 
NDCs in the preparation and implementation of Project activities and other associated 
activities, through, inter alia: (i) the coordination of community-based mapping exercises; 
(ii) the preparation of Cash Grants selection criteria and procedures; (iii) the provision of 
advice on resettlement policies and procedures (in accordance with the Resettlement 
Action Plans); (iv) the provision of training on gender awareness; (v) the establishment 
and operation of CRCs; (vi) the creation and implementation of conflict-resolution 
mechanisms related to Project activities; (vii) the supervision of housing construction 
activities; and (viii) the provision of training on the use of new building codes and 
techniques.  
 
Component 2: Community Service Infrastructure Repair, Improvement and Extension 
(US$20.0 million)  
 
Carrying out of: (i) repairs, improvement and extension of basic community 
infrastructure, including, inter alia, roads, walkways, drainage ditches and channels, solid 
waste management facilities, water supply systems and sanitation facilities; and (ii) 
construction of CRCs; both activities in the Selected Port-au-Prince Neighborhoods.  
 
Costs to be covered would include the construction/rental of office spaces under this 
component; its staffing, training and operation are included under the Social 
mobilization, and advisory support for reconstruction.  
 
Detailed work programs for this component are difficult to determine in advance as a 
result of the diverse needs of each community. These programs would be identified using 
the existing CDD structures and the participatory process combined with technical and 
urban planning exercises, with the communities and the municipality. As such, the 
following is a list of activities under consideration:  
 
(a) 
Roads and pedestrian access  
 
(b) 
Drainage ditches & channels  
 
(c) 
Solid waste  
 
(d) 
Water supply  
 
(e) Sanitation 
 
 
(f) 
Community Reconstruction Centers  
 
(g) 
Social facilities  
 
Page  4
Component 3: Institutional Capacity Support and Studies (US$ 5.0 million):  
 
Provision of technical assistance to support the Recipient and the Municipalities of the 
Port-au-Prince metropolitan area, through, inter alia: (i) the development of 
neighborhood-level urban restructuring plans and natural risk maps; (ii) the preparation 
of medium and long-term urban development and housing studies and strategies, and 
associated policy and administrative measures; (iii) the carrying out of technical and 
environmental/social safeguard audits; and (iv) the provision of capacity building to 
Recipient#s agencies and Municipalities.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (US$ 2.0 million):  
 
Supporting BMPAD in the coordination of the administrative, supervision, monitoring, 
evaluation, financial management and procurement aspects of the Project, through the 
financing of incremental operating costs, goods and consultants# services.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Selected Poor Neighborhoods of the Metropolitan areas of Port-au-Prince severely 
affected by the January 12, 2010 Earthquake.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Project categorization  
 
This project will support a variety of social infrastructure and housing investments. 
Most adverse impacts will arise from small-scale construction activities, debris 
management and worker safety. These impacts will not be large-scale, irreversible or 
significant. Potential indirect and cumulative impacts will largely be positive given the 
Page  5
precarious state of the environment in the neighborhoods in which the project will 
operate, particularly following the 2010 earthquake which has accelerated decay and 
environmental blight in these neighborhoods. As such, we recommend that the Project 
have an environmental category B.  
 
Potential negative impacts (direct, indirect, and cumulative) related to construction, 
operation and maintenance phases of small-scale infrastructure investments, in particular 
for civil works, will be mitigated and/or avoided under guidance provided in the existing 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that was prepared for the 
CDD program in Haiti, and has since been updated to take housing and social 
infrastructure into account.  These measures have been identified and assessed during 
subproject preparation of PRODEPUR, and will be included (with associated costs) in 
contractor contracts.  
 
In addition, small-scale infrastructure investment proposals will emerge from 
community discussions following a strong participatory approach put in place by 
implementing partners. A good model of this type of interventions is already being put in 
place by the PRODEPUR project where good practices and modalities of handling 
community participation to minimize impacts on individuals have already been tested in 
the post-earthquake context of urban Haiti. However, as target neighborhoods are small, 
it is not expected that any given project activity will result in significant impacts related 
to land acquisition and/or resettlement.   
 
Safeguard instruments  
 
To outline a process for identifying, mitigating and managing the adverse impacts 
arising from this project, PRODEPUR#s existing Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be updated to cover the typology of all potential infrastructure 
investments under the project. The ESMF will also include a diagnostic to identify the 
environmental management systems among the PMCs and contractors that will execute 
project investments, which will be used to identify PMCs and contractors who are 
capable of executing project investments while meeting Bank safeguard minimums. This 
ESMF will be embedded in the project#s Operational Manual.  
 
The ESMF will incorporate lessons learned from the implementation and application of 
the ESMF for the PRODEP and PRODEPUR projects, and builds upon three key inputs 
that have been developed and used under PRODEPUR to identify and minimize the 
potential environmental impacts of its subprojects, namely: (a) a map of sensitive areas in 
each community; (b) community level diagnostics setting forth key environmental 
constraints; and (c) standard environmental management plans for common subproject 
types (e.g. steps to minimize and mitigate impacts arising from common construction 
activities).  
 
The ESMF, in accordance with national law and international best practice, will include: 
(i) subproject screening and classification based on potential environmental impacts of 
the project type and site sensitivity; (ii) decision-support matrices for identifying the 
Page  6
required environmental work (which investments require what type of Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP); (iii) a monitoring and evaluation section to supervise the 
implementation of appropriate mitigation measures; (iv) implementation arrangements; 
(v) budget implications; and (vi) the suite of capacity building activities necessary to 
strengthen the capacity of BMPAD and the various PMCs and contractors to apply 
safeguard remedies.  
 
The ESMF will be prepared to include measures and principles for dealing with debris 
removal and worker health and safety (as well as potential involuntary resettlement, all of 
which are described below). Subprojects will be declared ineligible if they are located 
within a critical area. The definition of critical areas will be updated based on the results 
of a multi-hazard risk assessment that will identify those portions of each neighborhood 
where reconstruction is inadvisable given the risk of flooding, landslides, etc.  
 
The timing of safeguards interventions will be determined based on lessons learned 
from implementing the ESMF for PRODEP, and PRODEPUR .With PRODEP and 
PRODEPUR, initial screening occurred prior to the completion of technical designs for 
each sub-project. With the intention of screening out ineligible sub-projects prior to 
sinking funding in preparation, the ESMF will include procedures to reevaluate the 
screening following the completion of technical designs to ensure that all potential 
impacts are captured, assessed and mitigation activities identified.  
 
As some activities may result in resettlement of few people, the project will develop a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) # building on lessons from a Social Assessment 
(SA) and validated through a community-based mapping exercise # to guide the 
implementation of micro-scale resettlement programs within the communities 
participating in the project. Participatory and community-based approaches will be put in 
place to ensure the application of the avoid-minimize-mitigate principle in the target 
neighborhoods. Particular attention will be given to the documentation of all land-related 
transactions. The BMPAD, in collaboration with the Bank team, will also ensure that 
sufficient and appropriate capacity is transferred to implementing partners on the ground 
to manage the application of social and environmental safeguards adequately.  
 
Retroactive financing and applicable safeguards instruments : In the event that payments 
are made for eligible expenditures prior to the date of the Grant  Agreement, the 
Recipient shall ensure that, for each project activity, for which such eligible expenditures 
were incurred, and which required the preparation of an environmental management plan 
and/or resettlement plan, the relevant plan was prepared based on the Urban Community 
Development Project Safeguard Documents, and thereafter implemented in accordance 
with the terms of the relevant plan, all in a manner acceptable to the World Bank.  
 
Scale and scope of potential adverse environmental impacts:  
 
The main direct impacts arising from project investments are expected to occur during 
(i) demolition and debris management; and (ii) construction of new housing and of small-
Page  7
scale community infrastructure (e.g. road rehabilitation). In both cases, the investments 
will cause only localized negative environmental impacts, consisting mostly of worker 
safety issues, noise, vibration, dust, and access disruption.  
 
Management of Debris. The clean-up of debris may not be a significant issue at the 
household level, but is an issue at the large scale, particularly in terms of final disposal. 
The initial urgency to clear debris in order to recover bodies has led to fairly 
indiscriminate dumping of debris in the neighborhoods, causing blockages to water 
canals which in turn can cause localized flooding in the rainy season. All debris will be 
cleaned up and managed prior to the initiation of individual reconstruction. The 
management (including reuse and final disposal) of debris is an important contextual 
issue for this project, and is being addressed through parallel and complementary 
approaches, including through the Bank-financed Haiti Infrastructure and Institutions 
Emergency Recovery Project (HIIERP) that is building the capacity of the Truitier 
Landfill to accept and properly manage debris and other wastes. The ESMF will build on 
standards identified in the Debris Management Plan that was prepared under 
PRODEPUR to guide how debris will be collected and managed at the source site (up to 
arrival at Truitier). This includes including procedures for dealing with any human 
remains found in the wreckage in the ESMF, procedures that in turn will be based on the 
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs guidelines.  
 
Demolition and Construction: Adverse impacts arising from both demolition and 
construction activities will be highly localized, ranging from elevated noise and dust 
levels to increased waste and changing (over the short term) pedestrian and vehicular 
traffic routes. The ESMF will include commonplace mitigation measures to minimize and 
manage these adverse impacts. A special focus will be put on public and worker health 
and safety, by, among other things, erecting appropriate signage, cordoning off sites due 
to be demolished or under demolition, providing appropriate personal protective 
equipment (e.g. hard-hats) to families visiting their construction sites, and managing 
work around important schedules, such as school start and close, to avoid endangering 
children.  
 
Worker Health and Safety:  Training in the use of construction equipment will be 
provided through the Community Reconstruction Centers. Personal protective equipment 
will be made available, and its supply and proper use will be added in contract clauses for 
demolition, debris removal and construction investments.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources: It is possible that the civil works might directly and/or 
indirectly affect cultural property in existing neighborhoods. These could include known 
local structures or sites of historic or cultural importance. Given the human cost of the 
Emergency, it is also possible that some sites will be accorded religious significance. The 
highly participatory nature of the project coupled with the screening procedures outlined 
in the ESMF will ensure that communities would be able to identify if any proposed sub-
project will have an impact on cultural property as defined by the policy (OP 4.11, 
Physical Cultural Resources). This process is captured in the ESMF, which also includes 
Page  8
guidance on preparing chance find clauses for contractors in bidding documents for any 
demolition or construction activities supported by the project.  
 
The following policies are not triggered, as explained below:  
 
Natural Habitats and Forests: Project activities will occur exclusively in urban 
neighborhoods that are highly degraded. Moreover, the ESMF will include screening 
procedures to ensure that no project interventions occur or affect these critical habitats.  
 
Pest Management:  The project will not result in vector management (VM) to prevent, 
reduce or eliminate the transmission of disease through risk vectors (such as rats). As a 
result, the procurement, storage or use of pesticides will remain ineligible under NHRP.  
 
Consultations and Disclosure:  
 
A
draft of the ESMF will be disclosed to affected peoples and other stakeholders, both 
locally and through the InfoShop. BMPAD and the selected PMCs and contractors will 
work through the existing community councils to consult with local communities 
regarding the proposed project activities, potential adverse impacts, proposed safeguard 
instruments and the existing grievance mechanism prior to the commencement of works. 
The comments, questions and concerns of the potentially affected peoples will be 
addressed in the ESMF, which will be disclosed in final format prior to the initiation of 
works (and within six months of project appraisal). Implementing partners will also 
ensure that people in target communities are fully aware of their rights and 
responsibilities vis-
à-vis the proposed interventions, and that beneficiaries have access to 
information on project activities, timing of project execution, as well as information on 
modalities to lodge complaints and resolve possible conflicts locally. To that effect, the 
implementing partners will establish grievance redress mechanisms at community level to 
ensure that possible complaints and grievances are heard and resolved as efficiently and 
effectively as possible. The grievance redress mechanism will be based on 
recommendations emerging from the social assessment currently being commissioned, 
which will identify legitimate channels and stakeholders who are recognized as valid 
tools and individuals/institutions in resolving conflicts and disputes.  
 
Local peoples will remain engaged throughout the life of the project through the 
creation of Community Reconstruction Centers (CRCs) in each neighborhood that will 
house community liaisons and technical assistants, and will serve as a platform to provide 
trainings, host consultations, disclose materials and collect and address complaints.  
 
Scale and scope of potential adverse social impacts:  
 
A
Social Assessment (SA) originally carried out during project preparation for 
PRODEPUR helped to define the physical delimitation of the target areas and produced 
socioeconomic data and information about CBOs working in those areas; it also 
identified social issues that can affect project implementation, as described below.  
 
Page  9
The key social issues that relate to the project include: (a) the accurate identification of 
families that lived in each house in the project intervention area prior to the Emergency, 
(b) determining their property tenure status, (c) developing assistance options that 
adequately address the situation of all categories of affected families/houses, especially 
renters and sub-renters (d) addressing the needs of vulnerable groups, (e) possible 
discovery of human remains during the process of debris removal, and (f) addressing 
physical relocation that may be necessary as a result of house repair, reconstruction or 
community infrastructure development.  
 
In order to address the above issues adequately, the project will: (a) continue to rely on 
community-based processes to identify and address issues, (b) continue consultations 
with the community throughout program preparation and implementation based on 
dissemination of prior relevant information, (c) develop clear entitlement criteria and 
assistance options for all categories of affected families, especially renters and sub-
renters, (d) promote special measures to address the needs of vulnerable groups, (e) put in 
place an agreed, community-endorsed protocol to deal with possible discovery of human 
remains during debris removal, (f) develop an adequate resettlement framework to 
address possible relocation of beneficiaries in the realization of public works, (g) carry 
out community-based mapping prior to ascertain property tenure status of beneficiaries; 
and (h) establish a durable conflict resolution mechanism to address any complaints, 
disputes or grievances that beneficiaries may have during the design and implementation 
of the program. The conflict resolution mechanism will be housed in the Community 
Reconstruction Center and will be available to resolve conflicts arising from any 
component or activity supported by NHRP.  In addition, a rapid social analysis will be 
conducted in consultation with the key stakeholders to identify any additional, critical 
social issues, and to solicit suggestions on how to best address them.  
 
The World Bank-financed ongoing PRODEPUR project has a strong record of 
community-based planning and implementation, which is a key, positive factor in 
promoting smooth preparation and implementation of the proposed NHRP project.  
Under PRODEPUR, each NDC, a strong umbrella community organization empowered 
in each neighborhood (for example, the NDC in Delmas 32 comprises sixty three 
constituent community-based organizations), has already demonstrated their capacity to 
successfully implement community-based initiatives. They have been involved in debris 
removal, implementing cash for work programs, and distributing survival kits, clean 
water and lanterns.  It is important that the NDCs continue to play a key role in helping 
design program activities to be supported under the NHRP, and in overseeing their 
implementation.  
 
The key social issues, and how the program will address them, are described below:  
 
Accurate identification of beneficiaries living in project intervention areas: The 
engineers from MTPTC have been working with social workers from PADF and UNOPS 
to divide all dwellings into the three categories (red, yellow, green) and identify the 
specific families that lived in each affected house. This information includes some 
household demographics, property measurements and tenure status of each of the affected 
Page  10
properties.  However, this information is not complete. The additional information 
required will be gathered through an enumeration and community-based mapping 
exercise.  
 
Determining the property tenure status of each beneficiary:  The community-based 
mapping exercise will help determine whether the family residing in each property is an 
owner of the house they occupy, or a lessee, a sub-lessee etc.  The tenure classification 
will also be based on whether the owner resides in the neighborhood or is an #absentee 
owner#, and whether the land on which the house is constructed is owned by the owner 
of the house.  The activities supported under the NHRP will be implemented without 
prejudice to the property tenure status of the owners and occupants, in the spirit of 
providing urgently required assistance to ensure safe shelter for families that have 
severely suffered in the aftermath of the earthquake.  
 
The typology of land tenure under this project is likely to include:  
 
#
owners residing in their own houses (who also own the land)  
 
#
renters, renting from owners residing in the same house (also own the land)  
 
#
renters, renting from absentee owners (in the country, and own the land)  
 
#
renters, renting from absentee owners (living in a foreign country, but own the 
land)  
 
#
renters, renting from renters (sub-renters)  
 
#
all of the above categories, but where the owner / occupant does not own the land  
 
#
owners / renters of #red houses# that will be demolished.  
 
Land tenure and property tenure issues in the Haitian context are particularly intricate 
and complex, have a long standing history and beyond the scope of this project to 
resolve. Nevertheless, two specific measures are being contemplated to facilitate field 
interventions under the proposed NHRP: (i) carrying out community-based mapping to 
collect information on the demographics and tenure status of residents and on the 
physical boundaries/characteristics of affected land parcels and buildings, and (ii) bg 
grievance mechanisms to address concerns raised by beneficiaries during the 
reconstruction process. The community-based mapping exercise will help legitimize 
tenure claims that cannot be substantiated with formal documentation, and will occur 
with the participation of formal authorities, CBOs and beneficiaries. The grievance 
mechanisms will address contested outcomes or unclear processes.  
 
Defining options for assistance:  Based on the information from the Community-based 
mapping exercise, the Multi-hazard Risk Map and the Urban Planning Map, a number of 
options for providing assistance to the eligible beneficiaries will be developed. 
Beneficiaries will be limited to houses marked red or yellow. Red houses will be 
demolished and rebuilt or repaired. Yellow houses will be repaired.  
 
The forms of assistance will be finalized in consultation with key stakeholders including 
the community-based organizations, various government agencies involved in the 
reconstruction effort and the beneficiaries of the project. All assistance will be provided 
to the women in the households.  The model of support will be based on community-
Page  11
based reconstruction methods that have been successfully implemented in Indonesia, 
Afghanistan and Pakistan.  The form and extent of project support to be provided to the 
communities, as well as the detailed provisions of how the program will be implemented 
and supervised, will be included in the OM.  
 
The issue of renters and sub-renters: Since a large number of affected families were / are 
renters, measures will be identified to ensure that they have continued access to rental 
housing after the house repairs have been completed. This will also include inhabitants of 
red houses.  
 
Measures to support vulnerable groups:  Among the beneficiaries, there are likely to be 
particularly vulnerable beneficiaries who may need special assistance. This may include 
women, especially female-headed households, orphan children households, households 
with old parents where the children may have died etc. Special provisions for them may 
include: (a) support in house repair/reconstruction; (b) higher amounts of assistance for 
reconstruction; (c) support for accessing various relief/development programs being 
administered by others; and (d) regular, targeted consultations with, and monitoring of 
these groups during project preparation and implementation  
 
Involuntary Resettlement: Subprojects are not expected to require involuntary 
resettlement since the sub-grants for Emergency reconstruction will finance settlement 
(housing and community infrastructure) rehabilitation and reconstruction in-situ. In the 
event they do, however, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is in preparation in 
accordance with OP4.12 to ensure application of the appropriate safeguard policies.  This 
policy reflects the following principles:  
 
#
Prior to the approval of eligible beneficiaries, BMPAD with the assistance of the 
PMC and the relevant NDC need to ensure that the sites, boundaries and ownerships of 
the land plots need to be clearly identified, reconfirmed by their neighbors and verified 
by the housing facilitators (the community-based mapping exercise).  
 
#
In cases where there are disputed claims, conflict resolution will be facilitated by 
BMPAD and the PMC #animateurs# through the conflict resolution mechanism in the 
Community Reconstruction Center.  
 
#
In case there is resettlement, the procedures put forth in the ESMF will be 
followed to ensure compliance with World Bank OP 4.12.  
 
Consultations and Disclosure:  
 
BMPAD, with help from the PMCs and NDCs will consult with project affected peoples 
and other stakeholders on the RPF prior to its finalization and before works begin. These 
consultations will continue through the life of the project. The RPF will be disclosed both 
locally and internationally through the proposed neighborhood Community 
Reconstruction Centers, existing social networks, and the World Bank website 
(www.worldbank.org) within six months of appraisal.   
 
Page  12
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Based on the ongoing experience with housing and social infrastructure investments to 
date, there will be no long-term adverse impacts.  Moreover, the project is likely to result 
in significant improvements in building social infrastructure and safeguards capacity and 
social capital in target areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Two alternatives to the proposed NHRP were considered. A first alternative examined 
was to support initiatives by various NGOs and other international organizations such as 
UNOPS focusing on the provision of transitional shelter to avoid environmental impacts 
associated with permanent construction. This alternative was rejected based on the 
Bank#s experience with other post-disaster reconstruction programs, for instance, 
Indonesia, Pakistan and India, which demonstrated that the building of transitional 
housing did not provide a lasting solution nor did they necessarily reduce short-term 
impacts from construction. A second alternative suggested was to modify the institutional 
arrangements of PRODEPUR to include a window for large public investment-type 
reconstruction operations within the Project municipalities. This alternative was rejected 
because relocating Emergency victims to standardized mass housing complexes was 
likely to further disrupt the already fragile social fabric of the communities and lay the 
ground for a rapid resurgence of crime and political violence. Moreover it would not 
reduce environmental impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguard Instruments.  
 
The Recipient will update the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) in accordance with OP 4.01 and the national environmental decree, as described 
above.  A draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to guide 
responses in the event that any involuntary resettlement, as defined under OP 4.12, 
occurs.  
 
Recipient Capacity.  
 
On behalf of the Government of Haiti (GoH), the Bureau de Monétisation des 
Programmes d#Aide au Développement (BMPAD) (Office of Monetization of 
Development Aid Programs) (formerly the PL-480 Management Office), under the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) and through its existing Project Coordination 
Unit (PCU/Bureau de Monétisation, BMPAD), will retain overall responsibility for 
implementing the proposed project. The other entities involved in project implementation 
include Neighborhood Development Councils (NDCs), the Project Management 
Contractors (PMCs), and the municipal government. These implementation arrangements 
will follow that of PRODEPUR.  
 
Page  13
BMPAD is in the process of upgrading its overall management capacity for larger scale 
development projects. In that context, BMPAD is in the process of recruiting an 
environment specialist and a social specialist that will be able to provide guidance at 
corporate level, as well as facilitate the application of World Bank policies in all sub-
projects. The newly recruited staff will also play a crucial role in training implementing 
partners# on aspects of World Bank environmental and social operation policies 
implementation.  
 
National government:  BMPAD is an autonomous public institution created in 2007 to: 
(a) receive and monetize food aid from the international donors, and (b) identify and fund 
government development projects with relevant institutions and/or agencies in areas such 
as road construction, agriculture, education, health, and commerce.  
 
As the national executing agency of the project on behalf of the GoH, BMPAD will be 
responsible for overall project coordination and oversight, but will delegate day-to-day 
project execution to the PMCs.  BMPAD will nonetheless provide continuous oversight 
of (i) the environment and social impact screening process; (ii) the sourcing of materials 
to ensure that national policies and environment best practice are followed; (iii) the 
implementation of investment-specific mitigation measures; and (iv) the execution of 
information campaigns and consultations. BMPAD will also continue to provide training 
to the PMCs and NDCs on environment and social impact assessment and impact 
management.  
 
To date, BMPAD has satisfactorily prepared and implemented the ESMF for its CDD 
portfolio. It has provided more than a dozen safeguards trainings to the PMCs, CBOs and 
NDCs under PRODEPUR and PRODEP. These trainings have consisted of training-of-
trainer events in (a) basic management, administration, accounting, safeguards and 
financial management for NDCs and municipal government officials; (b) capacity 
building and technical assistance to strengthen governance, participatory development, 
supervision, and coordination capacity at the municipal-government level and to relevant 
ministerial staff; (c) workshops with service providers to harmonize social and 
environment practices to assist CBOs and NDCs in carrying out project activities; (d) 
training of BMPAD staff to effectively supervise the identification and management of 
environment and social impacts and their associated mitigation measures.  
 
Local government: Despite Haiti promulgating a legal framework for decentralization 
under the 1987 Constitution to give citizens a voice in local politics and to provide 
citizens with basic services through the establishment of a functional local administration, 
the decentralized system remains barely functioning. There are three categories of local 
governments (collectivités territoriales), each with both executive councils (conseils) and 
legislative assemblies (assemblées), as follows: (a) the section communale, with an 
Administrative Council of the Communal Section (Conseil d#Administration de la 
Section Communale, CASEC) and a Communal Section Assembly (Assemblée Section 
Communale, ASEC); (b) the commune or municipality, with a three-member municipal 
council (headed by a mayor) and a municipal assembly; and (c) the Départment, with a 
departmental council and a departmental assembly. All bodies exercise financial and 
Page  14
administrative autonomy, but only the commune is empowered to levy taxes. As a result, 
the section communal and the departments are fully dependent on budget appropriations 
from the central government. Only the municipalities play a direct role in the project.  
 
The involvement of municipalities in disadvantaged urban areas is particularly uneven 
and suffers from lack of a clear legal and regulatory framework that can give coherence 
and supervision to the multiple municipal development initiatives in urban areas or take 
responsibility for planning and technical issues. In addition, in large urban centers there 
exists a large distance between the community initiatives at the local neighborhood level 
and the commune structure. Complicating this is the fact that no official subdivisions 
exist within cities; the municipal council and the municipal assemblies technically 
represent the entire commune, not just the city itself.  
 
Neighborhood Development Councils (NDCs): NDCs are formed by elected 
representatives of CBOs, civil society, and local/municipal government representatives 
(who are eligible for less than 20% of seats). As the principal entity for targeting benefits 
and allocating project resources at the communal level, NDCs also provide a critical link 
to local government and have the potential to engage in other non-project activities. 
NDCs play a fundamental role in mobilizing communities and promoting their 
participation in local decision-making. This will be an especially important role in 
supervising community mapping, verifying tenure and consulting with project-affected 
peoples in the NHRP, something that as a participatory and representative community 
body, the NDCs are very well suited to do.  
 
Project Management Contractors (Maîtres D#Ouvrage Délégués, PMCs):  
 
Under the overall guidance of BMPAD, the main service providers, whose primary 
responsibility is the implementation of sub-project activities, will be selected according to 
the standard World Bank procurement processes.  Their role comprises: (a) assisting 
NDCs in strengthening their organizational and operational capacities; (b) accompanying 
NDCS in the #on-the-ground# execution of subproject activities (including community-
based mapping); (c) providing technical assistance throughout the subproject cycle; and, 
(d) technically appraising social infrastructure investments identified by the NDCs.  
 
Capacity building:  
 
The project#s ESMF and RPF will be developed to include the training activities that 
will be given to all participants who will have responsibilities for safeguard 
implementation under the newer components.  It will distinguish among their different 
training needs in terms of raised awareness, sensitization to the issues, and detailed 
technical training:  
 
#
Detailed technical training for project implementers who will need to analyze 
potentially adverse environmental and social impacts, to prescribe mitigation approaches 
and measures, and to prepare and supervise the implementation of management plans. 
This training will address such matters as community participation methods; 
Page  15
environmental analysis; using the ESMF diagnostics and checklists; preparing 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), Resettlement Actions Plans (RAPs), and so 
forth; safeguard reporting; and subproject supervision and monitoring.  
 
#
Awareness-raising for additional stakeholders who may need to appreciate the 
approach or play a role in the implementation of the project (e.g. contractors; partner 
NGOs, etc.).  
 
#
Awareness-raising for beneficiaries who need to be familiar enough with the 
approach that they can make informed and specific requests for technical assistance.  
 
NDCs and PMCs will be targeted for training.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include homeowners, communities, municipalities, NGOs, and 
related government agencies.  The project will continue to be implemented under a 
participatory approach, as follows:  
 
Disclosure and Consultation:  
 
The Recipient will make the ESMF and RPF available in country (through the BMPAD 
website and they will be advertised in local newspapers) and through the Banks 
InfoShop. The final ESMF and RPF will include a summary of the consultation, 
including attendees, issues raised and how the final instruments addressed those issues.  
 
Communication and Dissemination campaigns: These campaigns, which have 
incorporated activities linked to local history and culture (music, dancing, etc.), have 
been very useful to promote community participation under PRODEP and PRODEPUR. 
The recruitment of local consultants to support this activity has contributed to its success. 
NHRP will continue these activities, incorporating a general strategy targeting selected 
groups (youth, women, etc.) to better use the resources and have greater impact.  
 
More broadly, a communication strategy will be developed to promote a genuine, 
community-led process that is perceived as fair and meaningful by all stakeholders. This 
will include consulting on project timelines, eligibility criteria, and assistance packages. 
Preliminary results from the community-based mapping exercise will be shared with each 
community in a transparent manner, to invite comments or potential objections from 
community members on the process or the results of the exercise.  BMPAD and the 
PMCs will work through the NDCs to consult with local communities regarding the 
proposed project activities, potential adverse impacts, proposed safeguard instruments 
and the existing grievance mechanism prior to the commencement of works. Local 
people will remain engaged throughout the life of the project through the creation of 
Community Reconstruction Centers in each neighborhood that will house community 
liaisons and technical assistants, and will serve as a platform to provide trainings, host 
consultations, disclose materials and collect and address complaints.  
 
Page  16
Neighborhood Development Councils (NDCs): NDCs will receive support under the 
project to better perform its functions: assessment, approval and follow-up of 
investments. Training and technical assistance will be provided to reinforce their role to 
promote social cohesion and address conflicts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/30/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/30/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is an OP8.00 operation and safeguards documents cannot be disclosed prior to 
appraisal. This requirement is n/a  
 
The documents should be published 6 months after effectiveness date.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
No 
Page  17
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sylvie Debomy 
05/02/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Valerie Hickey 
05/02/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Fabio Pittaluga 
05/02/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
05/02/2011 
Comments:  signed by acting Regional safeguards coordinator 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
05/02/2011 
Comments:  approved by acting SNM Ellen Hamilton 
