Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/16/2010 
Report No.:  AC5885
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P120110 
Project Name:  Cholera Emergency Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maryanne Sharp 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 3, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: January 18, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSHH 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Other communicable diseases (80%);Health system performance (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to improve the health and hygiene practices in order to 
reduce the spread of cholera and strengthen the institutional capacity to respond to 
outbreaks.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project would finance two Components: (i) Support to the Government's 
Emergency Response to Cholera at the Departmental Level; and (ii) Institutional 
Strengthening. The Components are outlined below:  
 
Component 1: Support to the Government's Response to Cholera ($11.0 million): The 
objective of this Component is to carry out a program of activities for immediate 
response to cholera, as outlined in the National Strategy for the Response to the Cholera 
Epidemic and defined at the departmental level, to support Government's emergency 
response to cholera. This Component seeks to respond to the needs of the departmental 
level through support to all service providers, whether public, mixed or private, 
undertaking interventions at all levels of the cholera response.  
 
Page  2
(a) 
Sub-component 1.1: Support to a Multi-sectoral Approach to Public Primary 
Health Care. This sub-component seeks to support a multi-sectoral approach to public 
primary health care, by (i) designing, through community participation and social 
mobilization, departmental cholera management plans with comprehensive identification 
of the department's needs for an effective response to cholera over a six months period, 
including human resources, equipment and vehicles, medical supplies, goods and 
materials including for medical waste management, and technical assistance, and (ii) 
implementing the most urgent priorities of such plans.  
 
(b) 
Sub-component 1.2: Support to the Health, Water and Sanitation Response of 
Non-Public Providers. This sub-component will finance the health, water and sanitation 
activities carried out by non-public service providers, through carrying out a program of 
activities for immediate response to cholera, including providing immediate access to 
basic health services for affected population and vulnerable groups, increasing health 
promotion and hygiene awareness and improving access to clean water and sanitation.  
 
Component 2: Emergency Response Capacity Building ($4.0 million): This Component 
will finance activities to support the successful implementation of Component 1, 
including a number of emergency response capacity building activities for both MSPP 
and DINEPA as well as overall project management and supervision. This Component 
will finance two sub-components:  
 
(a) 
Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening Government's capacity to manage and respond 
to outbreaks, including (i) strengthening surveillance, reporting, and monitoring of 
cholera cases, and building management and medical waste management capacity of the 
MSPP at the central and departmental level; and (ii) building capacity for DINEPA for 
the implementation of its cholera prevention and control strategy.  
 
(b) 
Sub-component 2.2: Carrying out a program of activities to support the 
management of the Project, including monitoring, supervision and audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This project will take place nationwide to strengthen the ability of service providers to 
respond to the cholera outbreak.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Valerie Hickey (YPP) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Project categorization: The Project will support multiple, small-scale activities prioritized 
by the Inter-Sectoral Response Committee.  These activities will mostly relate to 
preventing spread through enhancing access to hygiene information and clean water, and 
facilitating treatment for infected individuals. These activities will not produce any large-
scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. The Project is thus using a tried and tested 
approach in an emergency context in which the potential incremental scale of 
environmental impacts is minor and can be easily localized, and measures to mitigate the 
impacts are already standard practice among the non-public sector service providers. 
However, given the sensitivity of some of the interventions, particularly in terms of 
managing healthcare waste within and from healthcare facilities, and the inclusion of 
minor works, the Project has an environmental category of B.  
 
Scale and scope of potential impacts: Based on the experience from other emergency 
interventions to stem an epidemic, the likely key environmental risks associated with 
activities for this type of project include: healthcare waste management, worker health 
and safety, and minor works.  
 
Healthcare waste management: The management of healthcare waste (both excreta and 
medical waste) is a significant issue at the primary healthcare level and at the level of 
particular treatment centers for cholera, particularly in terms of final disposal. The initial 
urgency to dispose of waste at the household level has led to fairly indiscriminate 
dumping that has in many ways fueled the epidemic. The project's hygiene education 
awareness will directly confront this behavior. Methods to carefully manage healthcare 
waste in healthcare facilities will be finalized in the ESMF, consulted on and disclosed 
prior to the beginning of project activities.  
 
Worker health and safety: Given that cholera cannot be transmitted person-to-person, 
and rather is contracted through ingestion of contaminated food or drink, all project 
participants will receive training in proper preventive techniques prior to working with 
Page  4
the project. Cholera patients admitted to heath care facilities frequently present with 
nausea and profuse diarrhea, and therefore contact infection control measures will also be 
applied to avoid direct unprotected contact with body fluids as per standard precautions. 
Hand washing is a major component of these standard precautions and one of the most 
effective methods to prevent transmission of the disease. In addition to hand washing, (i) 
the use of gloves and gowns and other relevant personal protection equipment (PPE) will 
be mandated for all healthcare workers when providing care to cholera patients, and (ii) 
all areas in clinics will need to be cleaned and disinfected frequently, especially those that 
are in close proximity to a cholera patient. This will be done with a 0.1% solution of 
bleach at least twice a day. Provision of adequate staff and supplies, together with 
leadership and education of health care workers, patients and visitors, will be critical for 
enhanced safety climate in health care settings.  
 
Minor works. In order to provide the best possible service, some participating public 
and non-public service providers may use project funds to rehabilitate and refurbish 
existing clinic facilities, including by the construction of pit latrines and hand-washing 
stations. These minor changes will occur only within an existing clinic footprint and will 
not generate large-scale or irreversible adverse environmental impacts. FAES will screen 
all potential works in order to ensure that potential issues are identified upstream and 
proper measures included in project design. The potential issues depend on the type of 
construction (pit latrines vs. washing station), area available (tented clinic vs. traditional 
construction), and the location (urban vs. rural) of the proposed works.  
 
Activities that might result on involuntary resettlement are not eligible for financing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguard instruments:  The Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) in accordance with OP 4.01 and the national 
environmental decree.  The ESMF will incorporate lessons learned from the 
implementation and application of standard healthcare waste management protocols 
already implemented in other health sector projects, and builds upon technical guidance 
provided by, among others the World Health Organization (WHO), namely: (a) the 
World Health Organization (WHO) (1993) Guidelines for Cholera Control, and (b) the 
guidance by WHO and PAHO from November 2010 on Cholera Infection Prevention and 
Control.  
 
Page  5
The ESMF, in accordance with national law and international best practice, will include: 
(i) a typology of potential impacts; (ii) the corresponding mitigation measures; (iii) a 
training plan for participating public and non-public sector service providers; (iv) a 
monitoring and evaluation section to supervise the implementation of appropriate 
mitigation measures; (v) institutional arrangements; (vi) an implementation schedule; and 
(vii) a budget.  
 
Borrower Capacity. On behalf of the Ministry of Public Health and Population (MSPP), 
the Fonds d'Assistance Economique et Sociale (FAES) will have responsibility for 
supervising activities under Component 1 that will be implemented by participating 
public and non-public service providers.  
 
FAES: FAES will provide continuous oversight of (i) the environment and social impact 
screening process of activities to be implemented by all service providers; and (ii) the 
implementation of investment-specific measures to mitigate impacts on worker health 
and safety, waste management and minor works. FAES will provide training to service 
providers on environment and social impact assessment and impact management. The 
FAES team includes highly capable safeguards staff in an Environment Unit. Under other 
World Bank projects, FAES has exhibited sufficient capacity to undertake safeguards 
implementation and supervision.  
 
Public-sector service providers: Under the overall guidance of FAES, participating 
public service providers will be assessed for eligibility based on having the capacity to: 
(a) ensure the adequate application of environmental procedures to all activities as 
outlined in the ESMF; (b) monitor environmental management in all activities; (c) 
coordinate relations with environmental authorities where necessary and appropriate; and 
(d) present regular monitoring results to FAES. In addition, each participating public-
sector service provider entity will be trained in the project's ESMF.  
 
Non-public sector service providers: Under the supervision of FAES, participating non-
public sector service providers will be expected to implement their services according to 
the standards established in the project ESMF. During preparation, due diligence 
identified that each of the selected non-public sector service providers have the capacity 
to identify, minimize and mitigate potential adverse impacts as well as manage any 
remaining impacts.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include individuals suffering from cholera, affected communities, 
the donor community, and related government agencies.  
 
Consultations and Disclosure. Given the unknown nature of the cholera epidemic, 
stakeholders for this project include government agencies, healthcare personnel, patients 
and the public. The draft (and then final) ESMF will be disclosed in-country (and 
globally through the World Bank InfoShop) in French and consultations held prior to its 
finalization. All comments provided during these consultations will be recorded, and 
Page  6
included in the final ESMF where appropriate. Communication and dissemination 
campaigns form an integral part of activities promoted under this project. Once final, the 
main elements of the ESMF will be disclosed in a form appropriate to public 
comprehension and in all healthcare facilities.  
 
An initial consultation on the proposed scope and content of the ESMF was held in Port-
au-Prince with both public sector and non-public sector service providers from December 
3-6, 2010. Feedback from this consultation will feed into the ESMF that is under 
preparation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/01/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maryanne Sharp 
12/16/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Valerie Hickey 
12/16/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Joana Godinho 
12/16/2010 
Comments:   
