Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5787 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/02/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Haiti 
Project ID: P123756 
Project Name: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services II 
Task Team Leader: Diego Arias Carballo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 18, 2011 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (50%);Rural services and infrastructure (50%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective is to increase access by small farmers to agriculture  
extension services. It is expected that project activities will: (i) support the adoption of improved 
agriculture technologies and best practices on animal and plant health by small farmers; and (ii) 
allow an increase in the capacity to undertake key bio-security analysis in-country by investing 
in necessary equipment and technical assistance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total project cost is estimated at US$10 million (financed by a grant from the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program, GAFSP). Given the executing capacity of the 
MARNDR and the nature of project activities and investments, a 5-year investment project 
execution period, from 2011-2016, is deemed appropriate. The details of component costs and 
activities remain to be confirmed during the course of project preparation. The proposed 
components are listed below, and complement ongoing activities under the Bank-financed 
Strengthening of Agricultural Public Services Project (RESEPAG I) project, which is currently 
under Bank supervision, as well as ongoing activities under the NAIP that will be financed by 
other donors.  
Page  2
Component 1: Strengthening the Public Sector#s Animal and Plant Health (SPS) Capacity 
(US$4 million). This component includes: (i) strengthening the community-based veterinary 
groups (GSB) and plant health groups (GSV); (ii) expanding the capacity for animal and plant 
disease (SPS) surveillance; and (iii) investments to secure the certification of a national bio-
safety laboratory.  In order to execute these proposed activities the component would finance: (i) 
consultancy and training material and costs for Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and 
Rural Development (MARNDR) staff, GSB and GSV volunteers, and farmers; (ii) laboratory 
equipment, materials, and works; and (iii) information systems (hardware and software) for SPS 
surveillance. 
 
Component 2: Supporting Research & Development (R&D) Capacity in the Public Sector 
(US$5 million). This component includes: (i) strengthening farmer extension and advisory 
services to improve livestock management practices in hillsides; (ii) providing training and 
information to farmers on the optimal choice and use of improved agriculture inputs and services 
for more informed production decision-making; and (iii) training public and private sector 
extension service providers.  In order to execute these proposed activities, the component would 
finance: (i) consultancies and training material and costs for training of extension agents, 
organizations and farmers; (ii) material, equipment and works to rehabilitate existing Research 
and Extension Centers and Vocational Training facilities and to conduct pilot plot/livestock 
demonstration activities; and (iii) information systems (hardware and software) for improved 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of extension services. 
 
Component 3: Project Management (US$1 million). Project execution will replicate the 
institutional arrangements in place under RESEPAG I, which fall under the responsibility of the 
Director General (DG) of MARNDR.  The DG would coordinate project implementation across 
MARNDR#s units, in particular the Directorate of Animal and Plant Health (DPAV) and the 
Directorate of Research and Training (DRF).  The program coordinator in the DG team would be 
the primary Bank counterpart for the purposes of project supervision and would interface with 
the fiduciary functions.  The coordinator would also supervise the work of the different 
Directorates responsible for the two components (DRF and DPAV).To support project 
coordination and supervision, this component would finance technical assistance, operational 
costs, and other related incremental costs associated with project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will take place in rural areas throughout Haiti. Exact locations are not yet known, but 
will correspond to the priority agricultural landscapes identified in the NAIP.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Due to the substantial experience of MARNDR in executing Multilateral Development Bank 
(MDBs) financed projects (mainly IADB, IFAD, and WB), there is sufficient existing capacity 
within MARNDR for addressing such issues.  In particular, MARNDR is currently successfully 
executing two IDA-financed operations that are complementary to the activities foreseen under 
this project. As part of these projects, a robust Environmental and Social Management 
Frameworks (ESMF) has been prepared. Given the emergency nature of all projects in Haiti 
currently, experience implementing this ESMF is not extensive. As a result, the project will 
Page  3
develop an ongoing training program to sustain and build any additional capacity that is deemed 
necessary based on an assessment of gaps that will be completed during preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Valerie Hickey (YPP) 
Ms Rachel Hannah Nadelman (LCSAR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This project focuses on expanding access to extension services and promoting 
environmentally-friendly investments and practices in agriculture. The project will not support 
any activities that have large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts on the environment. For 
this reason the project is proposed as a Category B because its suite of potential adverse impacts 
on the environment are easily identified, mitigated and managed.  
 
Because exact investments are not yet known and will remain unknown at the time of Board 
approval, and many of these investments will complement those investments made under 
RESEPAG I and the Avian Flu Project (PRECONIA), the project will update and expand the 
existing Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that is in place for the 
RESEPAG I and PRECONIA projects to identify and manage the suite of potential adverse 
impacts under this project.  
 
Three types of impacts are foreseen under this project, arising from:  
 
1. Civil works: some construction impacts will be associated with the rehabilitation of 
existing Research and Extension Centers and Vocational Training facilities. No new facilities 
will be supported under this project. These impacts (e.g. noise, construction waste, etc.) will be 
limited in time and space, and actions to minimize and mitigate them will be included in the 
project#s ESMF.  
 
2.
Waste management: some activities may include the proper treatment and disposal of 
animal carcasses, some of which may carry diseases. The ESMF will adopt procedures outlined 
under the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) developed for the Avian Influenza Control 
and Human Influenza Emergency Preparedness and Control project (PRECONIA), to minimize, 
mitigate and manage these potential impacts. In addition, a waste management plan for 
laboratory waste will be prepared in the event that the project will support the building of a 
laboratory.  
 
3.
Occupational health and safety: during both construction and extension services, the 
project will expose workers to a variety of potential safety hazards. As such, the ESMF will be 
updated to include actions and training programs to safeguard workers.  
 
Consultations. Under RESEPAG I, a social assessment was carried out in February and 
March 2009, based on extensive consultations, with both MARNDR staff and community 
members in the pilot areas, and a stakeholder analysis.  The results of this assessment are serving 
as the basis for the design of this project, RESEPAG II.  MARNDR will continue to consult with 
potentially project
-
affected peoples during preparation and in anticipation of the start of project 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
activities, as well as disclose all safeguard instruments both locally and globally. For example, 
beyond the extensive consultations and peer reviewing undertaken in the context of the NAIP, on 
which this project is based, this specific project has already been discussed in June 2010 among 
the main local development partners in Haiti in the context of the Agriculture Sectoral Table. 
The Sectoral Table is represented by civil society, farmers groups, the private sector, women#s 
groups, youth organizations, donors, technical cooperation agencies and other ministries.  
 
Gender. A gender review has been carried out during RESEPAG I. Consultations with 
women during the project preparation phase ensured women#s inclusion at the policy and 
program levels. A resultant just-in-time grants series # Fostering Economic Empowerment for 
Women Agricultural Producers in Haiti # is working to integrate gender, particularly women#s 
issues, within the Ministry of Agriculture, as well as within two community-level pilots.  
Commitment to this initiative from both the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry for 
Women#s Affairs remains a key element of RESEPAG II.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
This project will focus on capacity building and providing agricultural extension services to 
existing agricultural lands. No new lands cleared after the appraisal of this project will be eligible 
for direct support. No agriculture activities that would require the clearing of forested land or 
would damage freshwater habitat will be supported. Nonetheless, because of the potential for 
indirect impacts on natural habitats, particularly if some agricultural landscapes abut protected 
areas, the need to trigger this safeguard policy will be confirmed during preparation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Because of the project#s potential to indirectly influence the management of natural forests, 
particularly in silvo-pastoral landscapes, the team will confirm if this safeguard requires 
triggering during preparation.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project will support investments related to agriculture extension services. These 
investments may include the procurement, handling, storage and use of pesticides for plot 
demonstration. No pesticides that are unlawful under national or international law will be 
supported under the project. A list of pesticides that fall under these categories or are otherwise 
ineligible for support will be included in the ESMF.  
 
In line with the approach taken under RESEPAG I, the Project will avoid the use of 
pesticide and herbicide intensive techniques and instead will support an approach that includes: 
(a) avoiding the use or promotion of pesticides with toxic categories I or II used for weed control 
or as insecticides; (b) promoting production practices such as rotational grazing and SPS that 
reduce the appearance of pests and increase natural enemies; (c) promoting the use of biological 
controls; (d) using animals more resistant to pests and applying products only when infestation 
level are critical; (e) avoiding the use of herbicides and pesticides near water sources and their 
contamination with pesticide residues when cleaning the equipment used; and (f) training 
producers, technicians, and farm workers to responsibly manage products, equipment, and 
containers to avoid their own contamination or that of cattle food or produce.  
 
This project will attach and update the Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) developed 
under RESEPAG I to its ESMF, and will include screening criteria to exclude pesticides that are 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
prohibited under the Bank#s policies. A specific plan will be included in this IPMP to provide 
for screening, no-objection and monitoring during the procurement of pesticides. The IPMP also 
includes guidelines on the relevant aspects of integrated pest management that will be included 
as part of the extension and training services provided under the project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
No areas that house physical cultural resources as defined under the policy will be eligible 
for support under this project. Criteria to screen these sites out will be included in the ESMF. In 
addition, chance finds procedures will be added to the ESMF to safeguard any cultural resources 
that may be discovered during works or services performed under the project   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
While the policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) is not triggered (as no involuntary 
land acquisition or displacement of people will be supported), compensation of farmers and 
owners for any loss of stock through potential culling actions promoted under the project will 
follow the compensation practices more usually associated with Involuntary Resettlement. These 
procedures have been developed under the Avian Influenza Control and Human Influenza 
Emergency Preparedness and Control project and will be included in the ESMF.  
 
The ESMF will include screening criteria to screen out any involuntary resettlement, as 
defined under the policy, and will also include screening criteria to document any voluntary land 
donations.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/20/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Assessment would be done during the months of September and October 
2010.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Diego Arias Carballo 
08/24/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
11/22/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
