Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
RESTRUCTURING STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/04/2011 
Report No.:  AC5631
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Honduras 
Project ID:  P103881 
Project Name:  Honduras Water and Sanitation Sector Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  David Michaud 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 4, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2007 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (47%);Sewerage (26%);Sub-national government administration 
(12%);Sanitation (8%);Central government administration (7%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (29%);Decentralization 
(29%);Other urban development (14%);Administrative and civil service reform 
(14%);Improving labor markets (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are:  (a) to improve the sustainability, efficiency, and 
reliability of the country#s water and sanitation sector institutions; (b) to improve the 
performance of the WSS sector institutions in the exercise of their respective roles in 
conformity with the WSS Sector Framework Law.  The specific objectives are to:  
 
#
Establish and strengthen municipal service providers and support good 
governance in WSS services provision through increasing transparency and 
accountability;  
 
#
Reinforce the national sector actors (ERSAPS, CONASA, SANAA) to fulfill their 
new roles a necessity for successful decentralization of the services;  
 
#
Reduce non-revenue water in selected areas of Tegucigalpa to provide immediate 
impact on the service quality.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project assists the Government of Honduras in implementing their Strategic Plan for 
the Modernization of the WSS Sector (PEMAPS) through activities at the national and 
municipal level. Eligible municipalities, with urban population between 40,000 and 
300,000, adopting autonomous service provider models are provided with a combination 
of free technical assistance for creating the service providers, short-term efficiency 
improvement measures, and investment funding once services are transferred 
(Component 1). The project finances efficiency improvements in Tegucigalpa to provide 
immediate impact on the service quality, while the transfer from the national utility to the 
municipality is being discussed (Component 2). Institutional strengthening actions help 
fortify and establish the national sector actors (Component 3). Component 4 finances 
project management activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in several municipalities in Honduras, with urban populations of 
40,000 - 300,000.  Sub-component 1C finances infraestructure investments once the new 
or improved service providers are already operating the system.  Investments funded 
under this component would include rehabilitation, connection to and expansion of water 
supply  and sewer networks, on-site sanitation facilities, and wastewater treatment 
systems.  Water supply investments can include coverage extension, rehabilitation of 
existing networks, tanks and treatment plants, and the development of new water 
production capacity.  Piped sewerage investment can include rehabilitation and expansion 
of standard, small-bore and condominial systems.  On-site sanitation investment will 
focus on creating supportive conditions for on-site solutions.  Wastewater treatment 
investments will include simple treatment systems such as stabilization ponds, artificial 
wetlands, and communal septic tanks.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSTR) 
Ms Ana Nunez Sanchez (LCSUW) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
a) 
Environment:  The project is designed to address key challenges for meeting 
urban users# water needs. The studies and activities financed by the project are expected 
to improve environmental conditions overall by increasing water use efficiency and 
wastewater treatment. Current environmental conditions and those associated with the 
project are assessed by an Environmental Framework aimed at protecting key 
environmental assets, avoiding and mitigating potential impacts. The project is rated as 
Category B given the small scale of physical investments and due to the fact that no 
significant environmental impacts are foreseen.  Minor potential environmental impacts 
include:  
 
a. 
 Component 1 Works aimed at building, rehabilitating or expanding the water 
supply and sewerage networks may result in erosion, deterioration of spring catchments, 
noise contamination, reduced air quality (e.g. dust, transportation) as well as construction 
waste. These impacts are avoided or mitigated according to tge Environmental 
Framework in the design stage and well as established guidelines for contractors during 
the construction phase.  
 
b.
Component 2 Similar impacts and management measures are expected for the 
works-related activities under the leak reduction component. In addition, leak detection 
has specific environmental implications such as temporary air quality reduction -- if 
smoke is used to detect leaks or illegal connections (there are other methods available).  
 
b) 
Physical Cultural Property:  There is no expectation that cultural property would 
be found in the Project area.  The Environmental Framework includes a screening process 
aimed at identifying possible Physical Cultural Resources and refrain investments in the 
area nearby. Moreover, the Environmental Framework includes a "chance find" 
procedure in case such property is encountered establishing an immediate cease of 
construction activity and reporting to the proper authorities.  
 
c) 
Social impacts:  OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples was triggered during preparation.  
Despite the project#s largely urban focus and its main impacts lying in the national 
modernization of the sector and the establishment or strengthening of local sector 
institutions, the small-scale physical works described in section I.4. of the present ISDS 
could certainly involve water sources such as hydrographic basins in a way that could 
potentionally affect communities living in the project municipalities# rural areas. 
Therefore, given that many indigenous communities in Honduras live in the highlands in 
close proximity to water sources, the policy has been triggered as a preventative measure 
to ensure that guidelines are in place in the case that a municipality with indigenous 
communities prioritizes physical works in these areas.  In order to raise awareness and 
capacity at the local level, PROMOSAS held a follow-up workshop on the policy for all 
participating municipalities (July 2009) and will continue to hold similar events targeted 
towards the municipalities with ancestral lands and/or afro-honduran communities.  
 
Page  4
Regarding OP 4.12, the policy was not triggered during preparation and is presently 
being triggered, during implementation, as a part of a restructuring process.  Initially, the 
foreseen water and sanitation works to be financed through the PROMOSAS project were 
conceived as complementary works to help the new provider to boost efficiency and 
modernize their service provision. Therefore involuntary taking of land was prohibited in 
order to maximize the productive use of the small allocation of funds reserved for 
physical works.  In other words, dit was agreed and reflected in all project documents that 
any sub-project would be ineligible if it involved (a) the involuntary taking of land 
resulting in: (i) relocation or loss of shelter; (ii) loss of assets or access to assets, or (iii) 
loss of income sources or means of livelihood, whether or not the affected persons must 
move to another location; or (b) the involuntary restriction of access to legally designated 
parks and protected areas resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced 
persons.  
 
Nevertheless, during the February 2010 supervision mission, the Bank team reported 
that municipal authorities and service provider management were expressing the need to 
prioritize physical works that could potentially involve easements,  construction on either 
privately-owned or leased land or land acquisition.  Based on this fact, the project team 
and the client agreed that the Involuntary Resettlement Policywould be formally applied 
as an instrumental measure for future sub-projects in order to expand the scope of eligible 
works and thus the Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework (IRPP) would be 
prepared.  Subsequently, an IRPP acceptable to the World Bank has been prepared, 
approved and disclosed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is designed to address current and future challenges related to the supply of 
water to urban users and mitigate possible adverse impact such as overexploitation of the 
water source and water pollution. One potential indirect and long term impact is the 
increase in the probability of land use change in areas surrounding new pipelines and 
road constructions. In addition, urban areas with improved water supply and sanitation 
could experience  population growth.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given that sub-projects will differ fundamentally and have diverse locations, 
consideration of alternatives will be considered on a sub-project by sub-project basis. The 
Environmental Framework includes a screening process aimed at identifying, avoiding, 
reducing and mitigating potential impacts on cultural and environmental resources. 
Specific projects consisting of building new infrastructure on sensitive areas will 
automatically not be considered as eligible for funding under this project.  Specifically in 
terms of involuntary resettlement, municipalities are encouraged to exhaust all design 
alternatives that will avoid the need to displace community members either physically or 
economically.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Presently, the project#s implementing agency, SEFIN's UAP, has a social/communication 
specialist as well as an environmental specialist on renewable, full-time consultancy 
contracts.  These two professionals address safeguard policy issues in addition to carrying 
out other relevant environmental and social/communication supervision.  
 
The Borrower has prepared and publically disclosed three relevant safeguards 
instruments:  an Environmental Management Framework, an Indigenous Peoples Policy 
Framework (a.k.a. Policy for Ethnic Communities) and a Land Acquisition and 
Involuntary Resettlement Framework. With two environmental engineers, a technical 
specialist and social specialist with substantial experience in public sector projects 
including water projects, the UAP has enough capacity to plan and implement measures 
needed to comply with safeguards. UAP may also hire additional ad-hoc short-term 
consultants as necessary to carry out the necessary environmental and social work.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include municipalities, autonomous municipal-level water providers, 
the water users/community members in the municipalities (in both rural and urban areas) 
who will be affected or benefited by the works, indigenous and afro-honduran 
communities which may be affected, SEFIN (UAP especially), SANAA, FHIS, 
CONASA and ERSAPS. The Concept and Appraisal Stage ISDSs, Indigenous Peoples 
Policy Framework, Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement Framework and 
Environmental Management Framework have been properly disclosed by the World 
Bank on the InfoShop website and by the implementing agency in-country.  
 
The Honduran government (represented by the UAP) has published the three safeguards 
instruments on their website as well as holding validation workshops and follow-up 
workshops for each instrument, inter alia the consultations with key indigenous and Afro-
Honduran community group leaders regarding the Indigenous Peoples Framework in 
April  2007 and July 2009, as well as the most recent disclosure workshop for the 
recently triggered Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement Framework; it was 
held in San Pedro Sula in July 2010.   The input from these consultations has been 
incorporated into the instruments.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/08/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/03/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  6
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/11/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/20/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/11/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/25/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/08/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/03/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
No 
Page  7
Manager review the plan? 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David Michaud 
09/16/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ana Nunez Sanchez 
09/16/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kimberly Vilar 
09/16/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
09/16/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
09/09/2010 
Comments:   
