Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/16/2011 
Report No.:  60299
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P107649 
Project Name:  Second Karnataka State Highway Improvement 
Task Team Leader:  Binyam Reja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 31, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Other public sector 
governance (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
350.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
155.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
500.00
655.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
As a follow up to the successfully implemented KSHIP I, the proposed KSHIP II 
is designed to take the Bank's support for India's highway sector to a higher level by 
providing assistance for innovative financing, implementing government-owned sector-
wide reforms, addressing road safety concerns during road construction and operation, 
and ensuring effective project implementation (including streamlined land acquisition 
and environmental clearance and well-managed procurement and FM processing).  
 
2. 
 As such, the project development objective (PDO) is to assist GOK to accelerate 
the development of the Core Road Network through leveraging public sector outlays with 
private sector financing, and improve the institutional effectiveness of the road sector 
agencies to deliver effective and safe CRN to users.  In order to achieve the objective, the 
proposed project will comprise the following components (a) Highway Financing 
Modernization, (b) Road Improvement Works, (c) Road Sector Policy and Institutional 
Development, and (d) Road Safety Improvement. The Project beneficiaries are the road 
users (business and citizens) living along the roads. A secondary beneficiary is the PWD 
Page  2
and KRDCL, whose capacity to manage the road network and provide safe and effective 
road services is expected to improve.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project components  
 
3. 
Component 1: Road Improvement Works (Total Cost: US$603 million; IBRD: 
US$260 million; GOK: US$94 million; Developer: US$249 million). This component 
will support capital improvement and maintenance works of selected priority Core Road 
Network through a combination of traditional contracts and PPP concessions.  
 
(a) 
Conventional item-rate contracts (Total Cost: US$166 million; IBRD: US$120 
million; GOK: US$46 million). The project will finance improvement of about 269 km of 
priority roads following conventional contracting method. It will also finance the design, 
supervision and associated land acquisition and R&R activities.  
 
(b) Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Maintain-Transfer 
(DBFOMT) 
Annuity 
Concessions (Total Cost: US$437 million; IBRD: US$140 million; GOK: US$47 million, 
Developer: US$249 million). The project will finance improvement of 562 km of roads 
under DBFOMT (annuity) concessions. The project will finance 50 percent of the 
estimated construction cost, which would be paid to the selected concessionaire during 
the construction period. The GOK will select a concessionaire through a competitive 
bidding process, who would raise the required financing to carry out the construction 
works and other expenditure through a combination of equity and debt. The 
concessionaire will recover the investments through (a) lump-sum payments in two 
installments during construction (financed through IBRD loan), and (b) a semi-annual 
payments (annuities), paid by GOK during the operating period of the concession. The 
Concession will span for a period of 10 years with a construction period of two to three 
years, and O&M phase of seven to eight years.  The selected Concessionaire will fully 
bear the design and performance responsibility and risks. A firm will be engaged as 
"Independent Engineer" to monitor the progres s and quality of works during the 
construction period on a continuous basis and thereafter the maintenance and safety 
management issues on an intermittent (monthly) basis during the remaining concession 
period. This component will also finance the preliminary design, transaction advisory 
services, associated land acquisition and R&R activities and the fees of independent 
engineer.  
 
4. 
Component 2:  Highway Financing Modernization (Total Cost: US$374 million; 
IBRD: US$67 million; GOK: US$56 million; Developers/Financial Institutions: US$251 
million). This component will assist KRDCL in implementing the concept of co-
financing with private financial institutions through technical assistance and pilot 
transactions.  
 
(a) 
Technical assistance and advisory services (Total Cost: US$5 million; IBRD: 
US$4 million; GOK: US$1 million). This component will finance a range of technical 
assistance and advisory services designed to assist GOK to expand private sector 
participation in highway development and to undertake fiscally prudent market 
Page  3
borrowing for the development of the Core Road Network. As part of GOK's strategy to 
transition the road financing arrangements from "annual budgetary allocations" to "non-
lapsable, ring-fencing of specified stream of revenues from road u ser fees", it has 
allowed KRDCL to toll recently improved highways and channelize the resulting 
revenues into a dedicated account. KRDCL will be utilizing these revenue flows to 
support the development of roads through PPP transactions, either directly or through 
mobilizing additional debt financing via securitization.  These roads, which are in 
relatively good condition, will generate substantial net revenue. In this context, the 
project will finance the costs of a Financial Planner and other experts to assist KRDCL 
and GOK in the following critical areas: (a) developing a tolling strategy, including the 
optimal means for effective collection and monitoring of toll revenues; (b) preparing a 
medium-term financial plan, covering various sources and uses of the revenues generated 
by KRDCL; (c ) formulation of debt policies that would enable KRDCL to achieve 
appropriate investment-grade credit rating for its bonds; and (d) advise GOK on any 
contingent liability it would have through the KRDCL borrowing. The advisory support 
to GOK and KRDCL would ensure that borrowing by KRDCL would be prudent, 
sustainable, and within its means.  
 
(b) 
Co-financing pilot transactions (Total Costs: US$369 million; IBRD: US$ 63 
million, GOK: US$55 million; Developers / Financial Institutions:  US$251 million). The 
project will provide US$50 million financing to KRDCL for co-financing with 
commercial financial institutions to develop about 400 km of highways under either of 
the above contractual arrangements (item-rate or DBFOMT concession). This component 
will also finance the preliminary design, transaction advisory services, associated land 
acquisition and R&R activities and the fees of independent engineer. Several domestic 
financial institutions have shown interest to provide co-financing with IBRD for KRDCL 
program. The co-financing is expected to gene rate additional US$200 million from 
financial institutions and developers, allowing IBRD financing to reach further. The 
IBRD co-financing would also help KRDCL to attract commercial financing at relatively 
attractive terms by lowering the risk perception of the loans. The co-financing sub-
component, which is planned for Phase 2 of the project, will be implemented following 
the safeguard and fiduciary policies agreed for KSHIP II, and will be acceptable to World 
Bank.  
 
5. 
Component 3: Road Safety Improvement (Total Cost: US$14 million; IBRD: 
US$11 million; GOK: US$3 million). This component will assist the GOK to respond to 
the growing road safety problems in Karnataka with comprehensive strategic and 
institutional measures, consistent with the main thrusts of the 2007 Sundar Committee 
report and the findings of the road safety management capacity review. In particular this 
component will finance the following activities:  
 
(a) 
Implementation of a result-based Safe Corridor Demonstration Program on two 
selected corridors. This will support multi-sector interventions in the areas of 
infrastructure improvement, enforcement, education, and post-crash care. The 
demonstration program will be monitored and evaluated during the project.  
 
(b) 
Capacity building of the Transport Department and its Traffic and Road Safety 
Cell to fulfill the lead agency functions.  
Page  4
(c) 
Capacity building to PWD staff in integrating road safety and work zone safety in 
the planning and asset management processes.  
 
(d) 
Establishment of a GOK Centre of Excellence for Road Safety Training, 
Education and Research.  
 
6. 
Component 4: Road Sector Policy and Institutional Development (Total Cost: 
US$11.8 million; IBRD: US$9.44 million; GOK: US$2.36 million).This component will  
support implementation of a new medium-term Institutional Development and 
Strengthening Action Plan (IDSAP) for the period 2010-2016. The IDSAP builds on the 
institutional and capacity improvements achieved during the implementation of the first 
KSHIP. It covers the PWD and the KRDCL, and has been established by the GOK in 
consultation with both the World Bank and the ADB as a basis for the harmonization of 
external assistance in this sector. The major IDSAP fields are as follows.  
 
(a) 
Road Sector Strategy and Sustainability - strengthening of GOK policy, 
legislation, rules and powers for road infrastructure planning, delivery and management, 
and financing reform.  
 
(b) 
Road Network Planning and Asset Management - enhanced technical policies, 
processes, skills and IT-based systems for road network development, planning, design 
and maintenance management.  
 
(c) 
Project Management - strengthening PWD and KRDCL capacity in project 
preparation, implementation, monitoring and reporting functions, including integration of 
effective Environment and Social Management (safeguards) processes  
 
(d) 
Governance and Accountability - as per the agreed Governance and 
Accountability Action Plan (GAAP), strengthening of functions and resources for RTI-
compliant public information and communication, quality monitoring and complaints 
handling, extension of e-governance tools and completion of PWD-wide Quality 
Management framework and capacity  
 
(e) 
Organization, Management and HR Development - strengthening PWD rules and 
procedures, updating IT-ICT-MIS strategy and assets, implementing comprehensive IT 
based Financial Management, enhancing PWD staff training / development capacity and 
staff performance management processes through reputed academic institutions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
7. 
Roads selected for KSHIP II are spread across Karnataka with a higher 
concentration in southern and northern parts, complementing the roads already improved 
under the previous KSHIP project. The state is known to be a leader in IT industry 
concentrated in Bengaluru and Mysore. It is also known for its efforts in forestry, water 
conservation and natural habitat protection. The project will be implemented in 14 out of 
27 districts of Karnataka.  Out of these, eight are from southern Karnataka and six are in 
northern Karnataka. These include Bangalore (U rban and Rural), Kolar, Belgaum, 
Dharwar, Koppal, Gadag, Gulbarga, Mandhya, Daks hin Kananda, Hasan, Haveri, 
Bellary and Davanagiri.   
 
Page  5
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
8. 
The project triggered four safeguard policies as indicated above. These include 
environmental assessment, Forests, Physical Cultural proprieties and Involuntary 
Resettlement. The Environment and social impacts will be triggered in component 1 and 
2. The component 1 will be implemented by PIU within PWD and the component 2 will 
be implemented by Karnataka Road Development Corporation Limited (KRDCL), a 
state-owned corporation also under PWD. The roads to be finance d in component 2 will 
be selected among the Karnataka's core Road Net work during the project 
implementation. The impact assessments and management plans (EMP and RAPs) have 
been completed for component 1 and a similar approach will be followed for component 
2
during the project Implementation. The description below is based on impact 
assessments carried out for component 1 only.  
 
9. 
Environmental Assessment: The key adverse environmental impacts of the project 
are removal of roadside trees (about 40,000 for the entire project), acquisition of small 
area of forest land and its conversion to road (total slightly less than 12 ha, along 4 EPC 
and 4 Annuity contract roads), increased air and noise pollution adjacent to the road, and 
risks of pollution and health impacts if proper measures are not taken for managing 
contractor operations during construction. While short term negative impacts could occur 
if proper care is not taken during the construction phase by the Contractors - localized 
increased pollution of air, and water, increased risk to safety for their workers as well as 
other concurrent road users, no other long term significant irreversible impacts are 
currently considered likely. A similar approach will be used for the Phase II roads, which 
are yet to be selected among those roads indentified under Karnataka's core network 
(component 2).  
 
Page  6
10. 
Natural Habitats: Initially, the policy was triggered at the PCN stage. However, 
since then KPWD has followed up with the Forest Department for identifying any natural 
habitats, and wildlife crossings across project roads identified as potentially sensitive. 
The Forest Department has confirmed that there are no reports of any wildlife crossings 
or accidents along the roads initially considered to be sensitive. There are no critical 
natural habitats known close to the project roads. However, the project has put in place 
orientation and sensitization o f contractors' workers to avoid damage to any important 
flora and fauna found close to the work-sites.  For the Phase II roads, it has been decided 
that no road s passing through any known wildlife protection areas will be financed under 
the project.  
 
11. 
Forests: This policy is now being triggered as total slightly less than 12ha is being 
requisitioned across 4 EPC and 4 Annuity corridors of Phase I. The project has already 
applied for the clearances under the Forest (Conservation) Act, and Karnataka Tree 
Preservation Act. The project will pay the necessary costs of compensatory afforestation, 
and Net Present Value of the land to the Forest Department. In addition, the road side 
spaces, as well as lands along abandoned stretches of roads where short road 
realignments are proposed, will be planted with trees to compensate locally for the trees 
being cut for the project. A similar exercise will be undertaken for Phase II.  
 
12. 
Physical Cultural Resources: There are several locally and regionally important 
cultural properties - religious as well as community structures that may be impacted by 
the project. Wherever appropriate, the KPWD will try to minimize adverse impacts on 
these, exploring among other options, design modifications for particular stretches such 
as in 2 Annuity Contracts links. The project includes adequate measures to ensure that 
any unavoidable impacts on such sites are managed properly. Chance-find procedures are 
also included in the contracts to handle such situations.  
 
13. 
Involuntary Resettlement: The land acquisition required for the project consisting 
of 830 Kms to be developed under component 1, is 225 hectares including about 10 
hectares of Government land. Because of this land acquisition, about 5, 300 families will 
be affected by varying degrees.  More than 50 percent of these impacts are minor in 
nature losing only narrow strip of land. The major impacts include those who are likely to 
be physically displaced or those losing their source of livelihood mostly consist of 
agricultural lands or petty businesses. This category will also include those becoming 
marginal or land less due to land acquisition to the project. The minor impacts are those 
who lose only small portion of their asset and are able to continue their livelihood with 
remaining assets without nay father assistance other than the compensation for the lost 
assets.  These include those who loose only part of their houses or that loose narrow strip 
of lands. The proposed compensation and assistance will enable the people to resettle 
their living standards.  The project does not anticipate any significant or irreversible 
impacts due to the land acquisition or displacement. In addition, about 1600communty 
asserts will be affected which are proposed to be reconstructed in the adjacent places in 
consultation with the local people. The impacts in component 2, will be assessed once the 
roads are selected. The social assessment and RAP will be completed for this component 
prior to invitation of request for proposals for the civil works.  
Page  7
14. 
Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.10): The project alignment does not pass though any 
designated Tribal areas. The census surveys confirmed that the project alignment does 
not pass through any designated tribal villages. The census survey indicates that the few 
affected scheduled tribe families do not exhibit the distinct characteristics and are 
scattered throughout the project roads. They have not identified themselves as distinct 
group during the consultations and are mostly working as agricultural laborers or they are 
found to be as small and marginal famer s and are fully integers with the rest of the 
population. The Tribal Welfare Department of Karnataka has confirmed in response to 
the implementing agency's request that the proposed project roads do not pass thorough 
any designated tribal a                          reas. In view of this, the policy on Indigenous 
peoples is not triggered for this project. The affected tribal who are scattered will be dealt 
with in the overall entitlements proposed for the project. The environment and social 
screening has been completed for about 3,411 Kms of Karnataka#s Core road  network 
indicate that the roads do not pass thorough the tribal areas who exhibit the characteristics 
of the indigenous peoples as described in the Bank#s Operational Policy on Indigenous 
Peoples. Therefore, this policy will not be triggered. The roads for the component will be 
selected among the above mentioned roads where the screening has been completed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
15. 
 The project does not envisage any long-term impacts. On the other hand, the 
project will have a positive impacts due to improvement in the road network enabling the 
people to have improved access to basic amenities, markets and thus improve the 
connectivity with the neighboring villages and nearby towns and thus alleviate 
development constraints in agriculture, commerce, education, health and social welfare.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
16. 
 Realignments were proposed in some the locations such as Huliyidurga, 
Madhugiri and Koratagere to reduce the impacts on loss of shelter and livelihoods by 
avoiding proposed roads passing through theses small towns.  Further, in some towns the 
corridor of impact has been reduced to minimize the impacts. Where ever possible design 
changes were made to minimize the physical displacements or loss of livelihoods.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
(A) Measures taken by the borrower to address the safeguard policy issues.  
 
(i) Environmental policy issues: KPWD has taken the steps described below to address 
the environmental safeguards related issues:  
 
a) 
A dedicated cell for environmental management headed by an Executive Engineer 
is in place within the KSHIP PIU and staff on deputation from the Forest Department is 
also available to ensure timely co-ordination at GoK level.  
 
b)
An EA has been carried out which resulted in the preparation of corridor specific 
EMPs. These have been cleared by the State Environmental Impact Assessment 
Page  8
Authority. Applications for permissions for the transfer of Forest land and cutting of 
roadside trees have been submitted. Further, an Independent Review was also 
commissioned on the EA process and outputs to confirm that these adequately address 
the safeguards policies triggered.  
 
c) 
The implementation of some of the key measures identified in the EMP has begun 
in advance of the road construction works. This includes the provision of noise barriers to 
protect sensitive receptors which the EMPIU is getting implemented now. Environmental 
Engineers are likely to be in place in the divisional offices overseeing the project 
implementation.  
 
d)
The PIU will be assisted by a Construction Supervision Engineer team which will 
include suitably qualified environmental specialists. They will be responsible for regular 
supervision and reporting to the PIU regarding the progress and status of EMP 
implementation.  
 
e) 
The PIU has agreed to formalize its approach to systematic environmental 
management with the target of certifying the PIU and at least one field division to ISO 
14001 during the project implementation period.   
 
(ii) Social Safeguard Policy Issues. The borrower has taken the following measures to 
address the social safeguard policy issues.  
 
a) 
Government has notified the Project Director as "Highway Authority" for land 
acquisition purpose under Karnataka Highway Act with delegated powers. The 
Government has provided dedicated land acquisition staff consisting of Special Deputy 
Commissioner and two (2) Assistant Commissioners to  fast track the process of 
acquiring the private lands. A committee including some of the independent members has 
been constituted for negotiating the price of private lands with the landowners.  
 
b)
A
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) endorsed by the Bank is already in place. The 
compensation and assistance proposed in the RAP is line with the Bank's operational 
policy on involuntary resettlement and Government of India#s new R&R policy, 2007. 
The key entitlements included are: minimum compensation for private land acquisition 
though direct negotiations (1.5 or 2.0 time of guidance value) with top-up compensation 
consisting of amount equivalent to stamp duty and registration charges, severance 
allowance equivalent to 25 percent of basic compensation , rehabilitation assistance for 
those becoming landless or marginal. The valuation for loss of structure is based on the 
market value without deprecation with 30 percent top-up additional compensation as well 
as transitional allowance such as subsistence and shift allowances. In addition, the 
displaced families will be provided with alternative house sites with construction grants. 
The non- title holders will be provided with alternative house sites with construction 
grants and transitional allowance. In case of those loosing livelihood, they will be 
provided with rehabilitation assistance or alternative sites for reconstruction of affected 
shops. Vulnerable families such as those with physically challenged per sons, widows or 
aged will be assisted to get Government pensions schemes or provide with lump-sum 
cash grants to meet the additional financial needs.  
 
c) 
The contracts for Two (2) NGOs and third party M&E consultant services are 
signed and they have commenced their services;  
Page  9
d) 
Database Management consultant services are procured to manage and track the 
implementation progress of land acquisition and resettlement;  
 
e) 
Key staff for R&R Implementation are in position (Chief Administrative Officer, 
Assistant Director, Manager (R&R), and 2 Social Development Officers) are already in 
position;  
 
f) 
The grievance redress committed headed by the Deputy Commissioner who is not 
associated with the Implementation are being constituted in the project districts. This 
committee some nominated members from the civil society and PAP representatives;  
 
g) 
 The RAP contains the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in chapter 2 setting 
out the policies and procedures for acquisition of private land and other assets, payment 
of compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation assistance, entitlement matrix, and 
procedures for the preparation of resettlement action plans as may be required for the 
project activities. This RPF will be the basis for undertaking social assessment and 
finalization of RAP for the roads to be financed under the component 2.  
 
(B) Assessment of the borrower's capacity to plan and implement the measures:  
 
a) The Project implementation unit (PIU) is fully aware and familiar with the potential 
environmental and social impacts and the required mitigation measures, as they have 
successfully implemented the previous Bank supported project.  In the previous project, 
environment and social mitigation plans were satisfactorily implemented and the 
department has documented some of the good practices and lesson learned.  
 
b) On the social side, the PIU  has a dedicated Social Development and Resettlement 
cell headed by a  Chief Administrative Officer to manage the land acquisition and 
resettlement impacts. He is assisted by a Special Deputy Commissioner and two Assistant 
Commissioners on the land acquisition side and Assistant Director and Resettlement 
Officer on the resettlement side. All these key staff is alread y in place. Two field units 
are in the process being established. Some of the Social Development Officers are 
already in place in these field units. The Social Development and Resettlement cell will 
engaged two local NGOs and Database management consultants to provide 
Implementation support. All these agencies are already in place. A third party 
independent monitoring consultants (R&R M$E consultant                        s) were also 
commissioned to oversee the implementation progress and provide advice and guidance 
on land acquisition and resettlement issues. This M&E consultants will certify the 
satisfactory completion of pre-construction activities related to land acquisition and 
resettlement prior to handing over of sites to the contractors. The above measures are 
adequate to manage the land acquisition and resettlement impacts in this project.  
 
c) The PIU has already put in place an Environmental Management Cell with an 
Executive engineer already experienced in implementing Bank-supported projects. The 
cell also includes staff from the Forest Department, on deputation to PWD,   to co-
ordinate with this key line department. In addition, field offices overseeing the project 
implementation are also being staffed with engineers, who have bee                n given 
orientation training in environmental management. The Construction Super vision 
Engineer team will also include Environmental Specialists who will be responsible for 
Page  10
the day-to-day supervision and reporting on environmental aspects. These arrangements 
are considered sufficient for managing the anticipated environmental impacts of the 
project.  
 
d) The KRDCL will put in place adequate institutional capacity to manage the likely 
environmental and social impacts of its respective component (Component 2).  This will 
be done prior to the initiation of work. The KRDCL will appoint qualified officers 
(mostly likely from those who have experience in the PIU) and will be provided with 
additional capacity building support, including formal and on-the-job training. With this 
arrangement, KRDCL should be able to enhance its inadequate capacity to manage land 
acquisition, resettlement and environment are currently being explored and will be in 
place prior to initiation of implementation of this component.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
17. 
The key stakeholders include the road users, local people, affected people and the 
concerned Government departments. A large number of consultations have been held in 
the project area in about 25 places involving about 1800 people from more than 150 
villages. The outcomes of consultations were incorporated in the RAP or designs as 
appropriate. Some of the outcomes incorporated include: improvements in the 
entitlements related to structure valuation, provision for replacement of affected irrigated 
bore wells and realignments in some of the towns. Further, six additional consultations 
were held to disclose the draft RAP and explain the contents of the RAP and sought their 
feedback. A number of clarifications related to entitlements and resettlement assistance 
were clarified during these consultations. The draft and final RAP has been disclosed by 
the implementation agency in their web site -www.kpwd.gov.in.and other public places 
accessible to the local people in March 2010. The draft and final RAP was also disclosed 
in the Bank's InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/27/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/25/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/27/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
10/26/2010  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/15/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/12/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  11
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  12
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Binyam Reja 
02/23/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi 
02/23/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
02/23/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/23/2011 
Comments:  cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel Audige 
02/23/2011 
Comments:  Cleared. 
