                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/04/2011                                     Report No.: 61713
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                Project ID: P114338
Project Name: Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor - I
Task Team Leader: Benedictus Eijbergen
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2011 Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDT                          Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                              Loan
Sector: Railways (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Climate change
(33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           975.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                    483.44
                                                                     483.44
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objectives of the Project are to: (a) provide additional rail transport
capacity, improved service quality and higher freight throughput on the 343 km Khurja to
Kanpur section of the Eastern rail corridor; and (b) develop the institutional capacity of
DFCCIL to build and maintain the DFC infrastructure network.

3. Project Description
The Program proposed for World Bank financing would construct 1130 km of the
Eastern Corridor from Ludhiana in Punjab to Mughal Sarai in Uttar Pradesh, which
includes the most heavily congested sections of this corridor, and connects ports and coal
mining areas in the east to consumption centers in the north-west of the country. The
new line will have several connections with the existing IR corridor enabling diversion of
freight trains from IR routes to the DFC. Details of the Eastern DFC proposed for World
Bank support are in Table below.

 Section          Length(Km) No. of Tracks Cost(US$m)
 1 Khurja-Bhapur (near Kanpur)  343     Double     1453
 2 Kanpur-Mughal Sarai      390   Double      1588
 3 Ludhiana-Khurja           397     Single     1065
 Note: 1US$ = INR 45.00

 It is proposed that the Bank#s financing for the Eastern DFC Program would be
provided under an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) in three phases. Each phase of the
APL would be comprised of a loan for one of the three sections and a continuing program
of technical assistance for IR and DFCCIL. The sequence of the loans is envisaged to be:
APL1 for Khurja # Kanpur; APL2 for Kanpur # Mughal Sarai; and APL3 for Ludhiana #
Khurja, with about a one year lag between these APL phases.

 APL-I Phase Project Description: The first project to be financed under the APL-I
would be the Khurja-Kanpur (343 km) section. In addition, APL-I would finance
institutional development technical assistance for DFCCIL. The proposed APL-I Phase
Project consists of the following components:

  (i)   Design, construction and commissioning of the Khurja # Kanpur section. This
component will construct 343 km of double track electrified railway capable of freight
train operation with 25 ton axle loads at 100 km/h; and

 (ii) Institutional development to assist DFCCIL and MoR to develop their capabilities
to best utilize heavy haul freight systems.

 Physical Works

 The project consists of construction of 343 km of double track electrified railway
capable of freight train operation with 25 ton axle loads at 100 km/h.

 Institutional Development

  22. Heavy Haul Freight systems are being introduced into IR for the first time, and
effective use of these technologies will require a comprehensive effort to bring about not
only technological enhancements but also a rethinking of operational and commercial
approaches to the freight business of Indian Railways. Also important, will be the
institutional development of DFCCIL which was created as a Special Purpose Vehicle to
build and operate the Dedicated Freight Corridors eventually comprising some 12,000
route kilometers of new heavy haul rail infrastructure. The Institutional Development
Technical Assistance proposed to be financed under this project seeks to serve these twin
needs, i.e. IR Heavy Haul Freight systems development and capacity building of the
DFCCIL organization, through a 5-year US$50 million program under the overall
responsibility of a multi-disciplinary committee established by the IR Board known as the
Heavy Haul Committee. The TA program includes three modules as follows: m1
DFCCIL institutional strengthening; m2 Freight markets and long-term commercial
freight planning; and m3 Technologies research and evaluation.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Program proposed for World Bank financing is a 1130 km section of the Ludhiana -
Delhi-Kolkata route from Dhandari Kalan near Ludhiana in Punjab to Mughal Sarai in
Uttar Pradesh, which is the most congested section of the heavily trafficked Eastern
Corridor. The corridor traverses the Indo-Gangetic plain eventually connecting the port
of Kolkata on the Bay of Bengal in the east with the industrial heartland of northern India
in the north-west. The corridor will mostly run parallel to the existing railway route with
diversions in densely populated areas to minimize adverse impact on residential and
commercial properties and economic activities. Under APL-I, the corridor will run 237
km parallel to the existing tracks and 106 km in detours with green field alignments. The
project area (APL-I) passes thorough 229 villages for the 272 kilometers where the social
impact assessment has been completed and passes through 64 villages in the realigned
Tundla stretch where the SIA is being updated in eight districts of the Uttar Pradesh state-
a predominantly poor region of the country with most of the people in the project area
depending on agriculture and its related activities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS)
   Mr Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)
   Mr Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project triggered three safeguard policies as indicated above - OP 4.01:
Environmental assessment, OP 4.11: Physical Cultural proprieties, and OP 4.12:
Involuntary Resettlement. OP/BP 4.10 has not been triggered based on SIA results for
APL-I. This may be triggered if the SIA findings indicate impact on tribal communities.

 Environmental Impacts: Railway projects, especially new alignments such as the current
project passing through large geographical areas, could cause significant impacts, if not
planned, designed and implemented without considering environmental sensitivities of
the project area. Based on the inputs from environmental assessment, number of
alignment alternatives to avoid significant environmental impacts and the final alignment
includes: (i) detours at 5 locations to avoid impacts on major settlements and cultural
properties along the alignment; (ii) minimum right of way at critical locations, to avoid
impacts on communities residing close to the alignment and forest areas; (iii) five major
bridges and adequate cross drainage works to avoid impacts on local drainage; and (iv)
provision of Rail Over Bridges and Pedestrian over passes to facilitate safe movement of
local traffic, etc.

 Despite the above measures, the project is expected to lead to: (i) acquisition of small
parcels of forest land in seven locations along the alignment amounting to a total of 6.56
hectares; (ii) cutting of about 2175 trees for the entire 272 km of alignment; (iii)
involvement of about 17 million m3 of earth work in embankment and 1.35 million m3 of
quarry material; (iv) increased noise and vibration levels in about 37 sensitive receptors
situated close to the alignment; (v) impacts on 22 physical and cultural properties; and
(vi) significant health and safety issues due to the construction activities of the project.

  Land Acquisition and resettlement impacts: The land acquisition required for the entire
1130 km proposed for the Bank financing will be very large, estimated to be about 3,800
hectares. The land acquisition for APL I section (343 km) will be to the tune of about
1,182 hectares in the 272 km stretch where the SIA has been completed, and excluding
the Tundla Detour (71 km) stretch where the SIA is being updated. This land acquisition
will affect about 8,126 households owning agricultural land, and land with structures.
Out of this, 999 hectares is private land and the remaining 183 hectares is Government
land. Out of affected land owners, half of them lose only linear stretch of land (less than
0.15 hectares); 75% land losers are or will be become landless, marginal or small
farmers. Only 386 households including 243 without any title. The land acquisition
process is in progress with 557 hectares (47%) acquired including 62 hectares of
government land in case of which land transfer process has been initiated with the state
government. DFCC will have to ensure that 80% of the route length of the construction
site is available encumbrance free with completion of LA and R&R as per the RAP, and
40% is in continuous 20 km blocks with adequate provision for contractor access. Based
on the current schedule, DFCC is expecting to complete the land acquisition including
payment of compensation by June 2012.

 The social assessment for 71 km of Tundla detour where new alignment has been
altered has commenced and is expected to be completed by the end of May 2011. The
social impacts in the Tundla stretch are similar to the 272 kilometer stretch where the SIA
has been completed. According to the interim SIA findings for the Tundla Detour (71
km) which passes through 64 villages, the land acquisition requirement will be around
280 hectares. A total of some 3600 families will be affected including about 100 families
losing residential and commercial structures. Once the SIA has been finalized, based on
this, a RAP will be prepared in line with RPF provisions.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The environmental assessment carried out for APL-I, highlights, a few long-term
environmental impacts due to quarrying large quantities of stone material (about 1.35
million m3), borrowing earth for laying the track (about 17 million m3), increased noise
and vibration levels during operation phase at about 37 locations along the railway track,
impacts on physical and cultural properties at about 22 locations and land use changes
over a long term. The environmental management plan prepared for the project, proposes
specific mitigation measures to minimize the above impacts, through specific
management plans for the borrow areas and quarry sites, noise barriers and cultural
property management plans.

 At few locations including habitations close to the new EDFC tracks, movement of local
communities and local traffic may also be affected due to including increased risk of
accidents. Key Rail Over Bridges and Pedestrian Over Bridges are proposed to minimize
these risks.

 Once the EDFC becomes operative, the project is also anticipated to have positive
impact in terms of providing employment and income opportunities. The EIA for the 71
km Tundla stretch, which was realigned to minimize land acquisition requirements, is
being updated and is expected to be completed by the end of May 2011. The
environmental impacts for the Tundla stretch will be similar to the 272 km stretch for
which the EIA has been finalized.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The measures taken to avoid or minimize adverse environmental, LA and involuntary
resettlement impacts include: (a) maximum use of the existing railway land within the
existing ROW; (b) using the minimum ROW at critical locations; (c) negotiation with
the Indian Railways to transfer unutilized loop lines and yards to DFCC where available;
and (d) detours at major cities/towns and urban habitations to avoid the physical
displacements. DFCCIL has also realigned a 71 km long corridor in the Tundla stretch to
minimize impacts on fertile agricultural land and impacts on communities.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
(a) Borrower’s measures to address the safeguards issues.

  Environmental Management Plan (OP/BP 4.01): The EA recommended a
comprehensive environmental management plan to address the impacts identified and an
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) with specific mitigation measures. The
measures include: (i) compensatory afforestation to compensate with the loss of forest
land and the loss of tree cover, in complete compliance with the Forest Conservation Act
of Government of India; (ii) avenue plantation at 10 trees per km all along the alignment;
(iii) rehabilitation plan for the Borrow Areas developed for the earth work for the project;
(iv) noise barriers in four critical locations affected with high noise levels and mitigation
measures for the management of increased noise levels in other sensitive locations; (v)
cultural properties rehabilitation plan for all the affected properties; and (vi) specific
construction safety and environmental management measures for the construction phase
of the project. The EMP measures will be integrated in the bid documents for
implementation by the contractors of the project
 Silicosis Reduction Strategies: Considering the large quantities of quarry material
handled in the project, a separate analysis of measures required to mitigate the potential
impacts of #Silicosis# on the construction workers of the project was carried out and
specific measures were recommended to be integrated in to the bid documents of the
project, for implementation by the contractor.

 An Environmental Management Framework is also developed for addressing the
environment safeguard issues for the subsequent phases of the project to be funded by
The World Bank (APL 2 and 3). The framework defines environment management
approach for identifying the environmental issues associated with the proposed projects,
identifies the requirements of conducting EA studies and provides guidance to integrate
environment safeguard measures during the planning, designing and construction phase
of DFC East.

 Regulatory Clearances: The prevailing environmental regulations in India, does not
mandate securing environmental clearance for Railway Projects. The project however
would require local approvals for diverting about 6.56 hectares of forest land and #No
Objection Certificates# for developing quarries, borrow pits, construction camps and
other machinery by the contractor. These requirements shall be completed by DFC (for
forest land) prior to the award of contract and by the contractor during the construction
phase on the project. DFC as part of the alternatives evaluation is also realigning the
Tundla stretch of the project, which in addition to minimizing impacts on local
communities will avoid impacts on the archeological monument #Budiya ka Tal#.
Depending on the finalized alignment in this section, DFC will secure clearance from the
Archeological Department of GOI (if required), prior to finalization of contract. Further,
the contract documents integrate different regulatory clearances to be secured by the
contractor prior to initiation of work and compliance through the construction phase.

 Steps Taken by the Borrower to date to Address Social Safeguard Issues. The borrower
has taken several steps to address social safeguard issues. The Borrower has enacted
special legislation for land acquisition under the Railways Amendment Act (RAA), 2008
providing a better framework for compensation and time line than the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894; and has adopted the National Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy (NRRP)
2007 to provide resettlement and rehabilitation (R&R) R&R assistance. It has endorsed
an Entitlement Matrix for providing LA compensation at replacement cost and adequate
R&R benefits to the relevant categories of the affected families consistent with the Bank
OP 4.12. The Borrower has carried out the social impact assessment (SIA) in a culturally
appropriate manner and has prepared a Resettlement Action Plan for the 272 km stretch
where the SIA has been completed; it is in the process of updating the SIA for the 71 km
stretches Tundla, based on which it will prepare and implement a RAP in line with a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared consistent with the Bank Policy. The
DFCCIL has established a Social and Environmental Management Unit (SEMU) and
arranged to establish and social and environment management mechanisms at the field
level including a Chief Project Manager (CPM) appointed to manage the process assisted
by Assistant Program Manager (social) for each contract package and facilitating NGOs
hired for community participation and income restoration. DFCCIL has started the
process for hiring Social and Environmental Safeguards Monitoring and Review
Consultants (SESMRC) for independent safeguard monitoring to provide quarterly
reports and annual audit on the implementation process and challenges encountered.
DFCCIL is instituting a two stage Grievance Redress Mechanism with clear procedures
for handling grievances and complaints at the district and DFCCIL levels, with an
Ombudsman appointed at the top to hear and resolve grievances. Men and women will
have equal access to the grievance redress process with the vulnerable petititioners
technically supported by NGOs in articulating their grievances.

 Entitlements of the Project Affected People (OP/BP 4.12): The Government of India
(GOI) amended the Railways Act, 1989 (RAA) in 2008 in order to streamline the process
for land acquisition (LA) for Special Railway projects such as this Project and provide
R&R assistance in line with the NRRP, 2007. Based on the RAA, 2008 and the NRRP,
2007, the Indian Railways has approved an Entitlement Matrix describing the
compensation and assistance for losses and impacts associated with the land acquisition,
which is consistent with the Bank safeguard policies. The RAA has new provisions
(compared to the Land Acquisition Act of 1894) as regards compensation and timeline.
The RAA, 2008 offers compensation with a 60% solatium. RAA also requires that the
market value of land/structure to be determined taking into consideration: (a) land value
under Stamp Act, 1899; and (b) average sale price of similar lands based on transactions
recorded in the previous three years. The Entitlement Matrix provides that an
Independent Evaluator will advise the Competent Authority in determining the
replacement value of the affected land and structures. The RAP/RPF defines cut-off date,
and offer payment of taxes for purchase of alternative lands and assets. All R&R benefits
expressed in monetary terms in the EM shall be updated based on the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) on an annual basis. The EM provides ex gratia of INR 20,000 for those
losing land up to 1500 square meters (sq.mt) and additional ex-gratia at INR.15/sq.mt. to
those losing land above 1500 sq.mts. The Entitlement Matrix provides a range of R&R
benefits as per NRRP 2007. The land owners becoming landless, marginal and small
farmers due to land acquisition will receive a rehabilitation grant of 750 days of wage. In
response to the concerns of the farmers, the Ministry of Railways has updated the
Entitlement Matrix with a clause for providing #higher compensation rates based on
provisions in any Act or Notifications issued or procedure established by the State
Government#. In order to maintain transparency, compensation and R&R benefits shall
be distributed among PAPs by cheque at select village camps on dates announced in
advance.

 Operational Policy 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples). The SIA study completed for the 272 km
has confirmed that no tribal communities are present in that stretch of the eastern
corridor. The total number of tribal families affected by the Project is eight, dispersed
along the corridor of impact. These eight affected tribal families do not have separate
social and cultural institutions and are socially a part of the mainstream population. No
Tribal Development Plan (TDP) has therefore been prepared as per OP 4.10. However, in
view of special protection provided by the Indian constitution to the scheduled tribes, the
Entitlement Matrix offers additional assistance for the tribal people affected by the
Project. This is aimed to minimize and mitigate any negative impacts and to ensure that
no irreversible harm will be caused due to the project to the tribal people. This is
consistent with Bank policy and NRRP 2007. In case the SIA indicates impact on tribal
communities for the Tundla stretch of 71 km and the proposed investments for the APL-
II and APL-III, a TDP shall be prepared as mandated by the RPF.

  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP): A Resettlement Action Plan for the 272 km has been
prepared in close collaboration with the stakeholders. It endorses commitment to ensure
that no irreversible harm will occur from implementation and that project benefits are
equitably distributed. The RAP involved extensive stakeholder consultation in local
languages, in a culturally appropriate manner with focus on gender, birth identity and
poverty. While population composition of the affected persons was not socio-
economically diverse, the presence of the eight scheduled tribe families scattered in the
project area was recognized during the process, particularly in terms of their general
socio-economic vulnerability recognized by the Indian Constitution. The RAP
underscores conformity with the Bank Policy OP 4.12 and institutes targeted measures in
its entitlement matrix and grievance redress mechanism to ensure that the vulnerability of
different socio-economic categories including the scheduled tribe families is fully
addressed with equitable project benefits for all the affected families. The borrower has
approved an Entitlement Matrix for providing compensation at replacement cost and
R&R assistance for loss of land, assets, and livelihoods to the eligible PAPs fulfilling the
requirements of OP 4.12. The Ministry of Railways (MoR) has updated the Entitlement
Matrix to include an additional provision for offering higher compensation rates based on
any act or notifications issued or procedure established by the concerned state
Government.

 1. Resettlement Policy Framework. The alignment for the Tundla detour (71 km) in
Firozabad and Agra districts was changed during the preparation process in order to
further minimize the land acquisition requirements. Earlier the alignment in this stretch
involved a single long detour of 71 kilometers passing through vast green field areas.
This was replaced with three smaller detours bringing down the land acquisition
requirements significantly. The social impact assessment for this realigned stretch is
being updated and is expected to be complete by the end of May 2011. Based on findings
of the SIA, a RAP will be prepared and implemented in line with the Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF). The institutional arrangements and compensation and other R&R
benefits will remain the same for this Tundla stretch as for the RAP prepared for the 272
km stretch of the Project. The budget of US$110 million indicated in the last section of
this Annex covers costs of implementing the RAP for the whole stretch of 343 kilometers
for APL I including the Tundla stretch. This RPF prepared for the Tundla stretch will be
applicable for any future alteration in alignment during implementation and also for
proposed investments for APL-II and APL-III.
 2. The RPF, in line with the principles of existing RAP for 272 km, outlines principles
and procedures for: (a) assessing social impact with a terms of reference (TOR); (b)
preparing the RAP before awarding work; (c) overall legal and institutional framework;
(d) entitlement matrix; and (e) implementation arrangements (including disbursement of
compensation and rehabilitation benefits, grievance redress mechanisms, stakeholder
consultation, NGO participation for facilitating community mobilization and livelihood
restoration, site hand over for civil work, monitoring and evaluation and indicative
budget). This RPF will be applicable for all activities linked to or associated with this
project, such as ROBs. The RPF makes full commitment to ensure no irreversible harm
occur from project implementation and states measures to promote equitable and
culturally appropriate distribution of project benefits among the all the socio-economic
groups including the vulnerable population and the scheduled tribes. The RPF mandates
that based on the SIA undertaken for the remaining stretch of 71 kms in APL-I and later
for APL-II and III mitigation plans will be prepared. In addition to consultations carried
out as a part of the SIA for the 71 km of the Tundla as well as for the forthcoming APL
phases, #free, prior, and informed# consultations will be held where there is impact on
the tribal communities. Based on these special consultations and SIA findings, Tribal
Development Plan (s) will be prepared in a culturally sensitive manner complying with
OP 4.10.

 (b) Assessment borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures

 DFCCIL is a new organization with no previous experience in environmental
management, land acquisition and resettlement management and has taken steps to
establish necessary institutional arrangements for safeguards management. The land
acquisition will be carried out by the State Government who is experienced in this field.
Competent authorities and Arbitrators have been appointed for carrying out land
acquisition using RAA, 2008.

 DFCCIL has established a Social and Environment Management Unit (SEMU) for
overseeing management of environment and social safeguard measures. The unit is
headed by a General Manager, supported by an Additional General Managers for land
acquisition and environmental safeguards management. The SEMU will also include
experienced Environmental Management and Social Development Specialists, and a
Deputy General Manger for dealing with grievances. At the field level, the Chief Project
Manager (CPM) will coordinate safeguard management activities with support by three
APMs for environment and social safeguards in charge of each contract of 100 kilometers
each. The LA process will be carried out with the support from the Land Acquisition
Consultants, who will undertake land surveys and coordinate with the local revenue
department. In addition, the Project Supervision Consultants will include social and
environment specialists to oversee coordination of civil works with RAP and EMP
activities. DFCCIL is also hiring NGOs to assist in community participation, livelihood
and skill improvement activities and to support affectees in articulating their grievances.

 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E): The regular performance monitoring of the RAP
implementation will be done by internal oversight mechanisms of the DFCCIL in which
the SEMU and the CPM office will have a key role to play. The SEMU and the CPM
office will be assisted by the PMC and the facilitating NGOs. DFCCIL will hire a Social
and Environment Safeguards Monitoring and Review Consultant (SESMRC) for third
party monitoring and audit of the implementation of land acquisition and R&R measures
and EMP. SESMRC will provide quarterly progress reports (QPR) and yearly Safeguard
Review Reports.
  Independent Grievance Redress Mechanism: The Borrower has set out a clear
institutional procedure for handling grievances and complaints. The Competent Authority
appointed for carrying out land acquisition as per the RAA, 2008 will be the first level for
hearing and resolving objections relating to the land acquisition process. Independent
Arbitrators will hear and redress grievances relating to compensation awards as per the
RAA, 2008. A two stage grievance redress mechanism (GRM) has been set out. At the
field level, the GRM will be chaired by the concerned District Collector or her/his
nominees, and will comprise representatives from the civil society and district local body.
At the corporate level, the Director, DFCCIL (Project Planning) will chair the GRM and
will have representatives from the Indian Railways, DFCCIL, and the civil society. The
senior level GRM shall be independent and the SEMU, which is responsible for overall
management of the resettlement and rehabilitation process, shall have no role in its
decision making except assisting in documentation of the grievance redress process. Both
men and women will have equal access to these grievance committees. In addition, while
the Indian Railway will appoint an Ombudsman to deal with unresolved grievances,
DFCC will hire an independent NGO to support the vulnerable. The Borrower will hire a
Social and Environment Safeguards Monitoring and Review Consultant (SESMRC) for
third party monitoring and annual quality audit of the implementation of land acquisition
and R&R measures. The Consultant will provide QPRs and annual audit reports.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders for the Project include the Ministry of Railways, DFCCIL, the state
Government, especially the officials of the revenue department, the Ministry of Forest
and Environment (at the state and national levels), elected local bodies, other state
departments, land owner farmers and residences, squatters, laborers, women, and local,
youth etc. Public consultations were held with the affected people during SIA and EIA
studies in the form of focus groups discussions at several locations. These included 227
focus group discussions (FGD) at the village level; 54 FGDs at the Tahsil or Taluk level;
and 18 FGDs at the district levels. In addition to this, consultations were held at 18
locations to discuss the potential environmental impacts of the project. These
stakeholders who took part included land owners, non title holders, government official
etc. The average participation varied between 12 to 45 individuals at the village level
consultations. The objectives of these consultations were to disseminate information
about the Project and its likely impacts and elicit people#s views for minimizing and
mitigating impacts. All consultations were inclusive in nature with strong focus on
gender, birth identity and poverty. Key issues discussed during the consultations
included: (a) potential environmental impacts; (b) employment opportunities; (c)
vibration impacts on structures close to the DFC tracks; (d) compensation; (e) loss of
common properties; and (f) accident risks. In the second round, follow up consultations
were held at 12 locations to discuss the draft RAP/RPF and at 8 locations to discuss the
draft EA, based on which these documents were finalized. Mitigation measures proposed
to address people#s concerns include: (a) provision of foot over bridges; (b) cross
drainage structures; (c) road over bridges; (d) and boundary walls at certain locations;
and (e) compensation and resettlement assistance and RAP Implementation
arrangements. In addition, the Bank team undertook field visits during the preparation to
interact with the people and stakeholders to have a firsthand assessment of impacts and
issues on the ground.

 The draft RAP for 272 km and the RPF for 71 km has been disclosed on the DFCCIL#s
web site and also in the Bank Info Shop during January 2011. The hard copies of these
documents are also available to the public at the field level Project Office and the district
administrations. The EA/EMP and RAP have been updated incorporating the Bank#s
comments; the final EA/EMP and RAP will be re-disclosed soon. In addition, the list of
PAPs eligible for different types of compensation and R&R benefits will be disclosed at
the village and panchayat levels. The details of GRM and Ombudsman will also be
disseminated to enable the people to approach those committees to resolve their
grievances and complaints.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       01/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   06/04/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    01/28/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                    02/01/2011
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       01/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   01/28/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    01/28/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             No
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                            Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Benedictus Eijbergen                        04/19/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari               04/19/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr I. U. B. Reddy                              04/19/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Satya N. Mishra                             04/19/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Sanjay Srivastava                            04/20/2011
  Comments: cleared on understanding that comments from Stephen Lintner via email dated 04/19/11
  have been incorporated.
Sector Manager:                    Mr Michel Audige                                04/20/2011
  Comments:
