Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/24/2011 
Report No.:  AC5959
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P121731 
Project Name:  ICDS Systems Strengthening & Nutrition Improvement Program 
(ISSNIP) 
Task Team Leader:  Ramesh Govindaraj 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 12, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASHN 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Nutrition and food security (50%);Child health (30%);Population and 
reproductive health (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
45.50
45.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overarching Program Goal is to improve nutritional outcomes of children in India.  
 
The Project development objective of Phase I would be:  
 
(i) to strengthen the policy framework, systems and capacities of the Integrated Child 
Development Services (ICDS) program at the national level and in 8 selected states to 
deliver quality services, to facilitate community engagement and to ensure a focus on 
children under three years; and  
 
(ii) to strengthen convergent nutrition actions at the national level and in selected states 
for improved nutrition outcomes.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  ICDS Institutional and Systems Strengthening will support strategic 
interventions to enhance the effectiveness of the ICDS program, including (i) refinement 
Page  2
of policies and guidelines across the ICDS program; (ii) strengthening and expanding the 
ICDS monitoring systems; (iii) capacity building at district, block and village levels; (iv) 
convergence between ICDS and the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) by 
developing guidelines and tools, carrying out joint training of ICDS and NRHM staff, 
and piloting enhanced convergence mechanisms, including sub-center level meetings of 
the health sector volunteers called Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs), the ICDS 
affiliated Aanganwadi Workers (AWWs) and the Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs) for 
joint program planning and review; (v) a variety of innovations to improve the 
effectiveness of the program, including setting up an innovations mechanism for high-
burden districts, piloting the placement of a second worker at each Aanganwadi Center 
(AWC) to provide outreach to women and children 0-3 years of age, and designing model 
AWCs; and (vi) strengthening program stewardship and implementation support capacity 
at district and block levels.  
 
Component 2:  Community Mobilization and Behavior Change Communication will 
strengthen the supply and demand-side interface of the ICDS program. It will: (i) review 
the experience of community participation, including public-private partnerships, social 
audit and voluntary action, and pilot promising approaches of community engagement in 
select districts; design and pilot the concept of social agreement and, based on the social 
agreement, develop viable models for community engagement for replication; (ii) 
promote community involvement and action through the education and empowerment of 
community-based organizations, using traditional community events to promote 
appropriate nutritional practices; and initiating partnerships with NGOs at the district 
level; and (iii) develop and implement an evidence-based BCC strategy.  
 
Component 3:   Convergent Nutrition Action will promote -- at the central and state 
levels -- convergent actions of multiple sectors key to improving nutrition outcomes. 
Activities will include: (i) development of frameworks and tools for facilitating 
convergent action of sectors key to improving nutrition; (ii) setting up and strengthening 
of structures for planning, coordinating and monitoring nutrition actions across multiple 
sectors; (iii) development of action plans and implementation and evaluation of these 
multisectoral initiatives for potential scale-up; and (iv) evaluation and operations 
research.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation will support effective 
project management including:  (i) financing specialists in a variety of fields to 
strengthen the operation of the established Project Management Units at the central and 
state level, as well as goods, training and incremental operating costs for these units; (ii) 
contracting a Technical Agency to provide required technical support for program 
implementation; and (iii) the monitoring and evaluation of project outcomes, including 
designing an impact evaluation study, carrying out a baseline survey as well as annual 
rapid assessments, quarterly internal assessments by ICDS supervisors and social 
assessments. The component would also support evaluation of pilots and best practices 
and the dissemination of the findings.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located in 162 districts in eight states of India: Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh and Uttar 
Pradesh.  The first seven of these have substantial tribal populations, and the districts 
selected (on the basis of a high burden of malnutrition) have sizeable tribal areas where 
the people are poor and have low access to public services including health care.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASDS) 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The bulk of beneficiaries in the project areas are not tribal, and the proposed project and 
sub-project interventions would not adversely affect tribal people - no negative impacts 
are expected on tribal culture, health or natural environments.  
 
However, as the project districts include tribal areas and people, and the Borrower aims 
at universal coverage of the target beneficiaries of the ICDS program (pregnant and 
lactating women and children under 6 years of age) a key concern is to ensure 
commensurate program benefits to tribal and other disadvantaged people.  An Equity 
Plan has been prepared for the project to achieve this goal.  As a consequence, positive 
impacts are expected on the nutritional status, health, cognitive development of young 
children, and knowledge and practices of mothers in tribal communities, as well as those 
of other disadvantaged groups.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Better nutrition, health and cognitive development of children are expected to reduce 
tribal poverty in the long term, especially non-income poverty. This is expected to occur 
Page  4
through both the ICDS Systems Strengthening components, particularly in the future 
Phase II when 'reformed' service delivery is operationalized, and through the nutrition 
convergent action component.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Instead of going directly into a service delivery support project, Phase I of the project will 
strengthen the institutions and management systems of the ICDS program.  This 
'alternative' has been adopted because of the need to reform ICDS to help it meet its early 
child development goals. Another alternative being piloted by the project is multi-sectoral 
action for nutrition.  This involves the design, execution and evaluation of pilots to 
reduce malnutrition.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Considerable emphasis has been placed on tribal areas in the ICDS program - for 
example, during the start up phases of the program tribal blocks received priority 
attention.  The GOI, state governments and district administrations are well versed in 
implementing programs in tribal areas.  However, delivery systems in tribal areas remain 
weak and the utilization of ICDS services by tribal people still lags behind.  New 
strategies and approaches are needed to address these gaps.  The project is aimed at 
strengthening Borrower capacity to plan, implement and monitor service delivery in tribal 
and other areas. The CPMU and SPMUs will have at least one staff person dedicated to 
facilitating and overseeing implementation of the Equity Plan prepared for the project to 
address the needs of disadvantaged groups, including tribal people.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are: pregnant and lactating women and children under 6 years of 
age (primary beneficiaries); village-level workers from the ICDS, Health and related 
departments; supervisors and managers up the line.  They were consulted during 
preparation through a social assessment, and will continue to be consulted on several 
aspects of the project during implementation of Phase I while key service delivery and 
support mechanisms are being worked out and/or piloted.  Their full-fledged involvement 
in implementation and M&E awaits service delivery, anticipated in Phase 2 of the 
project.  The Equity Plan and Social Assessment have been disclosed on the websites of 
the MWCD-GOI and Women and Child Departments of the participating states. Social 
accountability mechanisms will also be piloted in Phase I to improve system 
accountability to target beneficiaries.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  6
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ramesh Govindaraj 
02/14/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruma Tavorath 
02/13/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Meera Chatterjee 
02/13/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/15/2011 
Comments:  Approved 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Julie McLaughlin 
02/24/2011 
Comments:  Approved 
