Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/04/2011 
Report No.:  AC5789
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P107649 
Project Name:  Second Karnataka State Highway Improvement 
Task Team Leader:  Binyam Reja 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 6, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Other public sector 
governance (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
209.00
209.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
As a follow up to the successfully implemented KSHIP I, the proposed KSHIP II 
is designed to take the Bank's support for India's highway sector to a higher level by 
providing assistance for innovative financing, implementing government-owned sector-
wide reforms, addressing road safety concerns during road construction and operation, 
and ensuring effective project implementation (including streamlined land acquisition 
and environmental clearance and well-managed procurement and FM processing).  
 
2. 
 As such, the project development objective (PDO) is to assist GOK to accelerate 
the development of the Core Road Network through leveraging public sector outlays with 
private sector financing, and improve the institutional capacity of the road sector agencies 
to deliver effective and safe CRN to users.  In order to achieve the objective, the 
proposed project will comprise the following components (a) Highway Financing 
Modernization, (b) Road Improvement Works, (c) Road Sector Policy and Institutional 
Development, and (d) Road Safety Improvement. The Project beneficiaries are the road 
users (business and citizens) living along the roads. A secondary beneficiary is the PWD 
and KRDCL, whose capacity to manage the road network and provide safe and effective 
road services is expected to improve.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Project components  
 
3. 
  Component 1: Highway Financing Modernization Component (Total Cost: 
US$10.22 million; IBRD: US$8 million; PPIAF-SNTA Grant US$220,000). This 
component is designed to assist GOK to introduce innovative financing for the 
development of the CRN, and facilitate fiscally prudent market borrowing and promote 
private sector participation in highway financing and management. The component will 
(a) finance the costs of a CRN Financial Planner to assist GOK to prepare a detailed 
financing strategy for the state's road network, clearly delineating a range of possible 
approaches for developing and maintaining state highways and the associated 
requirements for raising funds, including private and public financing, domestic 
borrowing and multilateral financing; contract management aspects and tolling strategy. 
The PPIAF-SNTA financed Financial Advisor has completed the first comprehensive 
CRN financial strategy for CRN.  Further during implementation, the proposed project 
will support KRDCL to prepare annual and multi-year financial plan, including O&M. 
The TA is provided to KRDCL to improve better use of its project revenue from tolls and 
other user charges that are likely to be levied before a full-fledged road fund is 
established. (b) finance a PPP Transaction Adviser to support GoK market borrowing; 
provide advisory services to KRDCL/GOK on a range of PPP transaction matters, 
including financial feasibility analysis, legal documentation and and (c) technical 
assistance to establish a dedicated road fund, whose revenues would be used for O&M, 
and to service domestic debt, annuity concession payments and contribution to VGF.  
 
4. 
  Component 2: Road Improvement Component (Total Cost: US$542.69 million / 
IBRD: US$320.13 million / GOK: US$ 62.35 million / Private Sector: US$200.1 
million). This component will support the improvement of priority state highways under 
two contractual arrangements: (a) conventional item-rate contracts 269 km and (b) 
Modified Annuity (Availability Payment) Concessions 562 km. The modified annuity 
concession are long-term  DBFOM contracts whereby upgrading and widening of the 
roads will be carried out during the "construction phase", and O&M will be done during 
"operation phase". Unlike the commonly used annuity concession contracts in India 
where the private sector raises 100 percent of the project cost and gets paid an annuity 
payment during the concession period, the proposed project would modify this and pay 
upfront the concessionaire up to 50 percent of the estimated construction cost during the 
construction phase on achievement of agreed milestones and pay the rest of the project 
cost (including O&M cost) as annuity payments during the operation phase. This 
modification would reduce the risk to the concessionaire and should decrease the cost of 
the annuity contracts. At the same time, the annuity concessions would create a long-term 
partnership between the PWD and the private sector and ensure efficient maintenance and 
operation. The annuity concessions would also allow GOK to leverage the proposed 
IBRD loan with private sector and domestic financing and hence meet the large demand 
for improving the road network in relatively shorter period. Under this arrangement, the 
IBRD loan would be used to pay the upfront payment, and government and road fund 
Page  3
resources would be used for the remaining 50 percent (see Figure 1 above). If adequate 
VfM is not there, those roads will be taken upon EPC basis.  
 
5. 
 Component 3: Road Sector Policy and Institutional Development Component 
(Total Cost: US$10 million / IBRD: US$8 million / GOK: US$2 million). This 
component will support selected elements of a new medium-term Institutional 
Development and Strengthening Action Plan (IDSAP) for the period 2010-2016.  The 
IDSAP covers the PWD and the KRDCL, and has been established by the GOK in 
consultation with both the World Bank and the ADB. The major IDSAP fields are as 
follows:  
 
(a) 
Road Sector Strategy and Sustainability. Updating of policy, legislation, rules and 
powers to enhance the GOK's capacity for road infrastructure planning, delivery and 
management.  
 
(b) 
Road Network Planning and Asset Management. Enhanced policies, capacities 
and IT-based systems applied to state-wide roads development master planning and road 
maintenance planning, funding, operations and management.  
 
(c) 
Project Management (Preparation, Implementation & Monitoring). Strengthening 
PWD's and KRDCL's capacity in project management functions, as already implemented 
in the KSHIP PIU, as well as comprehensively enhancing Environment and Social 
Management (safeguards) functions and capacity.  
 
(d) 
Governance and Accountability.  Within the agreed Governance and 
Accountability Action Plan (GAAP), strengthening of RTI-compliant public information 
and communication, quality monitoring and complaints handling, deployment of e-
governance tools and completion of PWD-wide Quality Management framework / 
capacity.  
 
(e) 
Organization, Management and HR Development.  Strengthening key elements of 
the PWD rules and procedure, updating the IT-ICT-MIS strategy to improve PWD 
functions and governance, implementing a comprehensive IT-based Financial 
Management system, enhancing staff performance management tools, staff training and 
HRD capacity, and developing the PWD-linked Karnataka Engineering Research Station 
as a viable technical training centre.  
 
6. 
  While ADB investment and TA operations in the sector have already started 
supporting the implementation of IDSAP-linked Planning, Asset Management, Contract 
Management and engineering-related Road Safety activities, the agreed ADB support in 
these areas is limited in scope. Accordingly, KSHIP-II funding will also cover 
"extension" and completion actions in those areas as part of this Project's support to 
IDSAP implementation, with an overall KSHIP-II emphasis on "final-phase" and 
operationalisation measures to ensure effective, sustainable capacities and results are 
achieved in all main IDSAP fields during KSHIP-II.  
 
7. 
  Under this component, the Project will finance consulting services, technical 
assistance and limited instances of equipment and minor works, where these are required 
for technical / operational / management capacity building and improvements, IT-ICT-
MIS integration and technology upgrades, completion of road information, asset 
management and planning tools and applications, sector policy and planning studies, 
Page  4
final-stage HRM/HRD enhancements, necessary #sustainability# plans and GAAP-
specific activities.  
 
8. 
  Component 4: Road Safety Improvement Component (Total Cost: US$11 
million / IBRD: US$8.80 million / GOK: US$ 2.20 million). Against the backdrop both 
of rapidly increasing motorization and a continuing sharp rise in road-related deaths over 
the last decade in Karnataka, this component will support in a major state-level road 
safety intervention, aimed at establishing an effective combination of comprehensive 
results-based GOK road safety management strategy and the necessary supporting 
institutional capacity. The design of this intervention will build on the road safety 
management capacity review prepared for GOK in 2008 with Bank assistance, 
particularly the recommendation therein for a multi-sector demonstration project, and 
will also take into account of separate Road Safety activities currently receiving ADB-
funded technical support.  However via the more strategic KSHIP-II intervention the 
Bank will take the "lead donor" role in this field, as agreed between GOK and its 
development partners, and future ADB assistance to GOK on road safety will aim to 
support KSHIP-II facilitated plans and actions.  
 
9. 
  The KSHIP-II support will primarily involve the development, implementation 
and evaluation of a Safe Corridors demonstration project, and assistance to GOK to 
establish and implement a comprehensive state-wide road safety management strategy. 
The findings and results of the Safe Corridors project will inform progressive action on 
(at least) the following:  
 
a) 
Road Safety Lead Agency Capacity Building.  Rapid development of an effective 
Road Safety Cell in the Transport Department to support the Department's role as lead 
GOK agency for Road Safety strategy and management in the state. The lead agency will 
serve as a mechanism for horizontal and vertical coordination, and provide a forum for 
multi-discipline technical working groups.  
 
b)
Improving the safety of existing road infrastructure and improving the capacity 
for "safe roads" design, execution and maintenance.  
 
c) 
Strengthening enforcement and road user compliance on safety rules  
 
d)
Improving vehicle safety on each road corridor  
 
e) 
Improving emergency medical response system and making them available on site  
 
f) 
Enhancing road safety education, awareness, and training activities  
 
10. 
  Under this component, KSHIP-II funding will support a combination of 
consulting services, technical assistance, equipment and minor works procurements 
required for implementation of the Safe Corridors demonstration project, and will provide 
US$1 Million in "one-off" assistance to GOK (alongside similar ADB assistance) 
towards the costs of establishing a new Centre of Excellence for Road Safety Training, 
Education and Research in Karnataka.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
11. 
Roads selected for KSHIP II are spread across Karnataka with a higher 
concentration in southern and northern parts, complementing the roads already improved 
Page  5
under the previous KSHIP project. The state is known to be a leader in IT industry 
concentrated in Bengaluru and Mysore. It is also known for its efforts in forestry, water 
conservation and natural habitat protection. The project will be implemented in 14 out of 
27 districts of Karnataka.  Out of these, eight are from southern Karnataka and six are in 
northern Karnataka. These include Bangalore (Urban and Rural), Kolar, Belgaum, 
Dharwar, Koppal, Gadag, Gulbarga, Mandhya, Dakshin Kananda, Hasan, Haveri, Bellary 
and Davanagiri.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
12. 
The project triggered four safeguard policies as indicated above. These include 
environmental assessment, Natural Habitats, Physical Cultural proprieties and 
Involuntary Resettlement.  
 
13. 
Environmental Assessment: The key adverse environmental impacts of the project 
are removal of roadside trees (about 40,000 for the entire project), acquisition of small 
area of forest land and its conversion to road (total slightly less than 12 ha, along 4 EPC 
and 4 Annuity contract roads), increased air and noise pollution adjacent to the road, and 
risks of pollution and health impacts if proper measures are not taken for managing 
contractor operations during construction.  While short term negative impacts could occur 
if proper care is not taken during the construction phase by the Contractors - localized 
increased pollution of air, and water, increased risk to safety for their workers as well as 
other concurrent road users, no other long term significant irreversible impacts are 
currently considered likely.  
 
14. 
Natural Habitats: Initially, the policy was triggered at the PCN stage. However, 
since then KPWD has followed up with the Forest Department for identifying any natural 
Page  6
habitats, and wildlife crossings across project roads identified as potentially sensitive. 
The Forest Department has confirmed that there are no reports of any wildlife crossings 
or accidents along the roads initially considered to be sensitive. There are no critical 
natural habitats known close to the project roads. However, the project has put in place 
orientation and sensitization of contractors' workers to avoid damage to any important 
flora and fauna found close to the work-sites.  
 
15. 
Forests: This policy is now being triggered as total slightly less than 12 ha is 
being requisitioned across 4 EPC and 4 Annuity corridors. The project has already 
applied for the clearances under the Forest (Conservation) Act, and Karnataka Tree 
Preservation Act. The project will pay the necessary costs of compensatory afforestation, 
and Net Present Value of the land to the Forest Department. In addition, the road side 
spaces, as well as lands along abandoned stretches of roads where short road 
realignments are proposed, will be planted with trees to compensate locally for the trees 
being cut for the project.  
 
16. 
Physical Cultural Resources: There are several locally and regionally important 
cultural properties - religious as well as community structures that may be impacted by 
the project. Wherever appropriate, the KPWD will try to minimize adverse impacts on 
these, exploring among other options, design modifications for particular stretches such 
as in 2 Annuity Contracts links. The project includes adequate measures to ensure that 
any unavoidable impacts on such sites are managed properly. Chance-find procedures are 
also included in the contracts to handle such situations.  
 
17. 
Involuntary Resettlement: The land acquisition required for the project consisting 
of 830 Kms is 225 hectares including about 10 hectares of Government land. Because of 
this land acquisition, about 5,300 families will be affected by varying degrees.  More than 
50 percent of these impacts are minor in nature losing only narrow strip of land. The 
major impacts include those who are likely to be physically displaced or those losing 
their source of livelihood mostly consist of agricultural lands or petty businesses. This 
category will also include those becoming marginal or land less due to land acquisition to 
the project. The minor impacts are those who lose only small portion of their asset and 
are able to continue their livelihood with remaining assets without nay father assistance 
other than the compensation for the lost assets. These include those who loose only part 
of their houses or that loose narrow strip of lands. The proposed compensation and 
assistance will enable the people to resettle their living standards.  The project does not 
anticipate any significant or irreversible impacts due to the land acquisition or 
displacement.  In addition, about 1600communty asserts will be affected which are 
proposed to be reconstructed in the adjacent places in consultation with the local people  
 
18. 
Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.10): The project alignment does not pass though any 
designated Tribal areas. The census surveys confirmed that the project alignment does 
not pass through any designated tribal villages. The census survey indicates that the few 
affected scheduled tribe families do not exhibit the distinct charterstics and are scattered 
throughout the project roads. They have not identified themselves as distinct group 
during the consultations and are mostly working as agricultural laborers or they are found 
Page  7
to be as small and marginal famers and are fully integers with the rest of the population. 
The Tribal Welfare Department of Karnataka has confirmed in response to the 
implementing agency's request that the proposed project roads do not pass thorough any 
designated tribal areas. In view of this, the policy on Indigenous peoples is not triggered 
for this project. The affected tribal who are scattered will be dealt with in the overall 
entitlements proposed for the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
19. 
 The project does not envisage any long-term impacts. On the other hand,  the 
project will have a positive impacts due to improvement in the road network enabling the 
people to have improved access to basic amenities, markets and thus improve the 
connectivity with the neighboring villages and nearby towns and thus alleviate 
development constraints in agriculture, commerce, education, health and social welfare.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
20. 
 Realignments were proposed in some the locations such as Huliyidurga, 
Madhugiri and Koratagere to reduce the impacts on loss of shelter and livihoods by 
avoiding proposed roads passing through theses small towns.  Further, in some towns the 
corridor of impact has been reduced to minimize the impacts. Where ever possible design 
changes were made to minimize the physical displacements or loss of livelihoods.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
(a) Measures taken by the borrower to address the safeguard policy issues.  
 
(i) Environmental policy issues: KPWD has taken the steps described below to address 
the environmental safeguards related issues:  
 
a) 
A dedicated cell for environmental management headed by an Executive Engineer 
is in place within the KSHIP PIU and staff on deputation from the Forest Department is 
also available to ensure timely co-ordination at GoK level.  
 
b)
An EA has been carried out which resulted in the preparation of corridor specific 
EMPs. These have been cleared by the State Environmental Impact Assessment 
Authority. Applications for permissions for the transfer of Forest land and cutting of 
roadside trees have been submitted. Further, an Independent Review was also 
commissioned on the EA process and outputs to confirm that these adequately address 
the safeguards policies triggered.  
 
c) 
The implementation of some of the key measures identified in the EMP has begun 
in advance of the road construction works. This includes the provision of noise barriers to 
protect sensitive receptors which the EMPIU is getting implemented now. Environmental 
Engineers are likely to be in place in the divisional offices overseeing the project 
implementation.  
 
d)
The PIU will be assisted by a Construction Supervision Engineer team which will 
include suitably qualified environmental specialists. They will be responsible for regular 
Page  8
supervision and reporting to the PIU regarding the progress and status of EMP 
implementation.  
 
e) 
The PIU has agreed to formalize its approach to systematic environmental 
management with the target of certifying the PIU and at least one field division to ISO 
14001 during the project implementation period.  
 
(ii) Social Safeguard Policy Issues. The borrower has taken the following measures to 
address the social safeguard policy issues.  
 
a) 
Government has notified the Project Director as "Highway Authority" for land 
acquisition purpose under Karnataka Highway Act with delegated powers. The 
Government has provided dedicated land acquisition staff consisting of Special Deputy 
Commissioner and two (2) Assistant Commissioners to fast track the process of acquiring 
the private lands. A committee including some of the independent members has been 
constituted for negotiating the price of private lands with the landowners.  
 
b)
A
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) endorsed by the Bank is already in place. The 
compensation and assistance proposed in the RAP is line with the Bank's operational 
policy on involuntary resettlement and Government of India's new R&R policy, 2007. 
The key entitlements included are: minimum compensation for private land acquisition 
though direct negotiations (1.5 or 2.0 time of guidance value) with top-up compensation 
consisting of amount equivalent to stamp duty and registration charges, severance 
allowance equivalent to 25 percent of basic compensation, rehabilitation assistance for 
those becoming landless or marginal. The valuation for loss of structure is based on the 
market value without deprecation with 30 percent top-up additional compensation as well 
as transitional allowance such as subsistence and shift allowances. In addition, the 
displaced families will be provided with alternative house sites with construction grants. 
The non- title holders will be provided with alternative house sites with construction 
grants and transitional allowance. In case of those loosing livelihood, they will be 
provided with rehabilitation assistance or alternative sites for reconstruction of affected 
shops. Vulnerable families such as those with physically challenged persons, widows or 
aged will be assisted to get Government pensions schemes or provide with lump-sum 
cash grants to meet the additional financial needs.  
 
c) 
The contracts for Two (2) NGOs and third party M&E consultant services are 
signed and they have commenced their services;  
 
d)
Database Management consultants services are procured to mange  and track the 
implementation progress of  land acquisition and resettlement;  
 
e) 
Key staff for R&R Implementation are in position (Chief Administrative Officer, 
Assistant Director, Manager (R&R), and 2 Social Development Officers) are already in 
position; and,  
 
f) 
The grievance redress committed headed by the Deputy Commissioner who is not 
associated with the Implemeniton are being constituted in the project districts.  This 
committee some nominated members from the civil society and PAP representatives.  
 
(b) Assessment of the borrower's capacity to plan and implement the measures:  
 
Page  9
21. 
The Project implementation unit (PIU) is fully aware and familiar with the 
potential environmental and social impacts and the required mitigation measures, as they 
have successfully implemented the previous Bank supported project.  In the previous 
project, environment and social mitigation plans were satisfactorily implemented and the 
department has documented some of the good practices and lesson learned.  
 
22. 
 On the social side, the PIU  has a dedicated Social Development and 
Resettlement cell headed by a  Chief Administrative Officer to manage the land 
acquisition and resettlement impacts. He is assisted by a Special Deputy Commissioner 
and two Assistant Commissioners on the land acquisition side and Assistant Director and 
Resettlement Officer on the resettlement side. All these key staff is already in place. Two 
field units are in the process being established. Some of the Social Development Officers 
are already in place in these field units. The Social Development and Resettlement cell 
will engaged two local NGOs and Database management consultants to provide 
Implemeniton support. All these agencies are already in place. A third party independent 
monitoring consultants (R&R M$E consultants) were also commissioned to oversee the 
implementation progress and provide advice and guidance on land acquisition and 
resettlement issues. This M&E consultants will certify the satisfactory completion of pre-
construction activities related to land acquisition and resettlement prior to handing over 
of sites to the contractors.  The above measures are adequate to manage the land 
acquisition and resettlement impacts in this project.  
 
23. 
The PIU has already put in place an Environmental Management Cell with an 
Executive engineer already experienced in implementing Bank-supported projects. The 
cell also includes staff from the Forest Department, on deputation to PWD,   to co-
ordinate with this key line department. In addition, field offices overseeing the project 
implementation are also being staffed with engineers, who have been given orientation 
training in environmental management. The Construction Supervision Engineer team will 
also include Environmental Specialists who will be responsible for the day-to-day 
supervision and reporting on environmental aspects. These arrangements are considered 
sufficient for managing the anticipated environmental impacts of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
24. 
The key stakeholders include the road users, local people, affected people and the 
concerned Government departments. A large number of consultations have been held in 
the project area in about 25 places involving about 1800 people from more than 150 
villages. The outcomes of consultations were incorporated in the RAP or designs as 
appropriate. Some of the outcomes incorporated include:  improvements in the 
entitlements related to structure valuation, provision for replacement of affected irrigated 
bore wells and realignments in some of the towns. Further, six additional consultations 
were held to disclose the draft RAP and explain the contents of the RAP and sought their 
feedback. A number of clarifications related to entitlements and resettlement assistance 
were clarified during these consultations. The draft RAP has been disclosed by the 
implementation agency in their web site -www.kpwd.gov.in.and other public places 
accessible to the local people in March 2010. The draft RAP was also disclosed in the 
Page  10
Bank#s Info shop. During June 2010. A brochure containing the details of entitlements in 
local language is currently under finalization and will be circulated among the project-
affected people.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/27/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/25/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/27/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
10/26/2010  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/15/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/12/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  11
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Binyam Reja 
12/06/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi 
12/06/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
12/06/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
12/21/2010 
Comments:  cleared. Please see email dated 12/21/2010. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel Audige 
12/31/2010 
Comments:  Cleared. 
