Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5880 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/24/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P124614 
Project Name: Rajasthan Agricultural Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader: Severin L. Kodderitzsch 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2012 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (20%);Agricultural extension and research (10%);Animal production (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (70%);Rural markets (20%);Rural policies and 
institutions (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
30.00
80.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to demonstrate at scale the feasibility of 
a
range of distinct agricultural development approaches integrating technology, organization, 
institution and market innovations across selected regions of Rajasthan # each marked by 
different agro-ecological, climatic, water resource and social conditions # capable of 
significantly increasing agricultural productivity and farmer incomes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The guiding principles under the project are: (a) improved on-farm water use efficiency, reduced 
water-intensive cropping patterns, and using the resultant savings for economic purposes outside 
of agriculture in support the state#s water policy of reducing water consumption by the 
agricultural sector; (b) increased private sector participation in the development of value chains 
in processing and marketing in support of the state#s agro processing and agri-business policy; 
and (c) improved public sector capacity in delivering agriculture support services.  The project 
Page  2
will be taken up in 4 to 5 regional clusters covering different agro-climatic conditions of the state 
and implement a location-specific menu of approaches and interventions.  Selection of these 
geographical clusters will take into account, inter alia, drought-proneness, soil types, cropping 
pattern, sources of irrigation, marketing infrastructure, and livestock population. The 
beneficiaries of the project will primarily be smallholder farmers with actual or potential 
commercial outlook in the selected agro-climatic zones supported through collective action in 
achieving economies of scale.  The project components will address capacity, access and 
participation-related issues by (i) incentivizing group formation among smallholder farmers (e.g. 
water user groups, ground water management communities, watershed groups) through 
specialized service providers; (ii) promoting farmer access to farm inputs, advisory services, 
product markets as well as agriculture insurances; and (iii) promoting gender-equitable practices 
in the sector.  
 
Component 1: Climate Resilient Agriculture (tentative cost: $130 m):  This component will 
support climate-resilient approaches that allows for the sustainable use of the natural resource 
base through agricultural and livestock production systems aiming to increase long term 
productivity and farm incomes in an environment marked by increased climate and, in particular, 
rainfall variability.  More specifically, this component will support measures that improve: (a) 
harvest, capture, collection, delivery and distribution of water for agriculture and livestock 
purposes in surface water irrigated canal command areas, ground water sources and rainfed 
areas; (b) on-farm water use efficiency; (c) soil moisture and fertility improvements; (d) 
sustainable intensification and diversification of farm production; and (e) integrated crop and 
livestock farming systems.  
 
(a) Improvement of water use efficiency: This will be taken up under three different water 
scenarios, i.e. (i) irrigated command areas under surface (canal) irrigation, (ii) command areas 
under groundwater irrigation and (iii) rainfed area. Across all three water resource scenarios the 
project will support improvement in soil and moisture conservation (through contour bunding, 
contour vegetative barriers, etc.) and complimentary agriculture support services.  Matching 
grant financing will be provided for development plans proposed, developed and implemented 
by the respective farmer groups which in turn will be responsible for mobilizing their 
contribution  either in cash or in-kind or both.  Specific arrangements will be explored during 
project preparation.  
 
(b) Technology transfer and market led advisory services: Technology transfer and market-led 
advisory services will be supported through Agricultural Technology Management Agencies 
(ATMA) which undertake productivity promoting activities aiming at improving soil moisture 
regimes and on-farm water use efficiency, increase production and permit sustainable 
intensification and diversification of cropping patterns.  The project will finance (a) the 
demonstration and adaptation of location-specific soil and water conservation practices; and (b) 
the demonstration and use of improved crop varieties, integrated pest and nutrition management, 
as well as appropriate agronomic practices.  Public-private partnership in agricultural service 
delivery will be encouraged. This sub-component will also support adaptive research on broad 
thematic priority areas (to be identified during the preparation) suitable for the project locations.  
The adaptive research program will be built on the technologies that have been already 
developed by the state agriculture universities, the Central Arid Zone Research Institute, the  
International Crop Research Institute for Semi Arid Tropic, the International Centre for 
Page  3
Agriculture Research in the Dry Areas, the International Livestock Research Institute and other 
partners through the Global Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security.  
 
(c) 
Livestock strengthening and management:  Livestock provides a potentially significant 
source of diversified income to smallholder farmers operating in difficult climatic conditions. 
The project will support small ruminant livestock development (sheep and goats) through (a) 
establishing silvi-pasture plantations on private and common land as well as fodder processing 
and storage facilities, so that nutrition is made available for livestock round the year; and 
promoting green fodder cultivation as a crop diversification strategy; (b) developing organized 
livestock markets and livestock group marketing approaches; and (c) strengthening the Animal 
Husbandry Department's capacity to locally deliver cost-effective livestock support services such 
as animal health and nutrition, and to provide market linked advisory services.  
 
Component 2: Markets and Value Chains ($50 m cost):  To allow farmers to access a wider 
range of markets, community-level marketing capacities and skills will be strengthened under 
this component. This will include the support to (a) develop value chains aiming to establish 
longer term partnerships and market linkages between farmer groups and agribusiness 
enterprises, facilitated through an Agri-Business Promotion Facility (ABPF); (b) develop 
alternate market channels; and (c) generation and dissemination of accurate and timely market 
information. A competitive mechanism allocating matching project grants to farmer 
organizations who partner with private sector enterprises in the formation of a longer term value 
chain will be developed during project preparation.  
 
(a) Value chain development: The competitiveness of small-holder farmers and agribusinesses 
will be promoted by facilitating the development and establishment of demand-driven value 
chains through a participatory approach. An Agri-Business Promotion Facility (ABPF) will 
facilitate the roll out of these participative value chains identification and stakeholder 
consultation. ABPF will also facilitate the implementation of Rajasthan#s new Agribusiness 
Policy, mobilizing national and state grants and supporting the implementation of the improved 
access for agribusinesses to rural based grants.  
 
(b) Alternative market development: A wide range of alternative market channels will be 
promoted, which will include, among others, establishing rural producer organizations for input 
and output marketing, upgrading local rural markets; and promoting warehouse receipts and 
access to electronic spot exchanges in collaboration with private sector.  
 
(c)Market information services: Project will consider options for creating a sustainable market 
and agricultural information service, as well as providing reliable information to the field 
extension offices.  The main options will be (i) a public-private sector partnership in relying on 
outsourcing of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) services to private institutions 
or (ii) leveraging new software for large scale SMS broadcasting.  
 
Component 3: Capacity building, M&E, Project Management ($20 m cost):This component 
will support (a) mobilization and establishing of farmer groups and capacity building for 
participatory planning and plan implementation; (b) strengthening of institutions and human 
resources associated with the project implementation (i.e. participating line department and other 
Page  4
relevant agencies); (c) project management, robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system 
with a view of potentially scaling up approaches deemed successful under this operation across 
the state; and (d) building synergies and convergence with ongoing schemes from the 
Government of Rajasthan (GoR) and the Government of India (GoI) such as Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana (RKVY; National Agricultural Development Scheme), the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MNREGS), etc.  Development and pilot testing 
of production risk management tools in crop and livestock sectors will be supported under this 
component, in partnership with insurance companies and banks.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be taken up in 4 to 5 regional clusters within Rajasthan, covering different agro-
climatic conditions of the state (to be determined during preparation) and implement a location-
specific menu of approaches and interventions.  Selection of these geographical clusters will take 
into account, inter alia, drought-proneness, soil types, cropping pattern, sources of irrigation, 
marketing infrastructure, livestock population and importance, and maturity of the institutional 
structures.   
 
E.  Bo
rrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will trigger four safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.01); Pest 
Management (OP/BP 4.09); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Indigenous Peoples 
(OP/BP 4.10).  
 
The overall responsibility for the project execution will rest with the Department of Agriculture 
and its allied departments (including, amongst others, the Department of Animal Husbandry and 
the Rajasthan State Agriculture Marketing Board (RSAMB)) and the Water Resources 
Department.  A state-level Steering Committee is being proposed for project oversight and 
guidance; while a Project Coordination Unit (PCU)  is envisaged for the day-to-day 
implementation coordination, planning and scheduling, procurement management, financial 
control, reporting and monitoring. An assessment of implementation capacities of these 
departments will be done during preparation and suitably reflected in the project design; 
capacities will be strengthened during implementation. The institutional capacity of the 
Department of Agriculture to prepare and implement the environmental and social management 
frameworks will need to be significantly developed.  The Environment and Social Assessments 
will include an assessment of the borrower#s capacities and recommendations for suitable 
measures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Priti Kumar (SASDI) 
Mr Varun Singh (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This OP is applicable given the project#s focus on improving crop productivity and 
diversification, promoting efficient water storage, delivery, and distribution systems, watershed 
conservation, strengthening livestoc
k
activities and upgrading agricultural market infrastructure.  
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The potential adverse environmental issues are expected be negligible instead the project is 
expected to have positive environmental impacts. Some of the direct or indirect environmental 
impacts relate to (i) accelerated overdrawal of groundwater due to improperly designed irrigation 
systems and approaches (ii) construction activities for infrastructure development, (iii) working 
of market infrastructure (generation and management of solid vegetative, animal, trash wastes) 
and (iv) livestock activities. An integrated Environment and Social Assessment (ESA) and 
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed during project 
preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Other than possibly in the context of on-farm demonstrations, the project is not financing any 
direct procurement of pesticides and other agro-chemicals. However it is likely that with better 
marketing opportunities and advisory/extension services, farmers may increase land based 
productivity through application of fertilizers, pesticides etc for increasing crop yields and 
diversifying crop patterns and production. Therefore this OP is triggered.  The ESA/ESMF will 
include appropriate measures and a strategy for Integrated Pest Management.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Rajasthan has one of the highest proportions of Scheduled Tribe population among the Indian 
states. The regional clusters, where the project will be implemented, are likely to have physical 
presence of scheduled tribes, particularly in the southern districts. The social assessment will 
identify the social impacts on tribals, assess the community support for the project among them, 
and recommend specific measures to ensure their inclusion and participation in project 
interventions and benefits. These measures will be included in the social management 
framework.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The physical infrastructure that will be financed under the project component, includes soil 
and water conservation structures, small markets, livestock exchanges, collection centres etc. 
The social assessment will clarify the social impacts of these investments and provide inputs to 
the Social Management Framework. These will include social screening procedures, resettlement 
policy and entitlements, consultations with affected persons, and tribal and gender inclusion 
procedures. Social screening of infrastructure subprojects will flag any adverse social impacts, 
and recommend preparation and clearance of RAP before commencement of civil works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/30/2011 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The social and environment assessments will take approximately 6 months.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Severin L. Kodderitzsch 
01/13/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
01/13/2011 
Comments:  cleared on understanding that ESA, RPF and IPDF will be shared with us priot to 
appraisal. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
01/13/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
