Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/24/2011 
Report No.:  AC5889
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P104164 
Project Name:  National Rural Livelihoods Project 
Task Team Leader:  Parmesh Shah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 18, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural marketing and trade (55%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry 
sector (37%);Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (8%) 
Theme:  Rural non-farm income generation (45%);Rural policies and institutions 
(43%);Other rural development (5%);Climate change (4%);Rural services and 
infrastructure (3%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1,000.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
171.00
171.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
The project development objective for the proposed NRLP is to establish efficient 
and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to 
financial and selected public services.  
 
2. 
The proposed NRLP intends to support systemic reform and transformation of the 
Ministry of Rural Development from focusing on allocation, disbursement, and 
monitoring of central government resources, to one of providing quality technical 
assistance to states implementing the NRLM.  The activities to be supported under the 
proposed NRLP intend to achieve the following key outcomes:   
 
a) 
Enhance effectiveness of public expenditure on NRLM # the proposed NRLP will 
help establish rigorous and outcome-based systems and processes at the national and state 
level to implement the NRLM throughout the country.  The MoRD intends to adopt all 
the operational manuals, financial management and procurement guidelines, and 
Page  2
safeguard requirements that were prepared for the proposed NRLP for all the activities to 
be financed under the NRLM throughout the country.  
 
b)
Leverage resources for the poor # substantial leveraging of resources for the poor 
is expected from the proposed NRLP as evidenced by the initial three WB-financed state 
livelihood projects, namely:  i) group members accumulated their own savings in excess 
of US$1 billion; ii) leveraged nearly US$6 billion in credit from commercial banks; iii) 
leveraged in excess of US$500 million in resources from other public programs; and iv) 
achieved US$1 billion turnover in collective marketing of farm and non-farm produce.  
 
c) 
Increase access to other government programs # the institutions of the poor 
created under the proposed NRLP will provide greater integration with the formal 
panchayat system for last mile service delivery (i.e. nutrition, health, education), 
enhanced access to other critical programs for the poor (i.e. MGNREGS), and ensuring 
that the Gram Sabha (locally elected body) is more representative of the poor by giving 
the poor and women a greater voice to reduce elite capture opportunities.   
 
3. Project Description 
3. 
While the WB-financing for the proposed NRLP is estimated at US$1 billion, the 
GoI has allocated to the NRLM approximately US$2.2 billion for the next two years and 
is expected to allocate approximately US$5.5 billion in the GoI#s following Five Year 
Plan (FY13-17).  In this regard, the activities detailed in the component description 
below, will provide the enabling environment for the effective utilization of all the 
resources allocated by the GoI to the NRLM.  With the exception of Component Two that 
will be implemented in the 12 targeted states, the remaining components will provide 
support at the national level to enable the smooth rollout of the NRLM throughout the 
country.  
 
4. 
The proposed NRLP intends to support the implementation of the NRLM through 
the transformation of MoRD from the traditional focus of expenditure-based allocation, 
to one of providing quality technical assistance and results-based financing.  
Furthermore, being a national level project, investments will be made in developing a 
wider base of implementing partnerships with private sector, civil society, and other 
development institutions for bringing in new ideas, innovations, services, and delivery 
mechanisms.  
 
5. 
Component 1. Institutional and Human Capacity Development (US$61.3 million):  
The objective of this component is to transform the role of MoRD into a provider of high 
quality technical assistance in the field of rural livelihoods promotion.  This component 
will finance primarily staff, technical assistance consultancies, and training and related 
course material. Support under this component will be for all states. To achieve the 
objective of this component, the proposed project intends to support the following 
activities:  
 
a) 
Technical Assistance - establish teams of high quality professionals to provide 
technical assistance to the states in various thematic areas such as community 
mobilization, livelihood promotion, financial inclusion, human resource management, 
monitoring and evaluation, environment management, and fiduciary management, among 
Page  3
others.  This team will provide continuous support to state governments in the 
implementation of the NRLM and related activities in the rural development sector.  
 
b)
Human Resource Development - support development of partnerships with well 
established training and research institutions in the field of rural development throughout 
India that can deliver focused training programs for successful implementation of the 
NRLM and related activities in the rural development sector. The activities supported 
will include curriculum development, design and conduct of training programs including 
e-learning and distance learning. Under this feasibility of establishment of a National 
Center for Rural Livelihoods will also be explored.  
 
6. 
Component 2.  State Livelihood Support (US$793.7 million):  The objective of 
this component is to support state governments in the establishment of the necessary 
institutional structures and mechanisms for the implementation of NRLM activities from 
the state to the block level, including support to the formation of institutions of the rural 
poor. The extent of financing to each state will depend on the basis of state-specific needs 
as detailed in their respective State Prospective and Implementation Plans (SPIP) which 
will be jointly reviewed and appraised by the MoRD and the WB prior to the financing of 
any activities.  This component will finance livelihood grants to the poor rural households 
(i.e. SHGs/federations) to undertake productive livelihood activities as detailed in their 
livelihood plans, support for higher level producer institutions, producer groups, farmers 
collectives, and/or producer companies (PCs), technical assistance consultancies, training 
and related material, office equipment, and operational costs at the state level and below.  
To achieve the objective of this component, the proposed project intends to support the 
following activities:  
 
a) 
State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLM) # support the formation of an 
autonomous and professionally managed mission at the state-level for the implementation 
of the NRLM comprising of a multi-disciplinary team with expertise in themes like social 
mobilization, institution building, capacity building, microfinance, farm and non-farm 
livelihoods, and job employment, among others.  In addition, the SRLM would establish 
implementing entities at the district level comprising of multidisciplinary teams to further 
facilitate implementation of NRLM financed activities.  
 
b)
Institution Building and Capacity Building - support the identification, selection, 
and mobilization of poor rural households into self-managed institutions, such as Self 
Help Groups (SHGs) and their federations. This would also include providing capacity 
building and training activities for SHG members and federations in livelihood activities, 
bookkeeping, financial literacy, and business education, among others.  Teams of 
livelihood professionals trained in participatory methodologies and community 
facilitation will be set up at the block/sub-block level.  
 
c) 
Community Investment Support - provide livelihood grants to the institutions of 
the poor to enable them to undertake productive livelihood enhancing initiatives.  In 
addition, the NRLP would facilitate the establishment of higher level producer 
institutions, producer groups, collectives, and/or companies.  
 
d)
Special Programs - support for pilot activities that have potential for scaling-up 
and replication such as last mile delivery of public services including health and nutrition, 
implementing activities in high-conflict areas in partnership with civil society 
organizations, green opportunities, climate change-related activities, value-chain 
Page  4
development, using new technologies for financial inclusion, among others.  Activities 
under special programs will cover all States, including those States that are not directly 
participating in the NRLP.  
 
7. 
Component 3.  Innovation and Partnership Support (US$45 million):  The 
objective of this component is to create an institutional mechanism to identify, nurture 
and support innovative ideas from across the country to address the livelihood needs of 
the rural poor. Support under this component will be for all states.  This component will 
finance pilot initiatives and technical assistance consultancies that support innovative 
livelihoods activities in agriculture, livestock, youth employment, among others, for rural 
poor households. Support under this component will be for all states.  To achieve the 
objective of this component, the proposed project intends to support the following 
activities:  
 
a) 
Innovation Forums and Action Pilots - support selected innovations identified 
through development marketplace-type forums that have the potential to be scaled-up in a 
viable manner in partnership with development foundations.  
 
b)
Social Entrepreneurship Development - support the development of a network of 
grassroots innovators and social entrepreneurs, identified through a competitive process, 
at state and national level.  
 
c) 
Public-Private-Community-Partnership - develop and support effective 
partnerships with the private sector, foundations public corporations, and civil society 
organizations on livelihoods development for the rural poor throughout India.These could 
include ICT, agribusiness, commercial banks/MFIs and other financial service providers, 
and youth employment, among others.  Process and procedures for identification, and 
partnering with NGOs and social entrepreneurs under this component may likely follow 
an Innovation and Partnership Development Guidelines that is currently under 
preparation, provided it is found agreeable by both MoRD and the WB.  
 
8. 
Component 4.  Project Implementation Support (US$100 million):  The objective 
of this component is to strengthen the National Mission Management Unit for effective 
project management at the national level that develops key systems and processes for 
coordination and management of the proposed project and the NRLM. Given that the 
NRLP, and more importantly the NRLM, will be implemented across India, there are 
substantial managerial requirements which are critical to ensure the satisfactory 
implementation of both the NRLP and NRLM. In this regard, a dedicated National 
Mission Management Unit (NMMU) has been established under the MoRD.  This 
component will finance technical assistance consultancies, training and related material, 
office equipment, MIS development, and operational costs. Support under this 
component will be for all states.  To achieve the objective of this component, the 
proposed project intends to support the following activities:  
 
a) 
National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) - strengthen the various functions 
of the NMMU to be able to manage, deliver and support all aspects of not only the 
NRLP, but also the NRLM.  
 
b)
Monitoring and Evaluation - given the geographic scale and magnitude of the 
resources and activities to be supported by the NRLP/NRLM, a comprehensive and 
robust monitoring and evaluation system will be established to not only track 
Page  5
implementation progress but also to provide meaningful reports on household level 
impacts and implementation experiences so as to enable MoRD and state governments to 
take corrective actions, if necessary.  
 
c) 
Electronic National Rural Livelihoods Management System (e-NRLMS) and ICT: 
The objective of this sub-component is to design, develop and roll out electronic National 
Rural Livelihoods Management System (e-NRLMS) using state of the art IT platform for 
hosting and delivering variety of project services like management information system 
(MIS), decision support systems (DSS), financial management system (FMS), etc. This 
digital grid connecting village to the national level will be Aadhar (UID) compliant and 
will be leveraged to deliver ICT based services to rural poor households in the last mile.  
 
d)
Governance and Accountability Framework - the NRLP would support the 
development and roll-out of a user friendly and highly responsive governance and 
accountability mechanism by which to ensure that all aspects of the proposed project are 
being implemented in accordance with agreed principles and procedures.  
 
e) 
Knowledge Management and Communication - incorporating lessons from 
experience and communicating consistent and significant messages at both a policy and 
operational level, is critical for the overall success of the NRLP/NRLM.  In this regard, 
the project will invest in a variety of products and services to enhance the generation and 
use of knowledge and communications as a key tool for enhancing the quality of the 
program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
9. 
The Project would be implemented intensively in the villages of 400 selected 
blocks (in approximately 100 districts) of 12 states of the country.  Some of these states 
(Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu) have been chosen because 
of their past experience in implementing Bank-supported livelihood projects.  The other 
states have been identified on the basis of their high incidence of poverty and large 
number of rural poor (Uttar Pradesh), large poor tribal populations (Jharkhand and 
Chhattisgarh), and high poverty at the sub-regional level, in some cases combined with a 
substantial pre-existing base of social capital (Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, West 
Bengal).  All states except Uttar Pradesh have significant tribal populations that live 
mostly in highland and/or forest areas (many badly deforested) or, in the case of 
Rajasthan, are nomadic desert tribes. Most areas have a mix of different tribes with 
unique cultural and linguistic characteristics.  All states also have substantial Scheduled 
Caste populations and most also have poor minority populations.  Along with tribal 
people, these groups are also highly excluded socially and economically.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASDS) 
Ms Priti Kumar (SASDI) 
Mr Varun Singh (SASDS) 
 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
10. 
Environment: The project would provide finances to institutions of the poor 
against livelihood and vulnerability plans as well as introduce special initiatives for 
livelihood enhancement such as sustainable agriculture, community-managed dairy, etc. 
The project activities are likely to contribute to better environmental quality (for 
example, sustainable agriculture).  However, improper management and poor capacities 
of the SHGs and village federations could lead to issues such as the following: (i) land 
degradation including soil erosion, (ii) poor water availability and quality, depletion of 
groundwater, (iii) improper use of agro-chemicals (imbalanced use of fertilizers, unsafe 
use of hazardous pesticides), (iv) decreasing fodder availability, and (v) degradation of 
forests (unsustainable extraction of forest produce, shifting agriculture, grazing).  No 
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged.  
 
11. 
In addition to Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), the safeguard policies on 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and Pest Management (OP/BP 
4.09) have been triggered recognizing the importance of integrating sustainable 
management practices in forest-dependent and agriculture-based livelihoods. The 
safeguard policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) has not been triggered as the project 
funds are unlikely to be used for community-level civil works such as small dams, 
embankments, etc. (where needed, these may be taken up through existing Government 
schemes such as the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, Integrated 
Watershed Management Programme, etc.).  Project funds would not support activities 
involving excavations, etc., that may impact physical cultural resources # hence, OP/BP 
4.11 is not triggered.  As no international waterways and disputed areas are involved 
OP/BP 7.50 and 7.60 are not triggered.  
 
12. 
Social: The key social safeguard policy issue is the need to ensure an equitable 
and culturally-compatible stream of benefits to tribal people and other vulnerable social 
and economic groups in the project areas (O.P. 4.10).  The project#s Social Assessment 
(SA) documents the key social lessons from earlier livelihood projects in India and 
Page  7
elsewhere, and findings of the field consultations carried out in representative project 
areas.  Tribal and other vulnerable groups were a key focus of the field consultations.  
The SA has identified the following social issues which apply to tribal areas: widespread 
exclusion of the poor and inclusion of non-poor in development/welfare programs due to 
the inaccuracy of official #Below Poverty Line# lists; high transaction and opportunity 
costs and systemic corruption restrict the poor#s access to social and livelihood services 
and benefits, particularly of the most deprived who cannot afford such costs and have to 
rely on middlemen; physical remoteness and dispersed habitations exclude people from 
information and access; restrictive social norms for women in some tribes and religions, 
language and literacy, and seasonal migration/long absences from villages also result in 
exclusion or poor participation. Financial exclusion is caused by long distances from 
banks, the latter#s reluctance to open low-value accounts, documentation and collateral 
requirements, low priority given to the poor, inflexible lending terms and corrupt 
practices.  The poor perceive banks as unfriendly, complicated, and meant for literate and 
rich people.  There is low awareness of and poor access to agricultural inputs, knowledge 
of improved practices, and markets. The project is expected to have significant positive 
and sustainable impacts for the poor, including tribal people.  These would be, among 
others: greater inclusion; improved direct access to information, programs and services; 
lower transaction costs; reduced social restrictions and migration; and enhanced financial 
inclusion.  
 
13. 
O.P. 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered as involuntary land 
acquisition and land purchase are not envisaged and are included in the project#s 
negative list.  Any community project that involves voluntary land donation would follow 
consultative and transparent procedures to substantiate the voluntariness of the donation 
and informed consent of the donor.  These procedures would be included in the Project 
Implementation Plan (PIP).  The consent of the land donor would be minuted in the 
resolutions of the Federation/SHG.  Any voluntary land donor from the vulnerable groups 
would be eligible for livelihood and other social assistance from the project or Gram 
Panchayat with the agreement of the Federation.  All rural enterprise and value chain 
projects would be subject to screening by the BMMUs/PFTs for any adverse 
social/safeguard impacts.  The Project Implementation Plan (PIP) would lay down the 
process and templates for social screening.  Appropriate training modules would be 
prepared and used in the training of the BMMUs/PFTs.  Their screening reports would be 
monitored by the Project#s District and State level Social Development Specialists who 
have also been trained in these procedures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
14. 
Environment:  No severe or long term impacts are expected due to SHG-based 
activities. Agriculture, livestock, minor forest produce and non-farm sectors are the 
predominant sectors in which rural poor households are involved. Further, as the 
experience of existing Bank projects has shown, the nature of activities/works taken up 
by the SHGs and federations is likely to remain so during the project duration.  
 
Page  8
15. 
Social:  No adverse impacts are expected from this project.  The potential long-
term positive impacts would be: social, economic and financial empowerment of the 
poorest households, especially of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and women.  
The poorest and most excluded households would have greater access to, security and 
sustainability of livelihood resources, and enhanced household incomes.  The project 
villages would most likely see greater cohesion amongst the poorest social groups, 
greater capacity and assertiveness among the poor in claiming their rights and 
entitlements, and better participation in local government structures and processes.  
Gender relations could improve as collective action gives women self-esteem and 
confidence to voice their needs and priorities in both the public and private spheres.  
Overall, the social dynamics and rural institutional environment are expected to be much 
more supportive of the livelihood needs of the poorest households.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
16. 
Environment: No significant adverse environmental impacts are anticipated in the 
project. The approach strategy of the EMF makes a departure from viewing EMF as a 
tool to merely safeguarding the environment to managing the environment in order to 
better secure the livelihoods. It also views potential environmental problems as 
opportunities for Green Solutions that may generate Green enterprises and jobs. The 
EMF proposes to achieve this through the following alternatives:  
 
#
EMF compliance with the mandatory regulatory requirements list would apply to 
all the 40,000 federations in the project and appropriate capacity building support for 
compliance with regulations and awareness building on better environmental practices in 
livelihood activities would be provided.  
 
#
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) at SHG Federation would be pilot tested 
in 360 SHG Federations spread across 12 states during Year-2 of the NRLP and if found 
successful after a mid-term evaluation, would be scaled up to eventually cover 12,000 
SHG Federations (30% all federations in project) by Year-5. The EMP would identify 
issues with respect to the local natural resources impacting the livelihoods, indicate 
actions for better environmental management and identify resources for implementation 
through the Project and other government schemes that can be made available to VOs.. 
To help the SHG Federations prepare the EMP, a cadre of Community Resource Persons 
(CRPs) called the Green-CRPs would be developed by the Project. The EMP would also 
help identify good Green Practices which could be converted into Green Opportunities 
for newer livelihoods, enterprises or jobs.  
 
#
The annual external environmental audits which would be undertaken in Years 2-
5, and includes cumulative impact assessment, would apply on a sample basis to all 
40,000 federations in the project.  
 
17. 
Social:  Previous projects of a similar nature developed #Tribal Development 
Plans# focused on tribal peoples, and this approach was the first alternative considered.  
In larger projects, Tribal Development Frameworks were prepared.  This project adopts 
the framework approach not only because the project is large and covers a vast area and 
millions of people but also because the project is expected to differ from place to place 
and evolve over time.  Different states and blocks would implement the institution-
Page  9
development processes at different paces, and further sub-project investments would not 
be known until the community institutions are functioning.  Further, because the project 
would extend to people who are as poor and excluded as tribal people, the Social 
Management Framework covers all such groups (including, for example, Scheduled 
Castes and poor minorities).  While no adverse social impacts are anticipated, this Social 
Management Framework would ensure that no harm comes to these groups and, in fact, 
that they # including tribal people - receive positive benefits from the project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
18. 
Environment:  The borrower#s capacity to plan and implement the measures is 
mixed. States that have implemented World Bank-supported livelihood projects are likely 
to have a higher level of readiness to implement the environment management framework 
compared to states where such projects have not been implemented. To streamline these 
capacities, it has been agreed with the Ministry of Rural Development that the National 
Mission Management Unit (NMMU) in New Delhi which is the project management unit 
for NRLP to have a National Environment Coordinator and National Environment 
Associate to monitor implementation of the environment management framework in the 
participating states. Further, the State Mission Management Unit (SMMU) of the State 
Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLM) constituted by the State Governments to implement 
the NRLP activities would have Environmental Focal Points at the state level, district 
levels and among the block level project facilitating teams to implement and monitor the 
EMF at decentralized levels. Provision has been made in the EMF to bring on board 
training and capacity building agencies and sector-specific resource professionals and 
practitioners that infuse natural resources management and sustainable environment 
practices into the Project.  
 
19. 
Social:  The SMF was prepared on the basis of the SA, including a review of 
existing livelihood projects and field consultations with primary project beneficiaries 
including tribal groups in four project states. A list of field consultations is provided 
below.  Six of the NRLP states have on-going Bank-assisted projects in which there is 
regular interaction with beneficiaries and other grassroots stakeholders including NGOs.  
Feedback from project participants including staff percolates upward, studies and surveys 
have been done, and consultations are carried out from time to time.  Information has 
been gathered from these projects and used in the social assessment.  Further 
consultations will be carried out in ¬all states during the state-specific poverty and social 
assessments and preparation of state Social Inclusion Plans (SIPs).  
 
20. 
The SMF addresses the issues and needs of tribal people and incorporates the key 
requirements of O.P. 4.10 especially with respect to consultations, #free, prior and 
informed consent# and #broad community support.#  In addition to the Social Inclusion 
Plans (SIPs), the SMF would ensure informed and continued consultation, participation 
and inclusion of the targeted beneficiaries across the project cycle in the selected states 
and blocks.  It calls for identification, mobilization, provision of information to, 
inclusion, and capacity-building of all vulnerable people, with a special focus on tribal 
people.  It would support the project interventions on financial inclusion, selection and 
Page  10
support of livelihoods, and measures to meet other needs such as social services and legal 
awareness.  The SMF includes the institutional arrangements at the national, state, district 
and sub-district levels that are necessary to implement the social dimensions of the 
project, and the characteristics of the community institutions that would be created and 
supported by the project.  It also provides for capacity-building activities for project staff, 
community institutions, partners, etc. at all levels to address social needs and risks.  
Finally, it also provides for monitoring of the social performance and impacts of the 
project through specific indicators at the intermediate and project levels.  These 
indicators are part of the project M&E which includes community monitoring, internal 
monitoring, external process monitoring, thematic reviews and social audits.  The SMF 
has been disclosed in-country and on the Bank#s website.  
 
21. 
Given the scale and scope of NRLP as a multi-state, multisector, multi-tiered 
livelihood program, the capacity building needs are large and complex.  The institutional 
capacities for adapting, implementing and monitoring the SMF are limited, varying 
significantly across project states.  States that have implemented World Bank-supported 
livelihood projects have better readiness and capacity compared to new ones such as 
Jharkhand, Maharashtra or U.P.  Hence, in additional to the national level, operational 
capacity needs to be built at the national, state, district and block levels.  Comprehensive 
and continuous capacity building of project staff and partners is a key part of the SMF, 
and a key responsibility of the NMMU and SMMUs.  Training, capacity building and 
technical assistance would be provided by specialized agencies engaged by project 
management.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
22. 
Environment: The key stakeholders in the proposed project include the rural poor 
in the Project blocks. In the states with existing Bank projects, they are represented by 
their SHGs and federations. A national consultation workshop was organized by GoI on 
February 7, 2011 in which more than 70 participants from Jharkhand Bihar, Orissa, 
Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Delhi were 
present. There was a mix of government officials and NGOs. A presentation on the EMF 
and the Green Opportunities was made to the entire group. A smaller group was then 
formed to discuss in detail the EMF and the Green Opportunities. The inputs from this 
consultation have been integrated into the EMF. The EMF was disclosed in English on 
the websites of MoRD#s National Rural Livelihood Mission on February 7, 2011. The 
EMF would be disclosed in English and the local languages on the websites of the State 
Departments of Rural Development and on the Bank#s Infoshop.  
 
23. 
Social: The most important stakeholders of the project are the rural poor and their 
organizations, including SHGs, federations, producer organizations and government and 
non-governmental organizations working on rural poverty reduction and livelihoods 
advancement. The MoRD has held stakeholder consultations in order to inform the 
design and implementation of the project and address the limitations of existing rural 
development programs that target the poorest and most excluded groups. The following 
field consultations were also held.  
Page  11
State/District Consultations  Dates  
 
Bihar/Gaya   7 Community consultations with PRI members, SHGs, youth, poor men 
and women, landless, wage laborers, scheduled castes, and farmers +1 Block level +1 
District level   Nov. 26-28, 2010  
 
Bihar/Saharsa 
11 Community consultations with PRI members, youth, SC men, 
SHGs, SHGs and landless in flood affected areas, wage laborers, SC men and women, 
poorest group, health workers, disabled and farmers +1 Block level +1 District level 
 
Dec. 5-10, 2010  
 
Bihar State level 
Dec. 11, 2010  
 
Jharkhand/  
 
Dumka 
9 Community consultations with Primitive Tribal Group (PTG), Santhal 
tribals, Muslims, youth, other STs, artisans, farmers, SCs, other backward  castes and 
SHGs +1 Block level +1 District level  
Dec. 20-29, 2010  
 
Jharkhand/  
 
Gumla 
18 Community consultations with STs and ST SHG, 3 ST women and 
men, 3 PTGs/ PTG SHGs, , marginal farmers, SC/SC women,/SHGs/ men, potters, youth 
+
2
Block level (NGOs and AWWs) +3 District level (Government officials, agri-agency, 
NGOs) Dec. 20-29, 2010  
 
Jharkhand 
State level + NGO  
Dec. 30, 2010  
 
M.P./  
 
Tikamgarh 
6 Community consultations with PRIs, Farmers, ST, SHG, Youth, OBC + 
1
Block level +1 District level  
Nov. 29 # Dec. 5, 2010  
 
M.P./  
 
Narsingpur 
8 Community consultations with PRIs, Farmers, ST, SC, Muslim, SHG 
women and men, Youth, OBC, elderly women and widows + 1 Block level +1 District 
 
Dec. 6-13, 2010  
 
M.P.  State level 
Dec. 14, 2010  
 
Karnataka/  
 
Bijapur 
15 Community consultations with poor, SC and Muslim women SHGs, 
widows, PRIs, Farmers, STs, SCs, Muslim, OBC, SHG women and men, Youth, SC men, 
OBC + 1 Block level +1 District level  
Jan 15-24, 2011  
 
Karnataka/  
 
Bidar 13 Community consultations with  SC-ST SHG, SC and Muslim women SHGs,  
PRIs, artisans, men, widows, Farmers, STs, SCs, Muslim, OBC, SHG women/ men, SC 
men and women, SC Youth, Teachers, Disabled + 1 Block level +1 District level  Jan 15-
24, 2011  
 
Karnataka 
State level 
Jan 25, 2011  
 
24. 
During implementation, primary stakeholders, community institutions, project 
staff, other government departments, partner agencies and NGOs would be consulted as 
follows:  
 
a) 
Community level consultations with tribal and non-tribal groups during the state 
poverty and social assessments, village entry and participatory assessment processes, 
Page  12
social mobilization and institution-building processes, preparation of plans for 
microcredit, livelihoods and rural enterprises, and innovation/piloting proposals;  
 
b)
District/Block level consultations with DMMUs, government departments, 
DRDAs, partner NGOs, PRIs, training and resource agencies, and some community 
institutions during district and block review meetings;  
 
c) 
State level consultations with district administrations, government departments, 
partner NGOs, training and resource agencies, some community institutions during the 
state rural poverty and livelihood assessment, perspective/annual planning, project review 
meetings and learning events;  
 
d)
National level engagement with NRLM committee members, NMMU thematic 
and functional units, SMMUs, Social Development experts, NGO representatives during 
project reviews and national workshop/learning events.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2011 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  13
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  14
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Parmesh Shah 
02/24/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Priti Kumar 
02/24/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Meera Chatterjee 
02/24/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Varun Singh 
02/24/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/24/2011 
Comments:  cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
02/24/2011 
Comments:  Cleared 
