                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/02/2011                                       Report No.: 61708
1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                  Project ID: P119085
Project Name: National Ganga River Basin Project
Task Team Leader: Sanjay Pahuja
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 9, 2011         Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDI                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (40%);General
water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%);Sewerage (30%)
Theme: Water resource management (60%);Environmental policies and institutions
(20%);Pollution management and environmental health (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           820.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            180.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            556.00
                                                                       556.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the project are to support the National Ganga River Basin Authority
(NGRBA) in:
 (a) building capacity of its nascent operational-level institutions, so that they can
manage the long-term Ganga clean-up and conservation program; and
 (b)    implementing a diverse set of demonstrative investments for reducing point-
source pollution loads in a sustainable manner, at priority locations on the Ganga.

3. Project Description
The project will have two components relating to institutional development and priority
infrastructure investments. The first component seeks to build the institutional capacity to
effectively implement the overall NGRBA Program, including infrastructure investments
funded by the second component.

 Component One: Institutional Development (US$ 200 million)
 The objectives of this component are to: (i) build functional capacity of the NGRBA#s
operational institutions at both the central and state levels; and (ii) provide support to
associated institutions for implementing the NGRBA Program. The activities financed
under this component are grouped under the following sub-components:
 (a) NGRBA Operationalization and Program Management
 (b) Technical Assistance for ULB Service Providers
 (c) Technical Assistance for Environmental Regulators

  Sub-component A: NGRBA Operationalization and Program Management
  This sub-component is aimed at supporting the nascent operational institutions
established for implementing the NGRBA Program at the central and state levels on a full
time basis. The operational institutions comprise the NGRBA Program Management
Group (PMG) at the central level, and SGRCA Program Management Groups (SPMGs)
at the state level.

 The following are the main NGRBA Program activities included under this sub-
component:
 a.      Institutional Support to the PMG and the SPMGs. The sub-component will
support the initial setup costs of office infrastructure and equipment, incremental
professional staffing, as well as provision of critical consultancies, training, and operation
costs, for the PMG and the SPMGs. This support would therefore enable these
institutions to manage the entire NGRBA Program, including the activities and
investments not funded under the World Bank project.

 b.      Enhancing Ganga Knowledge Resources: The sub-component will support the
establishment of a state-of-the-art Ganga Knowledge Center (GKC) with the objectives
of: (i) serving as the global repository of knowledge resources and as the information
clearing house for all matters pertaining to the Ganga; (ii) addressing critical gaps in
knowledge generation and management, including through a global network of experts;
and (iii) improving information access for the public and decision-makers, including
through close coordination with the NGRBA communications program. The GKC will be
an integral part of the PMG.

 c.    Communications and Public Participation: The sub-component will finance a
dedicated communications and public participation program, undertaken in partnership
with community-based organizations, school and college student groups, and the media.
The communications and outreach efforts will build upon the existing vibrant discourse
and grassroots campaigns on the Ganga, including those led by some of the civil society
members of the NGRBA.

 Sub-component B: Technical Assistance for ULB Service Providers
 This sub-component will support the ULBs as well as local-level water and wastewater
service providers, through provision of modern and efficient information and planning
systems, training, equipment for managing physical systems, and technical assistance for
improving revenue/cost recovery to ensure sustainability of local investments.
 Sub-component C: Technical Assistance for Environmental Regulators
 This will support capacity building of the central and state pollution control boards, to
address the key constraints related to their functions regarding the Ganga, focusing on
improving information systems, staff skills, laboratory accreditation, and infrastructure
facilities. Some of the key activities include:
 a.      Upgradation of the Water Quality Monitoring System (WQMS) The sub-
component will support a system of automatic and high quality collection of water
quality data from more than 100 priority monitoring locations along the mainstem and
some important tributaries of the Ganga, addressing the needs for both technical and
institutional modernization.

 b.     Comprehensive inventorying of pollution sources The location, flows and
pollution loading characteristics of all large point source discharge locations on the
mainstem of Ganga will be mapped to create a basin-level inventory. Studies will be
supported to estimate the extent and relative contributions of the non-point source
pollution of various origins. This work, to be implemented in the first year, will start
addressing the baseline information needs for the Ganga basin.

 c.    Strengthening environmental compliance monitoring Surveillance for regulation
compliance will be strengthened for the Central and State Pollution Control Boards, by
improving information systems and support for incremental staffing.

 Component Two: Priority Infrastructure Investments (US$ 1,356 million)

 The objective of this component is to finance demonstrative infrastructure investments
in key sectors to reduce pollution loads in priority locations on the river. The investments
are intended to exemplify, among other attributes, the high standards of technical
preparation and implementation, sustainability of operations, and public participation
envisaged in the NGRBA framework. This component will also support innovative pilots
for new and transformative technologies or implementation arrangements.

  This component will support demonstrative investments in all the main sectors that are
key to addressing the pollution in the Ganga. The majority of investments are expected to
be in the wastewater sector, particularly in WWTPs and sewerage networks. Investments
will also be supported in industrial pollution control and prevention (e.g. common
effluent treatment plants), solid waste management (e.g. collection, transport and disposal
systems), and river front management (e.g. improvement of the built environment along
river stretches, improvement of small ghats and electric crematoria, and the conservation
and preservation of ecologically sensitive sites). Some investments may combine
elements of more than one of these sectors.

 In lieu of defining and appraising specific investments, the project preparation has
focused on developing an investments framework covering all four key sectors of
intervention under the NGRBA Program. This single framework will apply to all
investments under the NGRBA Program, including investments to be financed with the
government’s own resources. The objectives of the investments framework are to:
 a.    provide a filter for all the NGRBA investments, for ensuring that the selected
investments are well-prepared and amongst the most effective in reducing the pollution
loads;
 b.    make transparent the decision-making process on investments selection; and
 c.    ensure that the investments are implemented in a sustainable manner.

 Given the long-term nature of the NGRBA Program and the fact that the universe of
potential investments is large, the adoption of the framework approach effectively sets
the #rules of the game#, and will allow infrastructure investments to be selected on a
dynamic and ongoing basis.

  The Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) are ready for a large number of potential
investments, although they require review and improvements in order to meet the
NGRBA framework standards. While the GoI has initiated the process of developing a
basin-level approach to planning of the Ganga clean-up, the early investments of the
NGRBA Program (which will include the investments supported by this project) will be
limited to interventions which are in obvious priority locations and which can make a
positive demonstration impact in terms of sustainable operations and water quality
improvements. The investments will be selected to include potential early successes and
support for strong local demand and ownership. Investments worth approximately US$
150 million are currently undergoing technical review and environmental/social
assessment, for approval and implementation in the first year of the project.

 The investments framework prescribes the criteria and quality assurance standards
covering various aspects including eligibility, prioritization, planning, technical
preparation, financial and economic analyses, environmental and social management,
long term O&M sustainability, community participation, and local institutional capacity.
Examples of key criteria are presented below:
 (a) Explicit Consent of ULBs No NGRBA investments will be appraised without
explicit and informed consent of the relevant ULB. This consent will indicate a clear
recognition of the nature, scale and cost of the investment, and the ULB’s own roles and
responsibilities with regards to asset ownership and long-term O&M.
 (b) Technology Selection Technology selection for wastewater treatment will be
made on lowest lifecycle cost basis, specified for the local conditions and required degree
of treatment.
 (c) Design-Build-Operate (DBO) and other Long Term Contracts All investments
with significant O&M costs (such as WWTPs, pumping stations, landfills and waste
processing) will be developed and managed under long term contracts (either Design-
Build-Operate [DBO] or other kinds) including 15 years of O&M. This will bring
enhanced accountability, adequate capacity and resources, and strong performance
incentives to the sector.
 (d) Capitalization of initial O&M Costs In the wastewater sector, the first 5 years of
O&M costs, will be included in the total cost for each DPR, and will be financed on a
shared basis by the central and state governments. For other sectors, O&M costs may be
capitalized on a case-by-case basis, depending on needs and revenue generation potential.
  (e) House Connections Plans and cost of providing house connections up to property
line must be included in the DPRs for sewerage investments. The ULBs will implement
outreach and other actions to encourage households to connect up to these points.
  (f)   Industry Commitment to O&M Industrial pollution DPRs must include
appropriate affidavits from industries outlining commitment to ensure satisfactory
operation of common facilities.
  (g) Environmental and social management All investments will comply with the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) developed for the NGRBA
program, which requires identification of possible impacts and proactive management
measures for addressing them.
  (h) Area Development Wherever possible, river front management investments must
take an area development approach, both to achieve spatial scale along wider and longer
stretches of the river, and to integrate across sectors.

 The project will finance pilot investments in order to promote and demonstrate
innovative technologies and implementation arrangements. The potential pilot areas
identified so far include net-energy positive wastewater treatment technologies and
innovative Public-Private Participation (PPP) financing models which have not been used
in the Ganga basin states.

 The investments program will be planned and managed by the NGRBA PMG and
SPMGs. Execution of the infrastructure investments will be done by the Executing
Agencies (EAs), selected specifically for each investment. The five EAs proposed for
early investments under the project include the existing state-level technical agencies
which have the mandate of urban infrastructure (especially wastewater) management in
their respective states. Most of these agencies have been working for a few decades, and
have significant expertise and experience in preparation and implementation of
infrastructure projects in the four key sectors of the NGRBA Program. Procurement and
FM assessments have been conducted for these existing state-level agencies. The World
Bank will perform its due diligence on any new entity proposed as the EA for any
investment funded under the project.

 Investments involving rehabilitation of existing infrastructure will be included on a
priority basis, due to their intrinsically higher returns in terms of reductions in pollution
loads entering the Ganga.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Project area is the Ganga River Basin in India in the five states of Uttarakhand, Uttar
Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal. Other states in the basin are currently not
included in the NGRBA program and are therefore not included in the Project area.
Given the proposed framework approach, exact locations of infrastructure investments
are not yet known. However, given the emphasis on investment prioritization according
to greatest pollution reduction impact, it is expected that a significant portion will be in
the critical stretch from Kannauj to Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh. All project investments
will be along the mainstem of the river and along the tributaries that have significant
pollution impacts on the mainstem (e.g. the Ramganga River in Uttarakhand and UP).
Institutional strengthening and capacity building aspects of the proposed Project will be
basin-wide across the five specified states.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Ramachandran R. Mohan (SASDS)
   Mr Venkata Rao Bayana (SASDS)
   Mr Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)
   Mr Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (SASDI)
   Mr Pyush Dogra (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. A Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The environment and social assessment
(ESA) process adopted for the project took a holistic approach, assessed environmental
and social issues at a macro and micro level, identified associated risks and potential
impacts, and recommended management measures. Analysis of past projects, such as the
Ganga Action Plan (GAP) or the various schemes under the National River Conservation
Program (NRCP), clearly indicated that, at an overall level, there had not been any
substantial adverse affects from these programs, and there had not been any adverse
commentary or stakeholder opinion about negative social or environmental impacts. In
fact, the majority of the stakeholder opinion around these programs was about the need to
scale these up, and about the potential negative environmental and public health impacts
due to (i) the delay or partial completion of the activities under the scheme, (ii) the lack
of additional capacity and resources hampering operation of the assets created by the
programs, and (iii) the lack of expansion of these programs.

 Basin level issues: During stakeholder consultations undertaken in April-December
2010, a number of suggestions came to the fore. These mainly pointed out the ways the
proposed program can be augmented; but also pointed out a few issues that may arise at
specific locations of sub-project interventions. The stakeholders pointed out the need for
(i) involvement of local communities and agencies in planning and monitoring the
activities of the Project; (ii) ensuring the construction stage safeguards to avoid impacts
on neighboring communities and the construction workers; (iii) safeguarding and
minimizing impacts on social and cultural practices; (iv) promotion of awareness of
pollution load in the Ganga among the local religious institutions and their involvement
in various stages; (v) ensuring minimum ecological flows in the river for various critical
activities including for the sustenance of the aquatic life; (vi) inclusion of solid waste
management activities in addition to wastewater treatment facilities as possible sub-
projects; (vii) ensuring selection of suitable selection sites for the sub-project to minimize
impacts on communities and local environmental impacts; and (viii) creation of ’Ganga
Heritage Zone’ and preparation of a specialized master plan for the Ganga Basin Area.
Most of these were suggestions that were expected, and the project design was already in
the process of incorporating most of these ideas. There are several investments in the
project states that similar to one proposed under the project which are executed by local
level entities either under JNURM or with some other funding. Most of them are in the
advanced stage of implementation. The ESMF prepared for the NGRBA programme will
not be applicable on such investments and will not be supervised by the Bank


  Site level potential environmental issues. A further analysis of a sample of past
interventions by the ESA suggested that environmental impacts may arise if the sub-
project interventions are not designed, executed or operated appropriately. These impacts
could be due to a variety of reasons, such as (a) potential siting of sub-projects such as
sewage treatment facilities, common effluent treatment plants, solid waste disposal
facilities in environmentally sensitive locations such as flood plains, drainage paths,
natural water bodies or close to wildlife sanctuaries or other natural habitats, leading to
long-term impacts; to be addressed through careful screening and analysis of alternatives
sites early during the feasibility study; (b) potential absence of sludge/waste disposal and
management and leachate facilities in the proposed sub-projects, particularly in the
industrial pollution control and solid waste management sub-projects wherein the
treatment methods use various chemicals and polyelectrolytes, and consequent disposal
of untreated sludge and other organic waste into the Ganga and other nearby sensitive
habitats in the basin; to be carefully considered during selection of appropriate treatment
technologies and design of these various facilities; (c) inadequate management of
environmental issues such as disposal of construction wastes during the construction of
the sub-projects, including inadequate precautions to avoid contamination of the Ganga
and all nearby water bodies; air pollution, excessive noise and other nuisance to the
nearby communities; vibration and pollution impacts on nearby physical cultural
resources; inadequate attention to the occupational health and workers# safety issues; all
of such issues to be addressed by specific provision of generic environmental, health and
safety provisions in all work contracts; (d) inadequate maintenance of the facilities
created by sub-projects, depending on their locations, leading to continuation and or
further deterioration of river water quality, deterioration of ambient environmental
quality, negative impacts on the aquatic and other habitats, and possible degradation soil
or contamination of groundwater, and associated health impacts on the communities in
the sub-project surrounding; all of which would need to be addressed in sub-project level
environmental and social assessments and mitigation measures to be included in the
operation and maintenance management plans of the sub-projects. In most cases direct
environmental impacts will be negligible, but preparation and implementation of the sub-
projects may overlook the indirect impacts on-site and at the periphery of the
construction sites. In cases where the possibilities of indirect impacts cannot be fully
discounted (e.g., as related to sourcing of construction materials), management actions
are proposed in the ESMF and as part of the preparation and implementation
requirements of the sub-projects which include specific environmental and social
examination of options and due diligence.

 Based on the specific recommendations from the detailed ESA for the High Impact
Category sub-projects, and the relevant portions of the social and environmental
measures for the Low Impact Category sub-projects, the SPMGs and the executing
agencies will ensure that all required measures are included clearly and distinctly in the
detailed project reports and the bid documents of the sub-projects. Further, the SPMGs
and the executing agencies will, as part of the annual action plans, will endeavor to select
and design sub-projects with an aim to maximize the long-term benefits and promote
environmentally sustainable actions for the basin. All investments will be expressly
designed to preserve the natural and cultural heritage of the riverfront communities.

  Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): Nothing included or potentially included in the project
involves degradation or conversion of natural habitats. No project activity will involve
any (significant or insignificant) conversion or degradation of natural habitats (whether
legally protected or not). No activity in the project will include anything to affect (i) the
integrity of the natural habitats (by land use or water use), (ii) land clearing or
replacement of natural vegetation, (iv) permanent or temporary flooding of natural
habitats or any (v) drainage, dredging, filling or channelization of wetlands. The project
interventions by way of reducing the pollution load in the river will protect and enhance
sustenance of these sensitive habitats. This is best illustrated by the NGRBA#s vision to
revive Gangetic dolphins in the river as an indicator of success in the Project. Activities
in Component 1 of the Project are also designed to enhance capacities required to manage
long-term conservation needs.

  However, it is important to note that there are number of environmentally sensitive areas
in the Project States including two biosphere reserves, 27 national parks (5 of which are
tiger reserves also) and 75 wild life sanctuaries. Almost all of the sensitive areas are away
from the mainstem of the river or from the key cities where most of the sub-projects are
expected to be implemented, and all of these protected areas are intricately dependent on
the tributaries of the Ganga for sustenance of the quality of the habitats. However, a part
of the riverfront in Varanasi (from Ghat no. 1 to the Road Over-bridge) is notified as a
Turtle Sanctuary. The environmental assessment/analysis of each sub-project will,
therefore ensure that the sub-projects do not (i) involve any construction activities within
5km of any habitats such as spawning or breeding grounds, or (ii) cause any direct or
indirect impacts on wildlife and associated vegetations during construction or operation
phase. The project will monitor chances of any accidental impacts through safeguard
audits and will implement necessary actions to avoid or mitigate such impacts. Project
will monitor the chances of third-party impacts on ecological resources adjacent to the
mainstem of the river, and in the event of any third party impacts, quick actions will be
taken during project implementation period, including, for example, mobilizing resources
from the undisbursed balances to facilitate and undertake, as and when necessary the
requisite mitigation or impact reduction measures.

  Forests (OP/BP 4.36): The project will not: (i) include any logging; (ii) impact the
health or quality of any forest; (iii) either increase or decrease access or rights of
communities to forests or minor forest produce; or (iv) propose to bring about any
changes in management, protection and utilization of forests in the basin. Overall impact
of the project on forests, flora and fauna of the basin will be beneficial from the reduced
pollution load and the potential for improved ecological flows in the medium and longer
term. As far as possible, trees if any present in the sites for sub-project investments, such
as for sewage treatment plants, will be saved by careful site planning.

 Pest Management (OP 4.09): The project will not use, or directly/indirectly promote use
of any chemical or synthetic pesticides or herbicides, including in site clearance for sub-
projects.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): Considering the proposed interventions in
River Front Management and other cultural properties, the project triggers OP 4.11 on
Physical Cultural Resources. The project will support conservation, renovation and
restoration of cultural properties located in the stretches of riverfront taken up for
management. All architectural conservation and restoration works will be undertaken by
specialized supervisors and craftsmen. The policy is triggered to ensure that the
architectural conservation and restoration works are undertaken at the best professional
standards, and are duly supervised. In addition to the riverfront management sub-projects,
the project will ensure that cultural values are preserved while planning and
implementing all other sub-projects; and this concern will be prominently included in the
design of the sub-projects.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): The indigenous peoples (IPs) in India are defined as
tribal people. The scheduled tribes are recognized as a vulnerable community, accepted to
have endured disadvantages in terms of social indicators of quality of life, economic
status and sometimes as subject of social exclusion. In the five states through which the
mainstem of the Ganga flows, Jharkhand (26.4 per cent) has a significant proportion of
scheduled tribe population followed by West Bengal (5.5 per cent) and Uttarakhand (3
per cent), whereas in Uttar Pradesh and in Bihar, the scheduled tribes are less than 1 per
cent of the total population. Scheduled tribes are present in all districts along the
mainstem of the Ganga, except in two districts of Uttar Pradesh (Jyotiba Phule Nagar and
Kannauj). The only district where the scheduled tribe population is substantial (31 per
cent of total population) is Sahebganj in Jharkhand. Otherwise, the scheduled tribe
population is small in the districts along the Ganga # varying from 0.1 per cent in Tehri
Garhwal to 0.9 per cent in Uttarkashi within Uttarakhand; from 0.1 per cent in Ghazipur,
Bullandshahr and Ballia to 0.9 per cent in Allahabad within Uttar Pradesh; from 0.03 per
cent in Khagaria to 5.9 per cent in Katihar within Bihar; and from 0.2 per cent in Kolkata
to 8.3 per cent in Paschim Medinipur district within West Bengal. Given that all sub-
project interventions will be in urban areas and urban fringes, it is unlikely that any tribal
habitat will be found on or adjacent to any of the sub-project sites. The project will avoid,
to the extent possible, acquisition of any land owned by a tribal family.

 As part of the ESMF, an Indigenous Peoples Management Framework (IPMF) has been
prepared by the Project. Implementation of the IPMF will ensure that (a) participation of
the scheduled tribes will be effectively promoted in preparation and construction and
operation of the sub-projects; (b) inclusion of the neighboring scheduled tribe
communities in the design process, as and when they are located in close proximity of the
sub-projects to achieve the maximum possible positive impact of such communities; (c)
the design, execution and operation of the sub-projects, such as the riverfront
management activities are culturally appropriate; (d) the sub-projects including the works
and services associated with these do not inadvertently induce inequality by limiting sub-
project benefits to the elites of the community; (e) that all executing agencies engage with
communities through a consultation process appropriate to the local cultural context and
local decision-making processes; and (f) the sub-project activities including the
resettlement action plans, wherever relevant, establish appropriate information,
communication, and inclusion measures targeted at the scheduled tribe and other
vulnerable sections of the communities.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): According to an examination of the preliminary
list of potential sub-project investment works, there will be need for private land
acquisition both in urban areas and urban fringes, which might result in involuntary
resettlement and potential loss of livelihood. Nonetheless, such land acquisition and
resultant involuntary resettlement is likely be small scale, and unlikely to trigger any need
for a full-scale resettlement action plan. To The program guidelines, including processes
and review of the sub-project feasibility studies will ensure that acquisition of private
landholding is absolutely minimized. There is also a strong possibility that in some of the
urban areas where sub-projects will be taken up in the later years during the project, the
land parcels earmarked for public use such as constructed landfills or sewage treatment
plans are already encroached. Squatters on the public land reserved for sewerage
infrastructure is not unknown in India, although no such cases came to notice in the
sample sites investigated. To cope with such possibilities, the Project has prepared a
Resettlement Policy and Land Acquisition Framework (RPLAF), included in the ESMF.

  The social and environmental categorization of the sub-projects and the subsequent
procedures for scoping of the social issues described in the ESMF will identify the nature
of examination and analyses to be included during the feasibility studies and the
preparation of the detailed project reports for the sub-projects. Wherever possibilities of
land acquisition and chances of displacement of any individual or group of individuals
are found, the RPLAF will be fully applied.
  The RPLAF specifies procedures to be followed in the event that resettlement or land
acquisition is required for any sub-project, including procedures for identification of
persons entitled, their entitlement for compensation and/or resettlement assistance, and
the consultation and grievance redress mechanisms. Once the sites of the sub-project
works are known during the project implementation period, individual resettlement
and/or land acquisition plans will be prepared, in the event that any person is displaced or
is likely to suffer adverse livelihood impacts after a detailed site level assessment. These
resettlement action plans will be reviewed and accepted by the SPMG, the PMG and the
Bank in advance of the commencement of sub-project works in each specific site. The
RPLAF will apply to parallel activities undertaken by the executing agencies if these
activities are found to be (a) directly and significantly related to the Bank-assisted project
or sub-projects, (b) necessary to achieve its objectives as set forth in the project
documents; and (c) carried out, or planned to be carried out, contemporaneously with the
project.

  The sub-projects will have two stages of clearances # first for the feasibility study and
thereafter for the detailed project report. The candidate sites for any sub-project will be
identified, and an analysis of alternatives will be carried out by the feasibility study to
avoid or minimize involuntary resettlement, as far as possible without impacting the sub-
project objectives. This process of the feasibility study will be supported by ESA of the
Category I sub-projects. Once the best suitable site is finalized (incorporating the need to
avoid or minimize involuntary resettlement), and all requirements of land acquisition are
identified, a detailed plan and schedule for land acquisition will be prepared. The process
of land acquisition will be initiated as soon as the feasibility report is cleared by SPMG
and PMG, so that the initial processes for land acquisition (called #notification under
section 4(1)# under the country land acquisition laws) could be completed before
finalization and clearance of the detailed project report or financial closure wherever
DBO contracts are used.

 Once the feasibility report is cleared and DPR is under preparation, each sub-project
will complete rest of the land acquisition process (#notifications under 6, 9 and 11# will
be issued) so that so that entire land required for the sub project is acquired before the
mobilization of contractors. In parallel a sub-project resettlement action plan will be
prepared, and will be reviewed and cleared as part of the process of clearance of the
detailed project report and sanction for the work to commence. The resettlement action
plan will include detailed description of the compensation if any and resettlement
assistance to be paid to each entitled person, family or community, with special
additional provision for persons and families belonging to vulnerable communities. In
Jharkhand private land acquisition owned by a tribal family will additionally comply with
the Santhal Pargana Tenancy Act of 1949.
 During the implementation phase, an annual social and environmental audit will be
carried out to acquire feedback on performance of the sub projects and record citizens#
recommendations for improvement. Additionally, an external evaluation of the RAP
implementation prepared under NGRBP will also be undertaken twice during the
implementation of the project # midterm and at the end of the implementation.
  Social Impacts: While the Project is expected to benefit Ganga Basin communities, poor
implementation of sub-projects could lead to adverse impacts on people and land.
Potential social impacts during the construction phase of sub-projects include: loss of
land or structures, loss of access to areas for livelihood support, inadequate public safety,
noise, and other disruptions at sensitive receptors such as schools and health centers. Site
selection for major facilities, such as wastewater treatment plants, can be expected to be
locally controversial among directly affected people and other stakeholders. Social
impacts can be grouped into three categories: (i) direct (e.g. loss of properties, income
and livelihood); (ii) indirect (e.g. loss of access during construction); and (iii) perceived
(e.g. perception of decline in property values adjacent to STP, landfill sites, etc).

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
All interventions proposed under the project share the long term objective of improving
the water quality of Ganga. By virtue of this very objective, the environmental impacts of
the project are expected to be positive, beneficial, and aimed towards long term
sustainability. The project is also expected to improve, the overall health profile of the
project cities by way of reducing the incidence of water-borne diseases and, thereby,
indirectly increasing the productivity of the work force. At a cumulative level, the
impacts are beneficial, and the NGRBA program guidelines and the regular monitoring
processes will ensure that these beneficial impacts are enhanced.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for safeguard
management in the project requires analyzing various alternatives for each sub-project
while carrying out respective Environmental and Social Assessments (ESA). As per the
agreed policies of ESMF, these ESAs will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to
approving the sub-projects for implementation. In addition to the ESMF, and in order to
ensure integration of social and environmental issues in the long-term River Basin
Management Plan, the project will undertake a Strategic Social and Environmental
Assessment (SSEA) and Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) for the entire
basin during implementation. The recommendations of SSEA and PSIA will be suitably
integrated in various activities of the project and future initiatives of NGRBA.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Preparation of Environmental and Social Profile of Ganga Basin and Safeguard
Management Framework: Considering the significance of project interventions, the
borrower through independent consultants has prepared an Environmental and Social
Profile of Ganga Basin which formed the basis for the preparation of Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the project. The ESMF details out the
policies, procedures and institutional responsibilities for assessing and managing the
potential environmental and social risks and impacts that may come up throughout the
project cycle of NGRBP sub-projects, and is intended for use and application by the
agencies responsible for the execution of the investment sub-projects under each
component, to be implemented in NGRBA program.
 The framework categorizes the potential sub-projects of NGRBA into (i) High Impact
Category Projects - requiring detailed Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) and
preparation of specific Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and (ii) Low
Impact Category Projects - requiring implementation of environmental and social
management measures (EMP). Considering the fact that a majority of the sub-projects
(except common industrial effluent treatment plants and landfill projects) do not require
conducting EAs as per the environmental regulations in India, this categorization and
associated implementation procedures in the ESMF, demonstrate borrower#s
commitment and willingness to undertake improved management of environmental and
social issues.
 The ESMF provides detailed guidance, and sample terms of reference and reporting
structures, for compliance. Each sub-project will be subject to the further risk mitigation
measures, including the preparation of a detailed Environmental Management Plans
(ESMP) and Social Impact Assessment and/or Rehabilitation Action Plan (RAP) as
applicable. The ESMF will be applied to all investments sanctioned under the NGRBA
Program. It is however, important to note that, there are several investments in the project
area/cities, which are similar to those proposed under the current project, being
implemented with an objective of improving the sewerage and sanitation facilities. These
projects are executed by local level entities either under the ongoing national programs
such as JNNURM or through other funding agencies. Most of them are in the advanced
stage of implementation. The ESMF prepared for the NGRBA programme will not be
applicable on such investments and will not be supervised by the Bank. The World Bank
supervision of safeguards implementation in specific sub-projects will be limited to the
investments supported under this project.

 ESMF further includes the following: (1) a Resettlement Policy and Land Acquisition
Framework (RPLAF); (2) an Indigenous Peoples Management Framework (IPMF); (3) a
Gender Development Framework (GDF); (4) an integrated Grievance Redress
Mechanism (GRM); (5) Specific procedures on public consultation and disclosure; (6)
Environmental and Social Monitoring Arrangements covering selection, appraisal and
implementation of sub-projects; (7) schedule, procedures and terms of reference for
periodic environmental and social audits; and (8) a plan to augment institutional capacity
of the implementing agencies to manage environmental and social issues in the project.

 Assessment borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures: The project will be
implemented by the Ministry of Environment & Forests (through the PMG) and will
prominently include the Central Pollution Control Board, and the State Pollution Control
Boards. The mandate and primary function of these agencies is to protect and conserve
the environment, through a mix of regulatory, institutional and financial tools. These
agencies employ the best environmental professionals in the country, and have invested
for a long time in specialized institutes, such as the Botanical Survey of India and the
Zoological Survey of India and the Wildlife Institute of India for research and
development of application tools on environmental conservation and pollution
management. There is no obvious skill gap, particularly with respect to institutional
arrangements for addressing environmental safeguard issues that may arise in relation to
the project in general; even if these institutions admittedly face considerable resource
gaps to fulfill the needs of a rapidly emerging economy. On social safeguard issues
though (which are the domain of separate ministries in GoI and separate departments in
state governments) the PMG and the SPMGs and their associated organizations do not
have adequate capacity, and will depend on the relevant state departments, particularly
those that address issues of land acquisition and consequent resettlement and
rehabilitation. The PMG and the SPMGs will also be able to draw on other institutions,
such as the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute or the National
productivity Council for resolving issues related to environmental and social safeguards.
The Project includes sufficient resources for involving expert institutions to advice on the
adaptive management of both known and unforeseen issues.

 The Project has identified areas and opportunities for augmenting the capacity to
manage the social and environmental issues; specifically as the PMG and SPMGs are
expected to be full-fledged implementation entities with clear mandates and
accountabilities. Staffing plan for the PMG and the SPMGs include adequate number of
specialists in the area of environmental management and social development. These
staffing, training and continuing skill development programs, other resources that will be
required for effective management of the environmental issues, and the required budget
had been recommended and described in the ESMF; and have already been included in
the design of the implementation arrangements and institutional design for the Project.
Several staff with expertise in managing the environmental and social assessment
processes had been recruited, and they were involved in reviewing and finalizing the
ESMF. Once safeguard documents are reviewed by PMG, it will be forwarded to Bank.
All investment specific ESIA, EMP and RAP will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank
before bids for civil works are invited.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The ESMF benefitted from inputs derived from a wide spectrum of stakeholder
consultations and opinions, some of which were carried out during preparation of the
project, and some others which in the last several years opined on the evaluation of the
GAP and the national river conservation program, as well as which were conducted by
the GoI to finalize the program and the notification for the NGRBA. The ESMF was
developed based on a consultation process that sought feedback from key stakeholders.
Disclosure and consultation on the ESMF, including the Resettlement and Land
Acquisition Policy Framework, the Gender Development Framework, and the Indigenous
Peoples Management Framework, were both done at the national, state and local/city
levels.

 To initiate the process of preparation of ESMF, a first round of consultations were held
with the state level stakeholders in April, September and October, 2010. The objective
was to obtain consent from the states on ESMF in general and specifically on the land
acquisition processes and the resettlement framework. The next round of consultations at
local levels were held during the months of December 2010 and January 2011 in all the
five participating states to get feedback and suggestions from the stakeholders included
the potentially affected communities on the ESMF, the resettlement policy framework
and the gender framework. Separate and specific consultations were held in Jharkhand to
discuss the tribal management framework. The dates of local level consultations were
published in local newspapers enabling all interested stakeholders to participate and
provide suggestions.

  The local consultations focused on specific issues related to the potential sub-projects
and environmental and social issues associated with such sub-projects. About 50 officials
from across 11 agencies of NGRBP states/cities and 226 participants from potential
project cities participated in these consultations and provided inputs to the preparation of
ESMF. The draft ESMF and a summary of ESMF was translated in local language and
disclosed on the websites of the PMG and the SPMGs for public review and comments,
prior to the local consultations. The draft ESMF received substantial review by wider
public, had been commented positively in the media at national and state levels, and
overall received positive feedback. The ESMF has also been disclosed in the Bank#s
InfoShop.

  The ESMF and its specific instruments provide guidelines and procedures for further
consultations during project implementation, in particular in defining and designing sub-
projects and specific works. The consultation frameworks provide systematic guidance to
address potential risks and to enhance quality, targeting, and benefits to the communities.
Dialogue and disclosure actions during the assessment and execution process of a sub-
project are designed to ensure that those stakeholders, irrespective of whether they
benefit from or are adversely affected by the project interventions, are well informed and
are able participate in the decision-making process. The ESMF procedures consider the
level of environmental and social risk of each type of investments in allocating time and
resources to be dedicated for stakeholder consultation.

 Consultation being a continuous process, the ESMF#s disclosure on the websites of the
SPMGs and PMG will continue during project implementation. The Environmental
Management Plan (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for individual
investments will also be disclosed as per the principles and procedures of described in the
ESMF. The draft EMPs and RAPs will be disclosed, followed by discussion with the
affected community (including any individual adversely impacted by such intervention);
and final EMP and RAP will be prepared and disclosed only after incorporating
reasonable and relevant suggestions from the communities in the design of the
investments. The copies of the EMPs and RAPs will be placed at the offices of executing
agencies, district magistrate and contractors# offices, enabling easy access of any
community or individual. The executive summary of EIAs and RAPs for all particular
investments will be translated in local language and will be placed in the office of local
self-government body (village panchayat or municipality) of the town/village where the
investment is located. The list of affected persons, if any, will be pasted on the
conspicuous place in all the affected towns/villages, usually at the prominent roadside
entry to the investment site.
 Social intermediation and communication:
 The project has a strong social intermediation and communications component that will
promote:
 (a) Active stakeholder engagement though out the project cycle;
 (b) Continuous interaction with local communities to assess project impacts and address
local concerns in collaboration with project implementation agencies;
 (c) Ensure transparency by regular dissemination of information to wide range of
stakeholders through a well thought out communications strategy;
 (d) Undertake social audits through designated Citizen Monitoring Ccommittees at the
ULB level;
 (e) Synergistically engage with other civil society organizations active in the sector;
 (f) Build capacity of civil society organizations to promote citizen engagement and
monitoring of outcomes; and
 (g) Constantly provide feedback to decision makers at the ULB, State and Central level.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/18/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/18/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              01/28/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              02/02/2011
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/18/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/18/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/09/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/18/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/18/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/09/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                          Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification            N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                         N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Sanjay Pahuja                             04/27/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari             04/27/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Parthapriya Ghosh                         04/27/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Ramachandran R. Mohan                     04/27/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Sanjay Srivastava                          04/29/2011
  Comments: Cleared. See email of 04/14/2011 for details.
Sector Manager:                    Mr Herbert Acquay                             04/29/2011
  Comments:
