Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/23/2011 
Report No.:  AC6126
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P125601 
Project Name:  Third National Program for Community Empowerment in Urban Areas 
III - Disaster Management Support 
Task Team Leader:  George Soraya 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASIS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (26%);Roads and highways (26%);Sanitation (25%);Sub-
national government administration (14%);Public administration- Other social services 
(9%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (39%);Other social protection and risk 
management (38%);Other urban development (11%);Municipal governance and 
institution building (9%);Other public sector governance (3%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Trust 
Funds 
1.40
1.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of PNPM III is to assist GOI to ensure that the urban poor benefit 
from improved socio-economic and local governance conditions. PNPM III is developed 
based on the experiences from the previous PNPM projects, i.e. PNPM Urban I and 
PNPM Urban I AF. This objective will continuously be achieved through: (a) the 
formation and institutionalization of elected representative organizations that are 
accountable to communities; (b) provision of grants to communities directly and 
transparently to finance poverty alleviation activities, especially infrastructure services; 
(c) enhancing the capacity of central and local governments to partner with community 
organizations in service provision; (d) increasing awareness of disaster risk mitigation 
and mainstreaming of measures for resilience; and (e) increasing consolidation of CDD 
programs for effectiveness.  
 
The Government of Indonesia (GOI) has requested additional financing for PNPM 
Urban III (hereinafter also referred to as #the Additional Financing# or AF) to provide 
Page  2
immediate support for reconstruction and rehabilitation through community priority 
investments, particularly small scale infrastructure in villages affected by the recent 
eruptions of Mount Merapi. This volcano erupted on 26 October 2010 and again in early 
November 2010. The initial eruption was followed by seven large eruptions spewing hot 
gas into nearby villages, lava accompanied by hot gas along several rivers, and ash rain to 
cities up to 500 km from the volcano. As part of the PNPM Urban III, the AF will 
contribute to the achievement of the PNPM Urban III project objective.   
 
3. Project Description 
Background  
 
In 2006, the Government of Indonesia launched a national program for poverty 
reduction. A pillar of this program is the National Community Empowerment Program or 
PNPM, which is the Government of Indonesia#s (GOI) operational umbrella for all 
poverty programs which use a community empowerment approach. The program was 
built primarily upon the successful experience with the Bank funded KDPs and UPPs. 
Since then, there have been two windows of the PNPM program implemented by the 
GOI, i.e. PNPM rural and PNPM urban. Today PNPM has nationwide coverage in all 
rural villages (about 60,000) and urban wards nearly 13,000 #kelurahans#) in Indonesia. 
The ongoing PNPM Urban I, PNPM Urban I AF, and PNPM Urban III cover a total of 
11,126 kelurahans nationwide.  
 
The AF#s components, implementation arrangements, and approaches will be the same 
as those of  PNPM Urban III. The AF will specifically allocate its financing for activities 
in villages affected by Merapi, which mostly have been covered by the ongoing PNPM 
Urban III. It provides additional funding for the ongoing PNPM Urban III activities to 
respond to the impacts of the Merapi eruption.  
 
Project Components  
 
The proposed AF#s activities will support two of the four components of the original 
PNPM Urban III components, i.e. Community and Local Government Capacity Building 
and Kelurahan Grants. As part of the ongoing PNPM III, the AF will therefore strengthen 
the contribution of these two components in achieving PNPM III#s objective, particularly 
for kelurahans affected by the Merapi eruption.  
 
Component 1: Community and Local Government Capacity Building ($28 million + $3 
million GFDRR co-financing + $0.4 AF). The AF will finance the strengthening of the 
capacity of the BKMs and the local governments to enable them to carry out 
rehabilitation and reconstruction activities. The ongoing PNPM Urban III shows that the 
locally elected BKMs have been successful in carrying out their role of assisting and 
guiding community members with (i) project awareness building; (ii) developing 
Community Development Plans (CDPs #PJM Pronangkis); and (iii) channeling kelurahan 
grant funds for local infrastructure investments, training, and micro-financed income 
generating activities. This component will primarily carry out two activities: (i) finance 
the cost of facilitators to carry out social intermediation activities and community training 
Page  3
and in supporting BKMs; and (ii) finance training and capacity building of local 
government (lurah and Bappeda) to strengthen their support to PNPM.  
 
In total, the project has received financing of US$ 5 million grants (see also Component 
3
below) from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) to the 
Ministry of Public Works to support activities for community awareness for disaster risk 
reduction and mainstreaming resilience into investments financed under the project. This 
program includes: (i) development and delivery of an in-depth training module for 
facilitators on mainstreaming DRM into CDPs; (ii) recruitment and financing of 
engineers to oversee project preparation and implementation to ensure appropriate 
standards; (iii) public awareness-raising campaigns; and (iv) training activities for local 
government (lurah and Bappeda) in cooperation with BPBD (Disaster Management 
Authority at local level).  
 
Component 2: Kelurahan Grants ($115 million + $1 million AF). This component 
supports block grants to kelurahans, the value of which depends on the size of the 
population and disbursements. On average each kelurahan would get about US$ 30,000. 
The AF financing of US$ 1 million will support block grants to community priority 
investments related to infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction for the kelurahans 
affected by the Merapi eruption. As in the PNPM Urban III, the typical activities for this 
component to be financed by the AF fall into three categories: (a) priority investments 
pre-identified by the community in the CDPs; (b) revolving loan funds provided to the 
poor for income generating activities and who typically do not have access to other 
lending sources; and (c) provision of social assistance, including training, to the poorest 
and most vulnerable in the community.  
 
Component 3: Implementation and Technical Assistance ($7 million + $2 million 
GFDRR financing). Under the ongoing PNPM Urban III, this component is financing the 
following activities:  
 
3A Project Management and Technical Assistance. The PMU will hire consultants and 
facilitators to assist in project implementation. This arrangement has been evaluated and 
expanded to deal with the scaling up and new features of the PNPM-Urban I AF. In 
addition, the GFDRR grant will finance hiring of consultants who will support the PMU 
and facilitators in implementing and providing oversight on DRR capacity building 
efforts at the community level.  
 
3B M&E Capacity Building. A comprehensive M&E sub-component will be designed 
under the project to ensure careful monitoring of ongoing implementation, as well as 
process evaluation to assess implementation issues in a timely manner with feedback 
mechanisms to the project team.  
 
3C Evaluation. A comprehensive evaluation would aim to understand how the CDD 
approach addresses the needs of the urban poor, the PNPM urban program in the context 
of other urban poverty programs in Indonesia, institutional issues, implementation issues, 
the role of local government, approaches to capacity building, and other relevant issues 
Page  4
that would provide input to future project design.  The study would attempt to identify 
strengths and weaknesses of the program, document good practice, and distill lessons 
learned.  The evaluation would draw on the rich monitoring data that exists through the 
MIS, as well as new qualitative data which would be designed specifically and collected 
for the purposes of the study.  In carrying out this evaluation, the World Bank would take 
the lead, providing oversight and ensuring objectivity.  Further details on the design of 
the study will be developed before project effectiveness.  
 
3D: New measures for accountability and transparency. In order to institute greater 
transparency in community decision-making and accountability with regard to the flow of 
funds, the following measures have been implemented since PNPM urban was introduced 
in 2008: (i) randomized audits; (ii) severe penalties for misuse of funds; and (iii) rewards 
for well performing BKMs and KSMs; establishment of an accountability matrix for all 
operations, and launch of   a publicly accessible website with information gathered from 
the MIS management system.  
 
Component 4: Contingency for Disaster Risk Response ($0). This component was 
identified during the preparation of the PNPM Urban III. Due to the high risk of 
catastrophic events in Indonesia, a provisional zero dollar component will be added under 
this project that will allow for rapid reallocation of the loan during an emergency, under 
streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures.  
 
Supplemental Poverty Alleviation Programs. In addition to the core PNPM urban- 
projects, the overall PNPM program of the Government includes various supplemental 
programs in urban areas that evolved based on the platform of the UPP process with the 
intention of strengthening the positive impact of poverty alleviation intervention efforts 
under the PNPM Framework. These supplemental programs include the following:  
 
(a) 
PAPG. The Poverty Alleviation Partnership Grant fund (PAPG) encourages 
partnerships between local governments and communities and attempts to institutionalize 
a
consultative process between the two for future activities undertaken by local 
governments using their own funds.  It finances poverty alleviation activities that are too 
big to be financed by the kelurahan grants, or that require local government involvement 
(e.g. networked infrastructure); and that cover more than one kelurahan.  About 100 
Local Governments have been selected to participate in the PAPG.  Selected cities will be 
eligible to receive amounts ranging from a total of US$450,000 to 750,000 over three 
years.  PAPG implementation begins in the project#s third year in order to give cities a 
chance to familiarize themselves with the BKMs and to develop the RPAS (Regional 
Poverty Alleviation Strategy).  Financing of PAPG comes from UPP2, UPP3, Local 
Government, and community contributions.  
 
(b) 
Neighborhood Upgrading Schemes (NUS).   The NUS were initiated on a pilot 
basis in UPP3 and in the Java Reconstruction Fund housing project to improve the living 
conditions in the poorest communities within the framework of the CDPs. NUS differ 
from traditional community investments (that are more dispersed) in its focus on a 
geographic area of the ward, in which a combination of improvements was undertaken in 
a
manner similar to block redevelopment. NUS starts with the preparation a detailed 
Community Settlement Plan (CSP) and is followed by implementation of priority 
Page  5
investments (which requires funding from the city government) to upgrade the living 
conditions of the area. The program initially started with 18 pilots, and the Government is 
now keen on expanding the NUS to 200 additional kelurahans that demonstrate good 
performance under the PNPM Program. Financing for the additional NUS projects is 
expected to come from savings from various on-going PNPM programs (including the 
on-going World Bank financed PNPM-Urban project), ADB projects and government 
financing.  
 
(c) 
Housing projects. For areas affected by a natural disaster, a supplemental 
settlement recovery program has been added. Although it is based on the UPP design, it 
has a specific purpose and objective.  So far the program has operated in Aceh, 
Yogyakarta and Central Java, and now West Sumatra. In most cases the supports are 
aimed at the poorest victims.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The PNPM-Urban III covers nearly 4,140 urban wards in 137 urban local governments in 
19 provinces, which includes those under PNPM-Urban I, and PNPM- Urban I AF, as 
well as this AF for the Merapi affected areas. The urban villages affected by the Merapi 
eruption are geographically distributed in vast areas in Districts of Magelang, Klaten, 
Boyolali of Central Java province  and Sleman of Yogyakarta province. Villages affected 
by the Merapi eruption are suffering from the damages of housing as well as basic and 
economic infrastructure including access roads, water, sanitation, irrigation, and drainage, 
caused by volcanic eruption materials. Water resources are affected by eruption materials 
resulting in poor quality and quantity. Most houses are heavily destroyed, covered by ash, 
sand, and gravel. Economic loss is high and households have suffered from loss of 
sources of income due to the damage of the agricultural land, livestock, shops, home 
industries, and workshops. Until now, it is not known whether there are physical cultural 
resources in the project area that are affected by the eruption. Some settlement areas are 
no longer habitable, difficult to recover, or would take a very long time to recover from 
the eruption materials. Some agricultural land may not be recovered in the near future 
due to acidic conditions. Cleaning up and rehabilitation in some sites will improve the 
social, economic and environmental living conditions but may take lot of efforts and 
costly.  
 
Salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard analysis are activities financed 
under Component 2, i.e. Kelurahan Block Grants. Typical activities for this component 
under ongoing PNPM Urban III and also AF fall into three categories: (a) priority 
investment pre-identified by the community; (b) BKM managed revolving loan funds 
provided to the poor for income generating activities and who typically do not have 
access to other lending sources; and (c) provision of social assistance, including training, 
to the poorest and most vulnerable in the community.  
 
There are no indigenous people (IP) communities in the villages affected by the Merapi 
eruption which would be supported by the AF. Under the wider PNPM Urban III 
program, however, there could be IP affected by the project due to its coverage that 
includes Kalimantan and Papua. PNPM Urban III therefore triggers the IP policy.   
Page  6
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (EASIS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The activities to be funded by the AF are similar to those financed by the PNPM Urban 
III. Priority investments pre-identified by the community would be small scale and 
involve rehabilitation and reconstruction of basic infrastructure and services and other 
possible priority investments for recovery. Similar to the ongoing PNPM Urban III, 
activities financed by the AF will lead to the improvement of environmental quality and 
socio-economic living conditions of the beneficiaries. The expected environmental 
impacts of activities funded by the AF mainly consist of debris and dust during the 
cleaning up and during construction, and temporary deterioration of water quality, 
sanitation and drainage facilities due to eruption materials. These impacts would be site-
specific and can be locally managed or mitigated through the community-based self-help 
clean up and continuous environmental awareness training with the assistance of local 
governments, as necessary. Disposal of the debris and eruption materials would be an 
issue. Disposal sites for putting the construction debris and cleaned-up materials will be 
defined by the community groups at the location where the environmental condition is 
not vulnerable. Merapi#s eruption materials have long been known to be useful for 
construction, so that eruption sand and gravel can be utilized for the rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of priority infrastructure. Therefore, no environmental degradation due to 
quarrying of construction material is expected to occur.  
 
As to social impacts, the AF adheres to the principle of minimizing involuntary 
resettlement through the adoption of a community-based approach developed through 
UPP and KDP which has been implemented through all PNPM projects, including PNPM 
Urban III. Communities that would be supported by the AF would, in all likelihood, 
prefer to rebuild their houses and priority investments in the current locations. 
Page  7
Identification of boundaries of house plots and agricultural land plots is important as 
some have been covered by eruption materials. Most families prefer to rebuild houses and 
start their living in their original sites. In the case that settlements are no longer habitable, 
or  agricultural land is difficult to be used in the near future, or future risks are deemed 
too high, families may choose to relocate to other sites voluntarily or with the advice of 
local governments. New road alignment, basic services facilities and networks may have 
to be rebuilt in new sites. Land in the new sites may be obtained by the beneficiaries 
themselves or by local governments and private entities. As in the case of the ongoing 
PNPM Urban III, in terms of land acquisition and resettlement, limited land acquisition is 
foreseen for investments in community infrastructure under the AF. Similar to the 
previous UPP and PNPM programs including PNPM Urban III, most of the land needed 
to build small-scale infrastructure is likely to come as a contribution from beneficiaries. 
Local governments may obtain land through direct negotiations in line with willing-seller 
willing-buyer principles, by which land owners have the option to refuse to sell their 
land. In the case land is obtained by the local governments through the eminent domain 
principle, OP/BP 4.12 will apply as specified in PNPM Urban III#s environmental and 
social safeguards frameworks and guidelines. Where land is obtained by voluntary 
contribution, the process and supporting documents must be well-documented.  
 
As investment activities financed by the AF are similar to those under the ongoing 
parent project in terms of the type and scale of activities, the potential environmental 
impacts would likely be similar to those under the ongoing parent project, which tend to 
be insignificant, localized, reversible, and manageable through community-based 
approaches with good engineering design and construction practices. There would be no 
scale-up operations financed by the AF. With the addition of the AF, The PNPM Urban 
III that includes AF will remain a Category B project for environmental assessment, and 
the same safeguards policies will be triggered, i.e. Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 
4.01), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The 
AF will use the existing PNPM Urban III#s environmental and social safeguards 
frameworks and guidelines, including the updated environmental guidelines and project 
manual that reflect the Government#s most recent regulations and the need to address the 
handling of eruption materials.  
 
The AF for Merapi affected areas is an urban Community Driven Development (CDD) 
program and similar to PNPM Urban I, PNPM Urban I AF, and PNPM Urban III. The 
AF will finance small-scale community infrastructure sub-projects such as tertiary roads, 
minor road/bridge repairs, footpaths, tertiary drainage, community water supply, and 
sanitation/public toilets.  It will likely have similar characteristics of environmental 
impacts and land needed for sub-projects with those under the UPP and PNPM programs 
including PNPM Urban III. These types of sub-projects are not likely to have any large 
scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts, but may require special designs 
and construction methods tailored to the situation at each site. Potential impacts are likely 
to be site specific, not significant and manageable by good engineering design and 
construction practices. Observations in some projects under previous UPPs and ongoing 
PNPM programs including PNPM Urban III suggest that environment related-issues 
Page  8
mainly occur due to inadequate guidance, monitoring and supervision by the facilitators 
and OCs (Oversight Consultants) during the planning and implementation stages.  The 
proper mitigation and prevention methods proposed are proper training (on specific 
technical environmental impact mitigation measures) and monitoring of the supervising 
field engineers, especially on site selection for water and sanitation projects, use of tested 
water quality from wells, and maintenance of the facilities.  
 
As the project will continue to finance small scale infrastructure sub-projects (mostly 
tertiary level infrastructure such as tertiary roads, minor road/bridge repairs, footpaths, 
tertiary drainage, community water supply, and sanitation/public toilets) it is very 
unlikely that significant amounts of land will be needed. Although size varies, 
experiences from the UPP and PNPM programs including PNPM Urban III show that the 
area of land needed for each sub-project is generally very small. Field observations 
suggest that for a public toilet for instance, the average land size is 30 m2. In the case of 
AF, land might be needed for new alignments of priority infrastructure and basic services 
or other facilities related to recovery as the current locations are no longer habitable or 
suitable for development. Similar to the previous UPP and PNPM Urban programs 
including PNPM Urban III, most of the land needed by sub-projects would likely be a 
contribution from beneficiaries. Decisions on land contributions have been made based 
on active consultation among the members of the community groups during the 
preparation of the sub-project proposals. Documentation of the consultation process and 
supporting information will be included in the sub-project proposals, and consolidated at 
the regional and national levels.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Overall and in the long-term, the project is expected to have a positive impact on the 
environment and on the beneficiaries# quality of life. With the recovery of access to basic 
services and community infrastructure provided by the AF, health conditions of the 
beneficiaries are expected to improve. At the same time, expenditures for access to basic 
services now located far away are expected to come down and communities are expected 
to have better access to economic and social facilities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower is familiar with the environmental guidelines, the land acquisition and 
resettlement frameworks as well as the IP framework, and has managed safeguards 
instruments as part of the implementation of the UPP and PNPM programs including 
PNPM Urban III over the last 10 years. The National Consultant Team (NMC) which is 
currently assisting the PMU of the Executing Agency will have experts who have 
sufficient experience in environmental management, social issues including land 
acquisition and gender, and in handling IP issues. The AF will adopt the Environmental 
Page  9
Guidelines, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework, IP Policy Framework of the 
ongoing PNPM Urban III project. These frameworks serve as umbrella environmental 
and social safeguard guidelines for the UPPs and PNPM-Urban series. The 
operationalization of these frameworks is included in the project operation 
manual/technical guidelines. The project operation manual/technical guidelines will be 
continuously updated based on lessons learned, implementation experiences on 
environmental and social safeguards, and to accommodate the needs in rehabilitation and 
reconstruction activities. The PNPM Urban III will train project management staff, 
consultants and facilitators in addressing disaster risk-related activities particularly for 
rehabilitation and reconstruction.  
 
The PNPM Urban III (that includes AF) will continue strengthening the capacity of 
project management staff, consultants and facilitators in environmental and social 
safeguards.  
 
As is the case under the ongoing PNPM Urban III project, the AF will not finance sub-
projects that use items set out in the negative list, or such activities as would have 
potential negative impacts on physical cultural resources or entail the potential for large-
scale land acquisition or resettlement.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main key stakeholders are the community members of the group who are 
beneficiaries of the PNPM Urban III including the AF. Participatory consultations are 
taking place as part of the formation of the community board of trustees (BKMs), the 
formation of community groups (KSMs), the preparation of the sub-project proposals and 
the implementation of sub-projects. The role of the facilitators and volunteers is 
important in this consultation process. Environmental screening and mitigation measures 
are identified and agreed among the beneficiaries during the preparation of the sub-
project proposals. Similarly, the need and mechanisms for obtaining land are identified 
and agreed among the beneficiaries through participatory consultations during the 
preparation of sub-project proposals. Facilitation and verification of the process and 
documentation included in the sub-project proposals are done by the BKM and 
facilitators.  
 
The Environmental Guidelines, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework as well 
as the IP Framework and the project operation manual/technical guidelines are uploaded 
on the project website (www.p2kp.org). The project operation manual and technical 
guidelines have been distributed to all project management staff, consultants, facilitators, 
and the BKMs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  10
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/23/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/19/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/23/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/19/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/23/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/19/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
Yes 
Page  11
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr George Soraya 
01/31/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja 
01/31/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Indira Dharmapatni 
01/31/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross 
02/01/2011 
Comments:   
