Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/07/2011 
Report No.:  AC5232
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P113078 
Project Name:  Geothermal Clean Energy Investment Project 
Task Team Leader:  Migara Jayawardena 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 17, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASIS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (50%);Power (50%) 
Theme:  Climate change (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
175.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
274.70 
 Clean 
Technology 
Fund 
125.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: Netherlands Finance Company 
0.00
399.70 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to increase the power generation 
from renewable geothermal resources, and reduce local and global environmental 
impacts. This will be achieved by assisting PT. Pertamina Geothermal Energy (PGE), a 
leading public sector geothermal developer, expand the power generation capacity in the 
Ulubelu and Lahendong (Tompaso) geothermal fields located in South Sumatra and 
North Sulawesi, respectively.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project includes a single component with an investment cost estimated at 
US$574.7 million.  Of this total, the World Bank will provide financing of US$175 
million through an IBRD loan which complements a US$125 million concessional loan 
from the Clean Technology Fund (CTF).  PGE will contribute US$274.7 million from 
funds secured from its parent company.  
 
Page  2
**  Investment in Geothermal Power Generation Capacity (US$574.7 million) - 
confirmation of geothermal resources, steam field development, construction of the 
Steamfield Above-Ground System (SAGS), and power plants of 110 MW and 40 MW at 
the Ulubelu and Lahendong (Tompaso) geothermal fields, respectively.  
 
The World Bank is providing technical assistance to PGE with an approximately $2.5 
million grant facilitated through the Government of The Netherlands.  It is helping PGE 
prepare the proposed investment to international and industry standards.  PGE is also 
undertaking a considerable recruitment and capacity building effort in anticipation of its 
substantial expansion of geothermal capacity.  Given the globally unprecedented scale-
up, PGE together with the World Bank has developed an additional $7 million technical 
assistance program to complement and further strengthen its already planned capacity 
building efforts.  The program is subject to securing grant funding by donors, and if 
successful, the technical assistance program will be supervised together with the 
proposed project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Ulubelu geothermal field is located 80km west of Bandar Lampung, in Lampung 
Province on the island of Sumatra, Indonesia. The proposed project will affect the 
villages of Datarajan, Gunung Tiga, Karang Rejo, Pagar Alam, and Muara Dua, which 
are located in the Tanggamus District. The area is a cultivated basin (rice and tree crop 
plantations) surrounded in the western, northern and eastern sides by mountainous areas. 
An area of watershed protection forest occupies the steep slopes to the north and south, 
but it will not be disturbed by the Project's physical activities or emissions. The first stage 
of Ulubelu Unit 1&2 (capacity 2x55 MW) is under development by PGE (upstream) and 
PLN (downstream) and financed by the Japanese International Cooperation Agency 
(JICA).  The proposed project focuses on the development of the second stage consisting 
of two supplementary 55 MW units, referred to as Ulubelu 3 & 4.  Drilling is underway, 
but construction of the station and Steam Above-Ground System (SAGS) for the second 
stage has not started yet.  Most of land for the envisioned facilities, except the 
transmission line to connect Units 3&4 to the grid at Units 1&2, has been acquired 
through PGE's market based approach using a willing-buyer/willing-seller process.  
Further land acquisition needs will only be ascertained based upon the results of the 
ongoing drilling activities and subsequent operation.  
 
The Lahendong 5 & 6 units (2x20 MW) are being developed in the Tompaso 
geothermal field that is located about 30 km South of Manado, in North Sulawesi 
Province, on the island of Sulawesi in Indonesia. It stretches across the villages of 
Sendangan, Pinabetengan, Tompaso, and Kanonang (I and II), Tomsewer, and Talikuran 
in the Tompaso and Kawangkoan sub districts, Minahasa District.  The Tompaso field is 
adjacent to the existing Lahendong geothermal field already under development (4x20 
MW units). Most of the project site is in agricultural use, with grazing being 
predominant.  Tree crops plantations, rice fields, and vegetable gardens are also present.  
There is watershed protection forest on steep slopes to the south and west of the site, but 
it will not be disturbed by the project's physical activities or emissions.  PGE has already 
Page  3
acquired almost 16 ha for Lahendong 5&6 using its market based approach through a 
willing-buyer/willing-seller process. Further land acquisition needs, which may 
ultimately total about 40 ha, will only be ascertained based upon the results of the 
ongoing drilling activities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSS2) 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASNS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project's large scale, long-term, significant impact is identified in the ESIAs as a 
"major beneficial" impact -- the global benefit resulting from avoided greenhouse gas 
production.   The geothermal plants will produce power with GHG emissions that are 
approximately ten percent of those of coal-fired plants, the most likely alternative, and 
one-third of the average emissions from Indonesia's present mix of power sources.  
 
The potential environmental impacts during construction identified in the draft ESIAs as 
of critical or major significance consist of the following:  noise from site preparation, 
drilling and construction; degradation of surface water quality caused by flow diversion, 
sedimentation from cleared land, and contamination from waste pond overflows or 
chemical and fuel spills; contamination of shallow aquifers during steam well installation 
or by chemical spills; and soil contamination from drilling muds and cuttings. The ESIAs 
include ESMPs with proposed mitigation measures that will reduce all of these impacts 
except for noise to low or negligible significance.  Noise during construction could have 
a
major impact at a few residences close to the Ulubelu site, and the ESMP provides for 
monitoring at those locations and erection of temporary noise barriers if the monitoring 
shows that standards are being exceeded.  
 
There are two potential impacts of operation identified in the ESIAs as critical or major:   
surface water contamination can result from poor chemical storage or spills at either site, 
Page  4
and the dispersion modeling in the ESIAs indicates that air quality degradation in 
residential areas may be caused by hydrogen sulfide (H2S) releases from the cooling 
towers at Ulubelu (but not at Lahendong Units 5 & 6, where the distance between the 
cooling towers and residential areas is greater).  Measures in the ESMP will reduce the 
significance of the water quality impact to low.  Mitigating the air quality impact at 
Ulubelu Units 3 & 4 is the most significant safeguards issue PGE has to confront: without 
abatement, PLN's Units 1 & 2 will themselves cause H2S concentrations that exceed 
World Health Organization (WHO) health guidelines in nearby residential areas, and the 
cumulative impact of the four units would increase both the size of the area affected and 
the H2S concentrations at some of the receptors.  The ESIA for Ulubelu Units 3 & 4 
estimates that approximately 60 percent removal of H2S will be necessary at both PGE's 
and PLN's plant, based on the best data currently available,  in order to avoid the adverse 
air quality impact.  
 
None of the potential social impacts identified in the ESIAs is of major or critical 
significance.  Land acquisition for the site is carried out on a market basis through a  
willing-buyer/willing-seller approach, which has proved satisfactory.  The process is 
transparent, non-coercive and fair, involving group negotiations with affected owners in 
the presence of local officials.  Owners are free to refuse to sell, and have done so.  When 
negotiations fail, PGE relocates the facility.  Affected landowners have been able to 
replace lost land and invest in housing improvements.  The process has generated no 
outstanding grievances or disputes. During construction, local employment opportunity 
(approximately 1000 jobs) is considered a moderate, beneficial impact, and so is 
investment by PGE in community development.  Risks to community health and safety, 
damage to local infrastructure, and interruption of water supply are moderate adverse 
impacts that can be mitigated to low or negligible.  During operation, there is the 
potential to employ local residents in up to 75 percent of the approximately 350 positions, 
but the significance is low beneficial without the skills development training 
recommended in the ESMP that will raise it to moderate beneficial.  Community 
development investment remains a moderate beneficial impact, and health and safety 
risks to community members on the site are considered moderate adverse impacts that 
can be mitigated to negligible.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Overall site selection is determined by the presence of an exploitable geothermal 
resource, and well locations are selected based on information on the characteristics of 
the resource.  The availability of multi-directional drilling technology is being used to 
minimize PGE's footprint and to allow well pads to be located to avoid impacts such as 
relocation of dwellings, and to change locations if land owners decide not to sell their 
land to PGE.   Alternative energy sources were compared to geothermal, and a number of 
Page  5
design alternatives were also examined.  The ESIAs summarize the analysis of 
alternatives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
PGE had already undertaken an ANDAL (ESIA under the Indonesian system) for 
Ulubelu and an environmental management and monitoring plan (UKL and UPL) for 
Lahendong (which fell below the threshold for full ESIA according to Indonesian 
regulations), but for the project, the company engaged an independent qualified 
international consultant that prepared dedicated ESIAs to international standards for both 
locations.  The ESIAs contain ESMPs covering all identified impacts, and they require 
contractors to prepare detailed ESMPs for their individual works.  
 
The approach to managing the impacts of H2S involves the following.  
 
*
The cooling towers at Ulubelu Units 3 & 4 and Lahendong Units 5 & 6, which are the 
principal sources of H2S at both locations, are designed to comply with the Indonesian 
emission standard (35 mg/m3 as a 1-hr average), as per the feasibility studies prepared 
for the project.  
 
*
PGE already observes the Indonesian workplace exposure limit (14 mg/m3 for 8 hr) 
at all of its geothermal facilities and engages safety consultants to ensure that workers are 
protected. This is also consistent with international good practice, and PGE will continue 
to apply the standard to the World Bank financed project.  
 
*
An odor standard for H2S (28 µg/m3) exists in Indonesia (but not in the Bank Group 
Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines), but the parameters for its application 
are not clear.  The Ministry of Environment has confirmed to PGE that the standard was 
intended to regulate air quality in industrial areas, not areas where H2S occurs naturally 
such as geothermal, and that it would be receptive to evidence from the geothermal 
power industry in support of a permanent exemption for geothermal projects from 
compliance with the odor standard.  
 
*
In accordance with the Bank Group EHS Guidelines, the WHO recommended health 
guideline for ambient concentration (150 µg/m3 as a 24-hr average) will apply to the 
proposed project.  Air quality modeling for the ESIAs indicates that this limit will not be 
exceeded in residential areas near Lahendong Units 5 & 6 but, as described in II.A.1 
above, will be exceeded in residential areas near Ulubelu.  PGE has agreed to inclusion of  
60% abatement in the front-end engineering design for Ulubelu Units 3 & 4 to achieve 
the ambient standard; and the cost of such measures is included in the loan amount.  
 
*
At Ulubelu, which is a shared airshed between PLN (units 1 & 2) and PGE (units 3 & 
4
of
the proposed project), H2S abatement and monitoring will need to be carried out in a 
coordinated fashion.  Therefore, PLN and PGE have formally agreed that both companies 
will undertake coordinated monitoring in the airshed and the necessary abatement 
measures at their respective power plants to meet the WHO established ambient standard 
Page  6
and also meet all Indonesia country standards.  The two companies have signed a Joint 
Hydrogen Sulfide Abatement Agreement (JHAA) to this effect which has been endorsed 
by the GoI. The JHAA is included in the ESIA for Ulubelu, and its commitments are 
reflected in the legal agreements for the project in the form of: (i) obligation of GoI to 
ensure that PLN and PGE implement the terms of the JHAA including installation and 
proper operation and maintenance of abatement equipment, and (ii) obligation of 
Pertamina to ensure that PGE implements the JHAA and has sufficient resources to do 
so.  
 
*
The ESMP for Ulubelu Units 3 & 4 includes a detailed monitoring program of H2S 
concentrations and possible health effects of H2S as well as an emergency response plan 
in the event of excessive concentrations.  The ESMP for Lahendong Units 5 & 6 also 
includes H2S monitoring, as a precautionary measure, although no adverse air quality 
impact is predicted there by the model.  
 
PGE acquires land through a market based approach utilizing a willing-buyer/willing-
seller process that is consultative, transparent and fair.  Owners are informed of 
benchmarks; discussions are non-coercive and attended by local village heads; owners 
are free to refuse to sell; and due to the technical nature of the sector, PGE has the 
flexibility to relocate the facility if negotiations fail.  At least three instances of 
negotiation that were unable to be successfully concluded are well known in the project 
areas, where PGE sought alternate locations.  No relocation of households has occurred 
or is expected, and PGE does not plan to request expropriation through eminent domain.  
Nonetheless, as expropriation is an option, the project triggers OP 4.12, for which PGE 
prepared a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework acceptable to the Bank 
that describes current land acquisition practices and establishes procedures to be followed 
in the unlikely event that expropriation is used.  Current practices involve considerable 
consultation and disclosure at the local level.  In addition, through the project, PGE will 
establish more systematic, transparent grievance procedures to deal with issues that arise 
during construction and operation of the facilities.  It is clear that local residents feel free 
to express their grievances already, and PGE has established a good record of responding 
promptly and seriously to all complaints; this responsiveness to community concerns will 
be further enhanced by having a more formalized process for handling grievances, as 
agreed through the project.  
 
The ESMP spells out in detail the monitoring activities to be undertaken by PGE during 
construction and operations.  For each project site under preparation, a full-time HSE 
officer is appointed.  The HSE officer reports to the Project Manager (appointed for each 
field under development) and helps him oversee contractor and PGE staff compliance 
with the ESMP.  Once a project transitions to an operational phase, an HSE Supervisor is 
appointed and an additional HSE officer assigned.  PGE contracts with the local 
university for assistance in environmental impact monitoring.  Responsibilities of each 
member of the HSE team are clearly defined in the PGE Guidelines for Occupational 
Safety and Environmental Protection System no. A-001/PGE600/2008-SO.  PGE has 
received a rating of "Green" by the Ministry of Environment, which means it not only 
meets or surpasses all applicable environmental standards but also practices waste 
Page  7
recycling and resource conservation and maintains an active program to support 
development in the communities where it operates.   In addition, an ISO 14001 
environmental management system is in place in PGE's Lahendong Area, and the 
certification process is ongoing elsewhere.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the project are local residents and local governmental units; 
private and commercial electricity users in the respective provinces; and national 
investment and regulatory stakeholders who deal with energy issues.  Both Ulubelu and 
Lahendong enjoy strong support, locally and nationally, for their future contributions to 
the grid, their potential to reduce the country's carbon footprint, for their investments in 
local infrastructure, their promise to provide modest local employment and stimulate 
commercial growth, and their responsive and visible corporate social responsibility 
investments.  Stakeholders were informed and consulted as early as 2004 during the 
national environmental assessment process.  In the course of land acquisition, which is 
undertaken on a willing-buyer/willing-seller basis, PGE consults extensively with 
landowners and local officials.  While preparing the ESIAs required for compliance with 
OP 4.01, PGE and its consultant held initial consultations in March 2010 in both of the 
affected areas and reported the results in the inception reports.  Additional, more 
extensive consultations were held in June 2010 to obtain stakeholder input on the final 
scope of the ESIA studies.  Approximately three weeks after disclosure of the draft 
ESIAs in October 2010, PGE conducted public consultation meetings at both locations to 
receive stakeholder comments.  In addition, consultations were held in Lahendong in 
January 2011 during the revision of the ESIA that was necessitated by design changes.  
Each ESIA includes a Public Disclosure and Consultation Plan that provides for ongoing 
liaison with affected communities during construction and operation of the geothermal 
facilities, and a grievance procedure to ensure that issues of concern to the public are 
properly addressed. The revised final ESIA documents were publicly re-disclosed on 
April 5, 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/30/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/07/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/07/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/30/2011  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/04/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/07/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/07/2010 
 
Page  8
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  9
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Migara Jayawardena 
03/18/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/22/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
03/21/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
04/06/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross 
04/03/2011 
Comments:  Approved. 
