                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                             Report No : 61902


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/25/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Indonesia                        Project ID : P124583
Project Name: Indonesia – FCPF Readiness Grant
Task Team Leader: Giuseppe Topa, Werner Kornexl
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A             Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: EASIS                      Lending Instrument: TF grant
Sector: Environment
Theme: Climate Change and Forestry
FCPF Amount (US$m.): US$ 3.6 million

Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing               Simple [X]                Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project       Yes [ ]                   No []


B. Project Objectives:


The Development Objectives of this grant is to contribute to the development of Indonesia’s
capacity to design a sound national REDD+ strategy, develop national and sub-national reference
scenarios and a measurement, reporting and verification system, consistent with local/regional
and national conditions and circumstances.
As such these PDO would be monitored through the following indicators:
   i.  A SESA is prepared and endorsed by national stakeholders including competent
       government agencies;
  ii.  conditions and circumstances impacting the National Reference Scenario are quantified
       and discussed with relevant stakeholders; and
 iii. studies on drivers of deforestation, revenue sharing options and investment options, that
       further strengthen the National REDD + strategy, are prepared and endorsed by the
       Government, after discussion and validation by stakeholders.
The FCPF grant will finance a subset of the overall financial and technical inputs required for
Indonesia to reach REDD readiness. Additional inputs will be provided by other Donors and the
Government of Indonesia with which the FCPF Grant will actively cooperate. More than 60
REDD Demonstration Activities are currently being developed by bilateral donors, NGOs and
private companies. A number of donors are contributing to the readiness process. To provide
some examples, the Norwegian Government with a total of US$ 1 billion, supports among other
activities, the preparation of the REDD+ Strategy and the implementation of the REDD+ agency.
The Australian Government supports primarily the Carbon Accounting System and some
demonstration activitities; UN-REDD is financing consultation, outreach and information
sharing processes and demonstration activities on the ground. Given the existing and planned
support for Indonesians readiness activities and the size of Indonesia, the Government asked the
FCPF Grant to focus on a limited number of activities that have not yet covered by other donors.


KEY RESULTS
   1) Understanding and awareness of drivers of deforestation and degradation and of
      strategies to address them is improved; assessment of priority investment options to
      reduce deforestation and forest degradation is available; activities within the country that
      result in reduced emissions and increased removals, and stabilization of forest carbon
      stocks are assessed; and understanding of the status, gaps and capacity building needs for
      the implementation of national REDD+ framework is improved.
   2) Existing REDD+ regulations are assessed; and the capacity of REDD+ related institutions
      is increased; awareness and ownership of the readiness process is increased through
      consultation and outreach; capacity of stakeholders, including indigenous peoples, to
      participate in policy development processes is strengthened; and an Environmental and
      Social Management Framework focussing on potential future REDD+ Demonstration
      Activities is available;
   3) Understanding of terrestrial carbon cycles of different land uses is improved; a time-
      series analysis of the primary social economic and policy aspects of land use change is
      available; and Permanent Sample Plots (PSPs) lead to an increased certainty in GHGs
      estimates from REDD+ in various forest types in selected areas.
   4) New data on REDD+ potential in selected provinces is generated; capacity to set up
      REDD+ frameworks and implement REDD+ programs in selected subnational locations
      is improved (locations: South Kalimantan, West Papua, South Sulawesi, Musi Rawas
      District-South Sumatera, NAD).


C. Project Description [from section 3 of R-PP Assessment Note]:

The national REDD+ readiness process consists of a number of activities that address issues
related to REDD+ readiness in Indonesia. The overall amount of funding needed to address
capacity building for REDD+ in Indonesia was estimated at US$ 18 million in 2009 in the
Indonesian R-PP. This did not include the establishment of new agencies and other activities
envisioned under the Norway LoI, which is moving toward implementation. The activities
identified in the grant agreement are a subset of an overall readiness effort laid out in the
Readiness Plan, which was presented to the FCPF in June 2009.
Indonesia’ REDD readiness planning is supported by UNREDD ($6 million) and the AUSAID
Indonesia Australia Forest Climate Alliance ($30 million). Both programs have been operational
since 2009 and are mostly concentrating their activities on (i) MRV and Reference Emission
Level setting, (ii) subnational readiness activities and (iii) outreach and communication.
Additionally, Norway’s Forest Climate Initiative and Letter of Intent provides $30 million in
Phase 1 of a three-part results based program. As part of the commitment under the Norway
Letter of Intent, the REDD Task Force is asked to coordinate the preparation of the REDD+
Strategy. FCPF will therefore only support strategic analytical inputs and a consultative process,
but not the entire REDD initiative. Given the multiplicity of actors and the small size of the
FCPF grant compared to other efforts, the FCPF grant cannot be held responsible for the entire
national REDD strategy, but should be seen as a contributor of specific inputs into a broader
multi-donor, multi sectoral dialogue and development process.
The FCPF support is national in scope with some research and capacity building in sub-national
areas. Readiness activities will contribute with information, research and capacity building
elements to a future national REDD+ framework. These elements will complement other
activities undertaken by the Government, NGOs, donors and other organizations.
Field-based data and sub-national readiness will be a critical component of national readiness,
and the FCPF will also fund contributions to studies and field-based measurements in the
following regions: South Kalimantan Province, West Papua Province, South Sulawesi Province,
Musi Rawas District in South Sumatra Province, and Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam (NAD)
Province. The Ministry of Forestry selected these regions based on support from the respective
sub national governments for REDD+ and the locations of potentially relevant demonstration
activities.
The FCPF readiness program is strategically important, even though it is small in terms of
funding when compared to the scale of overall REDD+ readiness activities in Indonesia. The
Ministry of Forestry selected the activities specifically because they were considered to be
important for readiness but were not being funded by other donors. The SESA and ESMF are of
particular strategic value as they apply directly to the policy framework for REDD+ and to future
REDD+ projects respectively. These safeguard mechanisms will be highly important once
Indonesia enters the investment phase of REDD+ (phase 2). The analysis of priority investment
options for REDD+ is designed to support the preparation of an investment strategy for the
Forest Investment Program (FIP) and similar schemes.


The program has four main components:

   (i) Analytical Work including the study of the causes of deforestation and of investments
          and other interventions needed to reduce deforestation and greenhouse gas emissions.

   (ii) Support to Readiness Process. This component will include: the assessment of recent and
           new REDD+ relevant regulations; capacity building of institutions and stakeholders;
           a quick assessment of revenue sharing options; ; a large subcomponent of
           consultation and outreach to cover all actors including Indigenous Peoples; and the
           completion of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and the
           preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).

   (iii) Assessment and measurement of GHG impacts of land use change. This component will
           study and measure the effect of land use change on carbon stocks, will develop time
           series of land use change, and will support a system to monitor carbon stocks at the
           ground level.

   (iv) Regional Data Collection and Capacity Building. The fourth component of the project
          will facilitate relevant REDD+ activities at the sub-national level by gathering socio-
          economic and biological data and other parameters as appropriate.

The readiness preparation phase is meant primarily for technical assistance and capacity building
activities, with the objective of preparing Indonesia for potential future REDD investments. The
grant will not finance any implementation of REDD activities on the ground (investments, or
pilot/demonstration activities). The critical elements of this grant agreement include the
preparation of elements for a REDD+ strategy and contributions to options for a benefit sharing
system, which will have potential social and environmental impacts. The impacts may be
positive for certain groups or certain locations, but may also be negative for others.

The TORs of studies financed under the Grant will include provisions to follow Bank policy
requirements on Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Physical Cultural Resources,
Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous People as appropriate.

Although the program itself does not involve REDD+ projects, a preliminary assessments
indicated that a number of World Bank safeguards policies may be triggered by future REDD+
related activities in Indonesia. A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be
conducted as part of the Readiness process to assess potential impacts from national REDD+
interventions, formulate alternatives and mitigation strategies and enhance the decision-making
process around the design of the national REDD+ framework. as one of the results of the SESA
an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, which will
guide potential future investments in REDD+ Demonstration Activities, toward compliance
safeguards policies.

The Grant will be supported by a significant consultation and outreach component. This
component will cover a wide range of stakeholder consultations at various locations, and build
on the REDD+ consultation process that the GoI is already implementing. The objective of
consultations will be to achieve the stakeholders’ effective participation in relevant analytical
work financed under the FCPF Grant. Consultation will allow the integration of stakeholder
inputs, including inputs from Indigenous People, into the Grant’s analyses and recommendations.
The principle used in consultation will be “free prior and informed consultation leading to broad
community support”. Consultations will be inclusive, conducted in local languages as
appropriate, and will allow for enough time for community reaction. Consultations will be
conducted with regional/local organization, with national legitimate IP organizations such as
AMAN, as well as with a sample of IP communities on key issues. A strategy for consultations
with IP/forest-dependent communities shall be developed, either as an integral part of SESA ToR
or as a separate plan, to ensure that legitimate representatives of Indigenous Peoples and other
forest dependent communities will participate meaningfully in all discussions regarding matters
that may affect them, including, for example, the revenue/benefit sharing mechanisms.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

This project does not entail activities on the ground. It is rather focused on providing technical
assistance to the government for the development of technical and institutional capacities to
participate in a future international REDD+ mechanism.


E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
The FCPF program will be coordinated and managed by the Center for Climate Change and
Policy in the Directorate General for Research and Development of the Ministry of Forestry
(FORDA). The Ministry of Forestry (MoFor) is responsible for managing and monitoring
Indonesia’s vast Forest Estate. The Ministry is also the responsible agency for evaluating the
Environmental Impact Assessment or AMDAL for all forest management plans; AMDAL
requirements include a process of screening projects for social and environmental risks and
designing mitigation measures. FORDA/MoFor is staffed with trained professionals and has a
good track record of working with the Bank in AAA activities. Recently, FORDA has worked
closely with the Bank in preparing the SESA requirements for the FCPF, and has increased its
familiarity with Bank safeguards in this process. FORDA representatives have participated in
most FCPF meetings especially those concerning the preparation of SESA guidelines.
While FORDA has several desirable qualities, its capacity to facilitate the inclusion of social and
environmental safeguards into national policies is not sufficiently tested and its capacity to carry
out safeguards needs strengthening. For this reason, FORDA will create a working group of
professionals within MoFor to develop a capacity building strategy for implementing the
safeguards requirements required under the REDD strategy.
During the Readiness phase, FORDA will coordinate closely with the National Forestry Council
(DKN) to conduct the SESA and produce the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF). DKN is a council specifically created to discuss forest policies with the
broader public and is organized in chambers - government, communities, companies, academics,
and NGOs including indigenous representatives organizations. DKN will have overall
responsibility for consultation and outreach activities, as well as for carrying out the SESA.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Juan Martinez                       Sr. Social Development Specialist                     EASIS
Virza Sasmitawidjaja                Environmental Specialist                              EASIS
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
The following table provides information on Safeguards Policies triggered. As the FCPF REDD+
readiness preparation grant will not fund REDD+ projects or define policies, there are no direct
impacts resulting from the grant and the table serves as background to potential future REDD+
investments financed by the World Bank and serves as guidance for the development of the
ESMF. This section is in compliance with the FCPF Charter and the Board Paper on Safeguard
Guidance for Readiness Activities under the FCPF.
The following table provides information on Safeguards Policies triggered. As the FCPF REDD+
readiness preparation grant will not fund REDD+ projects or define policies, there are no direct
impacts resulting from the grant and the table serves as background to potential future REDD+
investments financed by the World Bank and serves as guidance for the development of the
ESMF. This section is in compliance with the FCPF Charter and the Board Paper on Safeguard
Guidance for Readiness Activities under the FCPF.

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                   Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Although, REDD+ aims to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and
therefore intends to have positive impacts on the environment, there might be potential adverse
impacts, depending on the way these objectives are achieved. E.g. potential replacement of
native forests with plantations might have serious impacts on biodiversity.

This grant will, in part, support the country’s activities to identify the potential risks associated
with REDD+ policies and investment options. In order to do this, the FCPF uses the Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to integrate key environmental and social
considerations into REDD+ readiness by combining analytical and participatory approaches; and
uses the ESMF to provide a framework that can guide future investments in demonstration
activities on the ground.

The purpose of the SESA is to provide a participatory platform for stakeholders to build an
understanding of current situation/issues regarding REDD activities already taken, and identify
future options/opportunities

The ESMF will establish the modalities and procedures to address potential negative
environmental and social impacts from the implementation of a REDD+ Demonstration
Activities as well as associated mitigation measures through employing best practices.


The ESMF will incorporate procedures for: (i) ongoing consultations with relevant stakeholder
groups; (ii) appropriate capacity building measures; and (iii) environmental and social impact
screening and assessment. The ESMF will include the screening criteria, procedures and
institutional responsibilities for the safeguards policies that are triggered.

The Framework will provide for the preparation of time-bound action plans for mitigating
adverse impacts related to the future program and/or projects. Given the nature of likely REDD+
strategy options, the ESMF will give special consideration to livelihoods, rights (including those
of indigenous peoples), the special protection of vulnerable groups, biodiversity, cultural
heritage, gender, institutional capacity assessment, etc. It should include a mechanism for
monitoring implementation of the Framework. The mechanism shall be made accessible so that
the public can participate in the monitoring processes.

For potential REDD+ projects implemented after the Readiness phase, Environmental
Assessments that consist of Environmental Management Plans (EMP) will be used to identify,
avoid, and mitigate the potential negative environmental impacts associated with activities
implemented on the ground.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                X

This policy, seeks to ensure that all activities financed under this grant should take into account
the conservation of biodiversity, as well as the numerous environmental services and products
which natural habitats provide to human society.

Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have significant positive impacts on natural habitats,
as the country puts in place an effective strategy to reduce loss of natural forests and conserve
native species, especially where endangered flagship species are present and aims to reduce the
deforestation rates in general. This policy strictly limits the circumstances under which any
project can impact natural habitats (land and water areas where most of the native plant and
animal species are still present). Critical issues related to natural habitats and potential impacts
from potential future REDD+ implementation through demonstration activities on the ground
will be assessed during SESA implementation and under the ESMF.

For potential REDD+ projects implemented after the Readiness phase, site specific EMP would
be prepared for the designated sites.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                  X
REDD+ activities in forest lands aim to reduce deforestation, enhance the environmental services
contribution of forested areas, promote reforestation, reduce poverty, and encourage economic
development. Overall, the REDD+ activities are expected to have significant positive impacts on
forest, in that the main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation, while contributing to the
well-being of forest-dependent communities who will be consulted during the course of the
project. Any critical issues pertaining to forest and potential impacts from potential future
REDD+ implementation through demonstration activities on the ground will be assessed through
SESA and potential negative impact addressed in the ESMF. For potential REDD+ projects
implemented after the Readiness phase, site specific EMP would be prepared for the designated
sites.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                      X
This policy could be triggered depending on the scope of REDD+ strategies, which might
include reforestation activities or the intensification of agricultural activities on degraded lands.
The REDD+ implementation policy will not promote the purchase and use of pesticide, however,
in case the pesticide is used, safe handling and disposal standard operating procedures will be
developed.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                         X
This policy may be triggered, if for example, some of the REDD+ activities were to be planned
in and interfere with sacred groves. This should be determined on a case by case basis. No
adverse impact is expected. Nevertheless, a Physical Resources Management Framework will be
embedded in the Environmental Management Plan of the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                    X
Indonesian forests house many different indigenous peoples and vulnerable ethnic minorities,
any activities within and surrounding forest areas may impact them, both positively and
negatively. Many of the activities to be implemented as part of a national REDD+ program are
likely to take place in areas inhabited by indigenous peoples. Future REDD+ investments and
policies may adversely impact the lands and natural resource use of these communities, if they
result in restrictions of access to the resources they depend on for their livelihoods as well as
cultural survival for many indigenous peoples. Activities that support indigenous communities
in better managing their land and resources may provide positive outcomes. The inclusion of
forest dependent and indigenous peoples’ concerns in policy development is of particular
importance for REDD+ in Indonesia. The FCPF grant activities will build on and work with
existing networks and institutions to support ongoing processes for strengthening the inclusion of
local communities in policy development. Indigenous peoples and other forest dependent
communities (Masyarakat Adat) have developed networks and institutions to represent
themselves and engage in dialogue processes, together with CSO and think tank partners, both
domestically and internationally.

OP/BP 4.10 underscores the need for MoFor/Forda to identify indigenous peoples that inhabit
the forests, consult with them in the implementation of the grant activities (TA, analytical work),
and ensure that they participate in an appropriate way. Rather than developing a separate IPP or
IPPF for the Grant, OP 4.10 elements have been integrated into the various Grant activities, for
example through: assessing safeguard issues for all relevant analytical work and policy
discussions, involving indigenous peoples in the consultations and decision-making processes
(SESA), and as an explicit element of the grant and the ESMF.

The FCPF Grant is an opportunity to continue and expand engagement with indigenous peoples,
including in the REDD+ institutional set up. The Grant includes indigenous peoples as an
important partner in consultations on the analytical work financed under the FCPF grant..

FCPF will specifically support the discussion on guidance for a more effective engagement with
indigenous peoples in future REDD+ Demonstration Activities (activity 2.4). Concerns of
indigenous peoples will also be considered in the analytical work on drivers of deforestation and
on equitable benefit sharing mechanisms. This activity will be supported by DKN. The key
reason to use this body is that it is legislatively mandated and institutionally structured to
actively facilitate the participation of NGOs and communities, including indigenous peoples,.
Indigenous peoples and forest dependent people are represented in DKN and through their own
institutions and networks. One key group, though not the sole representative of indigenous
peoples, is AMAN the National Indigenous Peoples’ Alliance of the Archipelago. Founded in
1999, AMAN is comprised of 1163 indigenous communities that work collectively to create
space to recover and fulfill their rights and fundamental freedom to sovereignty, welfare and
dignity. AMAN is active as an observer at FCPF and FIP meetings and is also providing direct
inputs to the national REDD+ strategy and agency development process with existing resources.

The SESA, also implemented largely in cooperation with the DKN will also provide the platform
for effective participation of IPs, as part of the chambers of the institution.
The ESMF will include an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) to avoid or address
potential undesirable effects of future REDD+ activities and establish the procedures in
managing relations between such future REDD+ investments and indigenous peoples.

This approach is consistent with the Bank’s indigenous peoples' policy (OP/BP 4.10) and the
FCPF Charter and safeguard guidance.

For the preparation of the IPPF two definitions will be used to fulfill the requirements under
OP/BP 4.10, these are: (i) Masyarakat Adat /Adat communities/Customary law communities; and
(ii) Masyarakat Terasing / remote Adat communities.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
While no resettlement is expected as part of REDD+ activities, it is conceivable that there might
be limitation of access to forests and forest products, and involuntary access restrictions for local
populations to parks, reserves, forest management areas or protected areas.

The REDD+ policy framework should avoid promoting involuntary resettlement to the extent
feasible. All issues related to involuntary resettlement in potential future REDD+ Demonstration
Activities will be identified in the SESA, and the Process Framework for Access Restriction will
be established as part of the ESMF.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                   X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The SESA and all related safeguards instruments will be considered as the first step of the grant
implementation after signature of the legal agreement.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Name: Giuseppe Topa, Werner Kornexl       March 10
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Panneer Selvam Lakhsminarayanan   March 14, 2011
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Name: Franz R. Drees-Gross               April 8, 2010
   Comments:
