                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: 62271


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/17/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Indonesia                             Project ID: P112419
Project Name: Promoting Sustainable Production Forest Management to Secure Globally
Important Biodiversity
Task Team Leader: Kwaw Andam
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity                   Global Supplemental ID:
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2011        Estimated Board Date: September 14, 2011
Managing Unit: EASIS                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Biodiversity (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               3.30
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               8.00
        Financing Gap                                                    0.00
                                                                         8.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The objective of the project is to support the implementation of the Government#s policy on
Ecosystem Restoration Concessions whilst ensuring that biodiversity and community
participation are mainstreamed into ER Concession management practices and business plans.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project consists of 4 components to be implemented over 4 years:

 Component 1: Business Development in Ecosystem Restoration Concessions. The focus of this
component will be on promoting the development of multi-product sources of income that can be
derived from the ecosystem whilst restoring natural balances, incorporating these into
management plans of ERCs, and establishing working agreements between concession holders
and local communities concerning the sharing of responsibilities and benefits in the use and
management of ERCs. This component focuses on private sector issues and responsibilities.
  Component 2: Policy and Administration of Ecosystem Restoration Concessions. This
component is aimed at strengthening the capacity of Government at all levels to achieve the
visions and objectives of its ERC policy. The project will support three areas: (i) policy and
regulation; (ii) understanding of ER concepts and technical aspects; and (iii) monitoring of
ecosystems and biodiversity status. The expected outcomes will be improved regulatory and
licensing processes in Government to enable progress in the implementation of ERC policy, and
a working capacity in both Ministry of Forestry and local Government agencies to administer,
oversee compliance and monitor progress of the policy.

 Component 3: Knowledge and Experience. This component aims to ensure that information on
best practices, frameworks and standards, current policy and regulatory issues is shared and
exchanged among key interested parties in ERC. This will be achieved by supporting the ERC
Forum in its discussions and activities, and through a communication and outreach program to
ensure that documented experience is available to audiences directly concerned with ERC.

 Component 4: Project Management. The project will require the establishment of an office at
the headquarters of the Ministry of Forestry in Jakarta to handle project administration,
monitoring and evaluation, and liaison with Government.

D. Project location (if known)
To be determined during implementation.

  For applying the frameworks and standards, the project will provide technical assistance to up
to 6 ERC concession license holders/applicants’ sites in Indonesian production forest. The sites
will be determined when the government issues the ERC licenses that are expected in 2012, and
the ERCs benefiting from the project’s support will be selected on the following basis:
  (1) the management plans as submitted to the Government in support of the application for the
license fall short of the full integration of the multi-use restoration concept as set out in the
frameworks above;
  (2) the concession area contains globally important biodiversity; and
  (3) the concession company has expressed a commitment to proceed with the management
approach of the project.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
National institutional capacity for the monitoring and implementation of safeguards is weak in
the Ministry of Forestry. At the provincial level, the government agencies (including those
attached to the Ministry of Forestry) often do not have the equipment that would allow them to
monitor social and environmental impacts and their staff lacks training. The Borrower has
appointed Burung Indonesia, an NGO with capacity and experience with environmental and
social safeguards to implement the project on its behalf.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Isono Sadoko (EASIS)
   Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (EASIS)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    The project will seek to influence the actions of ecosystem restoration concession license
holders/applicants in expired forest concessions. Thus, there are various potential impacts on the
forest ecosystem and on forest dwellers and local communities. Given the project’s emphasis on
facilitating ERC holders/applicants to restore degraded forests and on people’s participation,
most of the impacts on the forest and on forest dwellers can be expected to be positive. However,
given the nature of the activities undertaken by ERC holders and the ERC concept being
relatively new in Indonesia, and as clear impacts (positive and negative) are not fully known, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared as the guideline for
any site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) relating to a participating
ERC. The ESMF will ensure that the potential environmental impacts are addressed as an
integral part of project design, appraisal and implementation. Site-specific ESMPs for activities
anticipated during the first year of implementation will be prepared before the appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                         X
    The objectives of the project are to provide technical assistance to the restoration and
conservation of biodiversity in logged over production forest concession sites yet to be
identified. No conversion or degradation of natural habitats is anticipated. To the contrary,
degraded habitats will be restored through assisted regeneration and enrichment planting with
local species for maximizing biodiversity. Planning of ER concessions will obviously have to
take into account possible impacts as well as ensure that best available science is brought to the
overall management for biodiversity enhancement and protection. Any issues pertaining to
OP/BP4.04 will be addressed in the ESMF. Site specific ESMPs will be developed for once sites
are known.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                  X
    The project will help develop management plans for select ERCs in previously logged over
production forest areas. The objectives of the project are fully consistent with the objectives of
the OP/BP4.36. The ERCs selected for technical assistance by the project will involve ecosystem
restoration activities through assisted natural regeneration and enrichment planting by enhancing
native tree species. As far as possible, the seedlings are obtained naturally from forest lands. No
commercial logging will be allowed in ERCs under the project. Any issues pertaining to
OP/BP4.36 will be addressed in the ESMF, which will also include a set of Environmental Codes
of Practice (ECOPs) for guidance. Site specific ESMPs will be developed once the sites are
known.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
    The project will not promote the use of pesticides, and natural sources of seedlings are
preferred. Nurseries may be set up by ER concession holders in the sites selected for technical
assistance by the project. These nurseries would be set-up regardless of the project, the project
will not procure pesticides directly or indirectly and the project will not affect pest management
in a way that harm could be done. The project will, on the contrary, promote IPM and biological
control of pests, where required.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                              X
    The project will collaborate with ERC holders/applicants in logged over commercial forest
concessions and further degradation or limiting of access to physical cultural resources is not
anticipated. The presence of rivers/forests/mountains/objects of spiritual significance will be
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes          No         TBD
assessed in the ESMF. Site specific ESMP will be developed once the sub-project sites are
known.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       X
    It is likely that Indigenous Peoples inhabit some of the ERCs collaborating with the project.
An Indigenous People Planning Framework will be developed to establish the procedures to be
followed in managing relations between the ERC and indigenous people. Site specific IPPs will
be prepared once the sites are known.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    The project will not directly finance activities in ERC sites nor physically relocate any people
living within a site. However, changes in forest management systems promoted by the project
may potentially affect access to, and use of, natural resources in select ERCs. For this reason a
Process Framework for Access Restriction will be prepared.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 05/23/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   During the Project Preparation Grant phase ending January 2011, safeguard studies,
   including social assessments in select ERC sites were carried out.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Kwaw Andam                                                  05/05/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan                             05/17/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross                                        05/17/2011
      Comments: approved.



1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
