Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/22/2011 
Report No.:  AC6104
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P125648 
Project Name:  COMMUNITY-BASED SETTLEMENT REHABILITATION AND 
RECONSTRUCTION PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  George Soraya 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASIS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Housing construction (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Trust 
Funds 
11.50
11.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective of Rekompak is to assist in meeting the needs of 
eligible households for earthquake-resistant housing and community infrastructure in 
areas in Central and West Java and Yogyakarta Special Region affected by natural 
disasters. The project was designed to achieve this objective through four sets of 
activities (see
 project components below), and based on the expe¬rience and lessons 
learned from a successful community-based housing reconstruction program in Aceh 
(this was the first CSRRP, otherwise known as #Rekompak Aceh#) and the ongoing 
CSRRP (Rekompak) in Central and West Java and Yogyakarta Special Region.  
 
The proposed activities to be funded from the PSF will be incorporated in the original 
design of Rekompak and directly contribute to achieving the project#s overall 
development objective.   
 
3. Project Description 
The main reason for the Government#s request to PSF for additional funds for Rekompak 
(hereinafter also referred to as PSF funds) is to provide immediate support for the 
reconstruction and rehabilitation of housing units and small-scale infrastructure in 
villages affected by the recent eruptions of Mount Merapi. The Government has also 
Page  2
obtained an additional financing grant for the Rekompak (called Rekompak AF) in the 
amount of USD 3.5 million from the Java Reconstruction Fund (JRF) for the same 
purpose. The Merapi volcano first erupted on 26 October 2010. The initial eruption was 
followed by seven large eruptions spewing hot gas to nearby villages, lava accompanied 
by hot gas along several rivers, and ash rain to cities up to 500 km from the volcano.  
 
The Government of Indonesia (GOI) intends to allocate the proposed PSF funds to 
villages affected by the Merapi eruption. It will cover the ongoing Rekompak villages as 
well as those which are not yet engaged in Rekompak but are severely affected by the 
Merapi eruption. The number and location of the villages with the support from the PSF 
funds will be discussed and agreed with respective local governments. More specifically, 
the funds would be allocated to: 
 
#
facilitate community planning processes in the Merapi eruption affected villages, 
in particular with the preparation, or review of Community Settlements Plans, 
 
#
provide additional sub-grants for community investments particularly small-scale 
infrastructure affected by the disasters in affected villages, and 
 
#
provide technical assistance to strengthen the Disaster Risk Reduction component 
of the project, with an emphasis on improving the involvement of local governments in 
mitigating the adverse impacts of natural disasters. 
 
To maximize the impact of the PSF funds, all proposed activities would follow the 
implementation arrangements that are already in place (by, for example, using training 
materials and guidelines for facilitators that are currently being used for facilitation in 
villages already served by Rekompak). This also means that existing arrangements for 
financial management, disbursement, and safeguards will be adopted for the additional 
activities financed through the Bank-administered trust fund. 
 
Project components: 
 
Similar to the original Rekompak, activities in the proposed PSF-funded Rekompak are 
grouped in four components, all of which directly support the original Rekompak 
components.  
 
a) 
Component I: Sub-Grants for Housing Reconstruction (US$5.0 million). The PSF 
funds would finance sub-grants for the reconstruction of about 2,450 housing units of the 
poorest households in villages most severely affected by disasters. The beneficiaries of 
this component will be selected by community groups, with assistance from the project#s 
community development facilitators. 
 
b) 
Component II: Sub-Grants for Priority Investment (US$4.1 million). The PSF 
funds would finance sub-grants for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of small-scale 
tertiary village infrastructure and other possible priority investments for recovery, in an 
amount of maximum Rp 2 billion (appr. US$ 220,000) per village. The selection of 
infrastructure projects eligible for sub-grants will be based on a Community Settlement 
Plans (CSP). In some high-risk areas, voluntary resettlement within villages may be 
required. 
Page  3
c) 
Component III: Community Education and Quality Assurance (US$1.2 million). 
Under the original component, housing task force teams were recruited to oversee project 
implementation, verify compliance with construction standards, provide capacity building 
for project management at the community level, and educate communities in emergency 
preparedness and mitigation of future disasters. A portion of the proposed additional 
financing would be used to continue and intensify community capacity building activities 
in order to ensure the sustainability of project outputs. These activities would be 
undertaken by community development facilitators and consist of: 
 
#
educating communities about the continuity of the disaster preparedness; 
 
#
educating communities about the importance of the quality of construction; 
 
#
building community capacity to operate and maintain assets created by the 
project; and 
 
#
ensuring that community user contributions are sufficiently large to cover 
operational and maintenance expenses. 
 
d) 
Component IV: Project Implementation Support (US$1.2 million). The additional 
financing would support:  
 
#
the continuation and expansion of National Management Consultant (NMC) and 
District Management Consultant (DMC) teams; and 
 
#
technical assistance for the preparation of evaluation studies. 
 
The additional financing for Rekompak will also support local government capacity 
building for greater participation in CSP approval, disaster risk reduction investment 
prioritization, and transfer of knowledge gained through the activities under the project. 
 
The proposed PSF funds support and contribute to PDOs for the original project through 
the scale-up of activities in disaster affected urban areas. As mentioned above, the basic 
implementation arrangements for the three projects (original Rekompak, Rekompak AF, 
and this project# PSF-funded Rekompak ) will not change. Both JRF and PSF-funded 
Rekompak will be managed by the same Project Management Unit and Executing 
Agency and the same JRF-financed project implementation frameworks, guidelines and 
mechanisms for safeguards will be applied.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The PSF funds will provide additional sub-grants for the rehabilitation and reconstruction 
of housing units and small-scale investments in urban villages that have been affected by 
the recent eruptions of Mount Merapi, which are already covered by the ongoing 
Rekompak (for housing and infrastructurerehabilitation and reconstruction due to the 
earthquake in 2006) or those that have not been covered by the ongoing Rekompak 
Yogya (plus Rekompak AF). The location of the villages will be agreed with the local 
governments. Villages are in Kabupaten (district) Sleman (Yogyakarta Special Region), 
Page  4
Kabupaten Klaten, Kabupaten Magelang, and Kabupaten Boyolali (all in Central Java 
Province). 
 
These villages that will be supported by the PSF funds have suffered from damage to 
housing as well as basic and economic infrastructure including access roads, water, 
sanitation, irrigation, and drainage, caused by volcanic eruption materials. Water 
resources are affected by the eruption materials resulting in poor quality and quantity. 
Most houses are heavily destroyed, covered by ash, sand, and gravel. Economic losses 
are high and households have suffered from loss of sources of income due to the damage 
to agricultural land, livestock, shops, home industries, and workshops. Until now, it is not 
known whether there are physical cultural resources in the project area that are affected 
by the eruption. Some settlement areas are no longer habitable, difficult to recover, or 
would take a very long time to recover from the eruption materials. Some agricultural 
land may not be recovered in the near future due to acidic soil conditions. Clean up and 
rehabilitation in some sites will improve the social, economic and environmental living 
conditions but may involve significant effort and cost.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (EASIS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The activities to be funded by PSF funds are similar to those financed by the original 
project. The positive environmental and social impacts already demonstrated under the 
JRF-financed Rekompak will likely occur in the PSF-funded Rekompak. The PSF funds 
will support the rehabilitation and construction of housing and basic social and economic 
infrastructure of families affected by the Merapi eruption, which will lead to the 
improvement of environmental quality and socio-economic living conditions of 
beneficiaries. The expected environmental impacts of activities funded by the PSF funds 
Page  5
consist mainly of debris and dust during the clean up and during construction, and 
temporary deterioration of water quality, sanitation and drainage facilities due to eruption 
materials. These impacts would be site-specific and can be locally managed or mitigated 
through the community-based self-help clean up and continuous environmental 
awareness training with the assistance of local governments, as necessary. Disposal of the 
debris and eruption materials would be an issue. Disposal sites for putting the 
construction debris and clean-up materials will be defined by community groups at the 
location where the environmental condition is not vulnerable. It has been long known that 
eruption material from Mount Merapi is often suitable for construction. Sand and gravel 
can be utilized as construction materials for houses and other infrastructure and will be 
abundantly available at almost no cost. Therefore, further environmental degradation due 
to quarrying of construction material is not expected to occur. 
 
As to social impacts, Rekompak adheres to the principle of minimizing involuntary 
resettlement through the adoption of a community-based approach developed through 
UPP and KDP. Since 2008, this approach forms part of the National Community 
Empowerment Program (PNPM). Rekompak  avoided (or minimized) land needed for 
housing and tertiary investments by adjusting designs, and all housing units were built on 
existing plots. Communities that would be supported by PSF funds would, in all 
likelihood, prefer to rebuild their houses and basic infrastructure in their current 
locations. Identification of boundaries of house plots and agricultural land plots is 
important as some have been covered by the eruption materials. Most families prefer to 
rebuild houses and restart their livelihoods in their original sites. In the case that 
settlements are no longer habitable and agricultural land is difficult to be used in the near 
future, families may choose to relocate to other sites voluntarily or with the advice of 
local governments due to high risks. Land in the new sites may be obtained by the 
beneficiaries themselves or by local governments and private entities. Local governments 
may obtain land through direct negotiations with land owners on a willing-buyer-willing-
seller basis, under which land owners have the option to refuse to sell their land. Where 
land is obtained by local governments through the eminent domain principle, OP/BP 4.12 
will apply as specified in Rekompak#s environmental and social safeguards frameworks 
and guidelines. 
 
As investment activities financed by PSF funds are similar to those of the ongoing 
parent project in terms of types and scale of activities, the potential environmental 
impacts would likely be similar to those of the ongoing parent project, which will be 
insignificant, localized, not irreversible, and manageable through community-based 
approaches. There would be no scale-up operations financed by PSF funds. With the 
inclusion of the PSF-funded Rekompak, Rekompak will remain a Category B project for 
environmental assessment, and the same safeguards policies triggered will be in place, 
i.e. Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), and 
Involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The PSF-supported Rekompak will use the 
existing Rekompak environmental and social safeguards frameworks and guidelines, 
including updates that reflect the Government#s most recent regulations and decrees, 
tailored to the needs of handling eruption materials.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the nature of the project financed by PSF funds, it will positively improve the 
environmental and social living conditions of beneficiaries in the long term, as 
neighborhoods or settlements will be more habitable with better houses and 
infrastructure.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As is the case of the ongoing Rekompak, most families prefer to rebuild their houses and 
make basic investments on their original sites or land plots. In principle, the CSP is the 
instrument to identify negative potential environmental and social safeguards impacts, 
including the need to relocate and to acquire land, screen the impacts, identify potential 
impacts on physical cultural resources (if any), and develop and agree on measures to 
mitigate or handle such impacts. If it is necessary to prepare specific safeguards 
instruments such as an UKL/UPL or SOP/SPPL, or a Resettlement Plan, they will be part 
of the CSP. The Community Settlement Plan(s), prepared by community beneficiaries 
themselves, will identify the inhabitable land plots/sites and the boundaries of land plots. 
The CSPs will avoid, and to the extent that this is unavoidable, minimize relocation. In 
the case that sites are no longer habitable and/or have potential high risks, community 
beneficiaries would voluntarily relocate to other sites. Land at the new sites would be 
obtained by the beneficiaries themselves or other parties including local government and 
private entities who wish to assist the beneficiaries. In the case that the local government 
acquires land for the relocation sites using eminent domain principles, the project will 
follow procedures as specified in the Rekompak#s Environmental and Social Safeguards 
Guidelines. 
 
Furthermore, the detailed design of the investments will be adjusted so that the need for 
land acquisition is avoided or minimized. Most community beneficiaries prefer to rebuild 
the existing investments on site. In the case that land acquisition is unavoidable, the 
community will decide on the approach for getting the needed land. As has been the case 
of Rekompak, it is a common practice that community beneficiaries voluntarily 
contribute land for investments. 
 
The CSP will also include measures to mitigate the impact of dust during the 
construction and clean up of ash, sand, gravel and debris, and identify suitable sites for 
disposal of excess materials, if reuse is not possible. Some materials will be used for 
housing and infrastructure, as the quality is good and suitable for civil works. Local 
governments will assist community beneficiaries in the clean-up operations. 
 
The Rekompak experience in using the CSP as an instrument to screen, identify and 
manage potential negative impacts has been very effective. Measures to address the 
Page  7
potential environmental and social impacts including land acquisition and the need for 
relocation are streamlined into the spatial arrangements and activities in the CSP. As part 
of Rekompak, the PSF-supported Rekompak will remain a highly participatory and 
community-based rehabilitation and reconstruction activity. Plans to avoid or minimize 
the need for land and negative environmental impacts, including measures to address 
social and environmental impacts will be decided by the community itself at all levels of 
activities, such as planning, siting, procurement, and construction as reflected in the CSP, 
with the help of field facilitators and local governments. The assessment of potentially 
affected physical cultural resources along with mitigation measures will be carried out 
during the preparation or review of the existing CSPs. All of these aspects will be 
reflected in the CSPs. 
 
The PSF grant   will use the Rekompak#s environmental and social safeguards 
frameworks as well as guidelines. The guidelines will be updated to accommodate the 
most recent government environmental regulations and tailored to the potential 
environmental impacts related to handling volcanic eruption materials during 
construction. Updates of the guidelines will be included in the project manual and will be 
a
condition of disbursement for categories 1 and 2 of this PSF-funded Rekompak. 
 
The grant recipient, i.e. the Directorate General of Human Settlements of the Ministry of 
Public Works, is a well-experienced institution in handling disaster-related projects. It 
has been in charge of the Rekompak Aceh since 2006 and Rekompak Central Java and 
Yogyakarta since 2007. Sufficient institutional arrangements are in place, including for 
handling environmental and social safeguards issues. The PSF-funded Rekompak will 
use the same institutional arrangements as Rekompak including a Project Management 
Unit, National Management Consultants team (NMC) and District Management 
Consultants (DMCs). So far the Rekompak has satisfactorily implemented the 
environmental and social safeguards instruments and guidelines and there are currently 
no outstanding environmental and social safeguards issues on the ground.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As with Rekompak, the stakeholders involved in the PSF-funded Rekompak will be the 
same. At the village level, BKM/TPK (BKM is Community Board of Trustees and TPK 
is the Implementation Team. Both of them have recently been grouped under the term 
#LKM#) and KSM (Community Group Beneficiaries) will manage and implement the 
project. They will be assisted by facilitators and overseen and guided by the DMC and 
NMC. Relevant local governments will also facilitate the planning and implementation 
process. All of them have been trained for the JRF-financed Rekompak and further 
training will be provided for the PSF-funded Rekompak. 
 
As described in point 4 above, the PSF-funded Rekompak, as it will adopt all 
approaches and mechanisms of Rekompak, is a participatory, community-based project. 
Community beneficiaries will prepare and decide on the plan (CSP) and implementation 
of the plan, with facilitation by the field facilitators guided by the DMC and NMC. Local 
Governments will also assist them as necessary. Consultations will take place among the 
Page  8
community beneficiaries at the planning and implementation stages of the project. 
Community beneficiaries will also monitor the construction process. 
 
The project guidelines, which also include the environmental and social safeguards 
aspects have been disseminated and socialized among community beneficiaries for the 
Rekompak through training. As villages to be covered by PSF-funded Rekompak are 
Rekompak villages, community beneficiaries especially the BKM/TPK already 
understand the guidelines. Coaching for the updated guidelines will be carried out for 
BKMs (Board of Trustees) or TPKs (Implementation Teams) in all of the villages as part 
of the review of the existing CSPs. The CSP is available for public as well as community 
beneficiaries in the BKM/TPK and kelurahan (village) office. For villages that have not 
been engaged with the ongoing Rekompak, more intensive training and coaching on the 
project#s guidelines and implementation approaches will be carried out for the 
BKMs/TPKs and new facilitators. 
 
The Rekompak Guidelines have been uploaded to the Yogyakarta and Central Java 
Rekompak website (www.rekompakjrf.org). The updated Guidelines will also be re-
uploaded in the website. The updated Guidelines will be distributed to facilitators and 
each beneficiary BKM/TPK.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/27/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/27/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  9
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
No 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr George Soraya 
02/18/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel 
02/18/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Indira Dharmapatni 
02/18/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja 
02/18/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross 
02/18/2011 
Comments:   
