Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4917 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P112419 
Project Name: Mainstreaming Globally-Important Biodiversity Conservation in 
Production Forest 
Task Team Leader: Giuseppe Topa 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASIS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
3.30 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
8.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to pilot the new ecosystem restoration concept for logged over forest 
concessions and provide the Ministry of Forestry and future ecosystem restoration concession 
holders a working model for selection and management of restoration concessions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will take advantage of the opportunities offered by the new forest 
ecosystem restoration policy in expired logged-over concessions through a three-step process: (a) 
building on experience from existing ecosystem restoration concessions and related initiatives (in 
Indonesia and abroad)  to establish learning sites and models; (b) disseminating information to 
stakeholders and supporting feasibility assessments for potential businesses/restoration 
concessions; (c) forming partnerships and facilitating investment to set-up a small number of 
new ecosystem restoration concessions with specific biodiversity considerations. During the 
preparation phase, criteria will be developed for the selection of sites, and one demonstration site 
for early interventions will be identified. The demonstration activity will be implemented in an 
Page  2
expired production forest concession in natural forest still to be selected. An implementing 
agency will be selected by the Borrower.  
 
The project is composed of 4 interlinked components:  
 
Component 1: Business Development for Forest Conservation in Ecosystem Restoration 
Concessions. Expected outcome: Ecosystem restoration concessions are promoted for 
biodiversity conservation, business on NTFPs and ecosystem services in Indonesia's production 
forests. In order to promote the viability of restoration concessions this component will consist of 
two main activities: (1) development of biodiversity friendly business prototypes (NTFPs and 
ecosystem services) in partnership with key stakeholders; (2) establishment of an ecosystem  
restoration demonstration site as a center of excellence for innovative conservation management.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building and Institutional Development. Expected outcome: 
Strengthened capacities of key stakeholders for developing ecosystem restoration concessions. 
This component will consist of three activities: (1) capacity development of Ecosystem 
Restoration Concession (ERC) holders to support biodiversity conservation in their sites; (2) 
capacity development of key stakeholders at the national level and in selected regions; (3) 
Contribute to policy dialogue on ecosystem restoration.  
 
Component 3:  Monitoring and Evaluation to support Ecosystem restoration Management. 
Outcome: Monitoring and Evaluation Systems to support ecosystem restoration concession 
management are established.  
 
Component 4: Project Management. Component 4 will finance the overall management and 
administration of the project. The project will require a full-time staff working at both central  
and site levels.  This component will cover the setting up and running of the project facilities, 
staff team and administrative and financial systems required for running the project. The field 
project staff will be supported by a project steering committee which will include senior staff 
from the Ministry of Forestry.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be determined during preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
National institutional capacity for the monitoring and implementation of safeguards is weak in 
the Ministry of Forestry.  At the provincial level, the government agencies (including those 
attached to the Ministry of Forestry) often do not have the equipment that would allow them to 
monitor social and environmental impacts and their staff lacks training. The Borrower will 
select, prior to inception, an implementing agency for the project with capacity in and experience 
with environmental and social safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Isono Sadoko (EASIS) 
Mr Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (EASIS) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Considering that the project will operate in a forest environment, there are various potential 
impacts on the forest ecosystem and on forest dwellers.  Given the project's emphasis on 
restoring degraded forests and on people's participation, most of the impacts on the forest and on 
forest dwellers can be expected to be positive. However, given the nature of the activities of the 
sub-projects and the project being relatively new in Indonesia, and as clear impacts (positive and 
negative) are not fully known, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
will be prepared as the guideline for any site-specific Environmental and Social Management 
Plans (ESMP) relating to a sub-project. The ESMF will ensure that the potential environmental 
impacts are addressed as an integral part of project design, appraisal and implementation. Site-
specific ESMPs for activities anticipated during the first year of implementation will be prepared 
before the appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project will operate in areas of forests including natural habitats. The objectives of the 
project are fully consistent with the objectives of the Natural Habitat safeguard policy. The 
project will contribute to the restoration and conservation of biodiversity in logged over forests.  
No conversion or degradation of natural habitats is anticipated. To the contrary, degraded 
habitats will be restored through assisted regeneration and enrichment planting with local species 
for maximizing biodiversity in the eventual sub-project site. Any issues pertaining to OP/BP4.04 
will be addressed in the ESMF. Site specific ESMP will be developed once the sub-project sites 
are known.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project will operate in forest areas previously logged by concessionaires. The objectives 
of the project are fully consistent with the objectives of the OP/BP4.36. The project will involve 
ecosystem restoration activities through assisted natural regeneration and enrichment planting by 
enhancing native tree species. As far as possible, the seedlings are obtained naturally from forest 
lands. No commercial or artisanal logging and no commercial plantations will be allowed in eco 
restoration concessions under the project. Any issues pertaining to OP/BP4.36 will be addressed 
in the ESMF. Site specific ESMP will be developed once the sub-project sites are known.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The project will not promote the use of pesticides, and natural sources of seedlings are 
preferred. However, in circumstances where pests might be found, pesticides will be selected to 
be environmentally friendly. Procedures for safe handling and disposal will be developed in case 
pesticides are to be used in some locations.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The project will take place in logged over commercial forest concessions and further 
degradation or limiting of access to physical cultural resources is not anticipated. The presence 
of rivers/forests/mountains/objects of spiritual significance will be assessed in the ESMF. Site 
specific ESMP will be developed once the sub-project sites are known.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
It is likely that Indigenous Peoples inhabit some of the restoration concessions to be awarded. 
An Indigenous People Planning Framework will be developed to establish the procedures to be 
followed in managing relations between the project and indigenous people. Site specific IPPs 
will be prepared once the sites are known   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will not physically relocate any people living within the area. However, changes 
in forest management systems may potentially affect access to, and use of, natural resources. For 
this reason a Process Framework for Access Restriction will be prepared .   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/15/2010 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
During the Project Preparation Grant phase, safeguard studies are being carried out with 
outputs expected by early December 2010.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Giuseppe Topa 
09/30/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/14/2010 
Comments:  Approved - see Virza's e-mail dated Dec 14 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross 
10/22/2010 
Comments:  Approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
