Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4950 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/27/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P114348 
Project Name: Water Resources and Irrigation Sector Management Program 2 
Task Team Leader: Xiaokai Li 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 23, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: January 27, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASIS 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Irrigation and 
drainage (50%) 
Theme: Water resource management (67%);Rural services and infrastructure (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the proposed project would be to further improve the governance, 
institutional capacity and infrastructure for basin water resources and irrigation management and 
service delivery, and increase irrigated agriculture productivity in the target river basins and 
provinces.  
 
Achievement of the development objectives would be assessed through the following 
performance indicators: (i) effective role-sharing and funding mechanism legally established for 
management of national river basins covered by the Project; (ii) number of BLU basin agencies 
operational with satisfactory governance structure and adequate resources for sustainable O&M 
of the river systems; and (iii) increase in agricultural productivity and farmer income in the 
project irrigation command areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project composition will be decided upon completion of the preparatory studies. Broadly the 
Project will cover: (i) further improvement of water resources and irrigation management 
capacity and effectiveness through investments in institutional strengthening, capacity-building 
Page  2
and infrastructure; and (ii) interventions to increase irrigated agriculture productivity and farmers 
income, likely with the following three components.  
 
Component 1.    Improvement of basin water resources management and participatory irrigation 
management (Tentative cost US$145 million)  
 
This component supports the consolidation of water sector reforms at national and local 
government levels, and development of selected service-provision river basin organizations. It 
will provide funding to further improve BWRM and PIM, in terms of technical capacity, 
operational effectiveness and physical system performance, and fiscal sustainability. The 
Component would likely have the following sub-components:  
 
A. 
Basin Water Resources Management  
 
A1.  Improvement of Basin Management Institutions and Infrastructure:   It provides support 
for further development and strengthening of selected river basin agencies established under 
WISMP 1 in basin planning, water allocation & water right management, asset management and 
inter-agency coordination, and for river infrastructure improvement;  
 
A2.  Development of Sustainable Public-Service River Basin Organizations (BWS-BLU):   It 
would support appropriate governance structure, improvement of management capacity and 
infrastructure in a number of selected river basins that are earmarked for transition from Balai 
(Besar)Wilayah Sungai (BBWS # river territory management unit under MPW) to a Badan 
Layanan Umun  (BLU). It would likely cover:  (i) establishment and capacity building of BWS-
BLU, including a set of interventions for institutional development, management strategy, and 
capacity-building to improve service delivery and fiscal sustainability; and (ii) river and 
irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation and improvement, possibly including non-structural 
measures.  
 
A3. National Hydrology Management Program and Information System (NHMP/SISDA): It 
would support development and implementation of a NHMP that would help improve the 
availability and quality of critical hydrological information, and enable assessment of water 
resources potential and utilization for scientific decision-making.  
 
B. 
Participatory Irrigation Management  
 
This sub-component will provide continued support to selected irrigation schemes which 
received supports from WISMP1, and support to larger irrigation systems under central 
government responsibility (>3000 ha).  
 
B1.  Institutional strengthening and capacity building for participatory irrigation management: 
Continued support for empowerment and scaling up of WUA/WUAFs and irrigation committees, 
and for capacity-building of irrigation management agencies and WUAFs to improve irrigation 
service delivery, multi-year planning and O&M of irrigation and drainage infrastructure;  
 
B2.  Irrigation System Improvement at different levels: Rehabilitation and improvement of 
central, provincial and district government irrigation system infrastructure taking into account 
climate change impacts;  
 
B3.  Irrigated agriculture support and climate change adaptation:  support for agriculture 
extension activities, climate change adaption measures incl. replication of technological 
innovations (e.g. SRI), and other interventions for improving agricultural productivity and 
raising farmers# income.  
 
Component 2.   Jatiluhur Irrigation System Rehabilitation and Improvement (Tentative cost 
US$ 90 million)  
 
This Component will provide support for the rehabilitation and modernization of the largest 
irrigation system of the country - Jatiluhur Irrigation System in northern West Java, including the 
Page  3
North and East Tarum Canal systems, for management improvement including 
development/strengthening and capacity building of the WUAFs, the Irrigation Committees and 
the Kabupaten Irrigation Services, and for measures to increase agricultural productivity. It likely 
includes three sub-components:  
 
J1. Institutional strengthening for Irrigation system management:  development and 
operationalization of an effective inter-agency management scheme involving related 
management agencies and farmer water user associations and their federations;  
 
J2. Infrastructure rehabilitation for I&D, flood and sediment management; and  
 
J3. Irrigated agriculture support and climate change adaptation:  Agriculture extension activities 
for productivity improvement, replication of technological innovations (e.g. SRI), and limited 
post-harvest support, etc.  
 
Component 3.  Project Management and Technical Assistance (Tentative cost: US$15 million)  
 
This Component would support project management, technical assistance for project 
implementation, independent M&E, investment planning studies and other preparatory activities 
needed for preparation of future investment interventions.  
 
Project Costs and Schedule.   The total project costs are expected to be around $250 million, 
including a Bank loan of $200 million. The project would become effective in January, 2011, 
immediately after the completion of WISMP 1. The project would last for 5 years.  
 
Implementation Arrangements.  Implementation arrangements will build on the experiences of 
WISMP1 and introduce necessary adjustments based on the results of PIP TA and Jatiluhur 
Irrigation System Management Improvement Study. It is expected that project implementation 
units (PIUs) would need to be established at national, provincial and district levels. The central 
implementing agencies of the project would be MoPW-DGWR, MoA#DG PLA and MoHA-DG 
Bangda, with MoPW and Bappenas as the anchor ministry and cross-sector coordination agency 
respectively. Civil societies would be engaged in project investment identifications and 
selections, as well as social mobilization and capacity building of irrigation water user 
community organizations (WUAs and WUAFs).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project activities under Component 1 would be located in a number of provinces 
and river basins (mostly within WISMP 1 areas in terms of geographical coverage, but to be 
decided), and activities under Component 2 will be located in Jatiluhur Irrigation System in 
northern West Java Province, including the North and East Tarum Canal systems.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agencies for WISMP 2 will essentially be the same as WISMP1 supported by 
the Bank.The PIUs, except possibly a small number of new PIUs, are familiar with Bank 
safeguards policies and requirements. The performance of WISMP1 PIUs with respect to social 
and environmental aspects of project implementation is in general satisfactory.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ninin K. Dewi (EASIS) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project activities of Component 1 are mainly small scale river basin management and 
irrigation infrastructure restoration, rehabilitation and improvement activities.  Majority of 
physical works will be limited to localized repair and rehabilitation activities within existing 
infrastructure and water course systems. Irrigation sub-component will not likely have 
significant, adverse irreversible or unprecedented environmental impacts, or affect vulnerable or 
protected sites or on critical natural habitats, because of the nature and scale of rehabilitation 
work within the existing irrigation canals only.  
 
Component 2 of the project supports rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage structures 
including canal lining, diversion and intake facilities, related control structures, and flood and 
sediment management (dredging) works.  Potential negative environmental impacts may include 
increased erosion; temporary deterioration of water quality, scouring of canals, and other 
construction related impact. Positive impacts include more effective water resources 
management (including water quality/pollution management) at basin, irrigation system and 
community levels, higher water use efficiency, improved water delivery services, higher capacity 
in adapting to climate change and hydro-met variability, and reduced vulnerability of farmer 
communities to climate risks.   
 
An assessment of the experience of WSIMP on the application of the Environmental and 
Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) will be undertaken by the task team to update the 
framework incorporating the lessons learned in the first project. The task team will also prepare 
standardized environmental guidelines for the most common type of projects and impacts of 
WSIMP2 in particular project activities of component 1.  EA/EMP will be prepared for activities 
that have been identified both for component 1 and 2 as required under both the Indonesia EA 
system and the Bank#s OP 4.01. Environmental assessment will identify and address any critical 
environmental issues related to the irrigation schemes that would include among others issues 
water quality, aquatic weeds and vectors (mosquito), and include measures to address these 
issues as relevant. EA/EMP will also focus on vulnerable populations who may be living in the 
project area and who may need additional efforts in incorporating them into the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Project activities will not take place in any protected areas, known natural habitats, or 
established or proposed critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Project activities will not take place in critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The irrigated agriculture support sub-component both under Components 1 and 2 includes 
support in agricultural extension services, climate change adaptation measures including 
replication of environmental-friendly technological innovations (e.g. SRI) and other 
interventions for improving agricultural productivity and raising farmers income.  
 
The Client will prepare a plan Integrating an IPM (meeting the requirements of OP4.09) 
with the Government's own ongoing IPM and INM (Integrated Nutrient Management), propose 
and define implementation institutional arrangements (budget, monitoring and reporting 
arrangements)   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Project activities will not take place in or near sites with archeological, paleontological, 
historical, religious, or unique natural values.  
 
Standard appropriate clauses will be included in all construction contracts regarding the 
procedures to be followed in the event of 'chance finds' of culturally significant artifacts or sites 
and this will be part of the EMP.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Except for Jatiluhur which is located in West Java province, WISMP-2 will works on 
WISMP-1 provinces with some additional kabupatens to be participated.  The activities will 
work on the downstream areas, where in the provinces participating in the project, no indigenous 
or isolated peoples reside. The activities will also work at the existing canals which have been 
operated for years. Experienced from the WISMP-1, most of the works will be small 
rehabilitation to the canals for a better water flows conducted by the community through 
WUAFs.  A bigger physical works will be undertaken in Jatiluhur component, but there is no 
indigenous community in the project area. However, whether this policy should be triggered will 
be decided when sufficient information is available.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition will be undertaken in the component 1 and component 2 of the project, 
which is likely to be in small scale with manageable impacts. Jatiluhur component will have 
bigger scale physical activities which will lead to a bigger scale land acquisition. Though, since 
the physical works will focus more on rehabilitation of the existing canals, it is expected that 
there will be no significant adverse impact to the community in the project area.  For component 
1, as most of activities are in community level, experience of WISMP-1 implementation has 
shown that all of the lands were acquired through voluntary land contribution. It is very common 
that the community contributed their small pieces of land to get a higher benefit from the 
activities.  
 
Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF) as a general guideline of 
the project in dealing with land acquisition and resettlement preparation and implementation will 
be developed by the Government of Indonesia. This Framework as part of the ESSF provides 
main principles of land acquisition according the Bank#s policy and provides procedures of land 
acquisition implementation, including the consultation process, compensation scheme, grievance 
mechanism and the arrangement of monitoring. For each subproject identified involving land 
acquisition that already indentified during preparation, the Land Acquisition and Resettlement 
Action Plan (LARAP) will also be prepared. NPMU is responsible to provide all the safeguard 
documents in timely manner so that they can be disclosed in the InfoShop as well as in the 
country (MoPW) website prior to project appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The Project will not finance dams. It needs to be clarified during preparation phase if any 
existing  dams/reservoirs will have direct linkage to the project activities.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
There will not be project activities on international rivers.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
There will not be any project activities that relate to dispute areas.   
Page  6
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/15/2010 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (including Environmental Management 
Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework) will be completed by project appraisal  
 
2.
The EA/EMP for the first year work program of Component 2 will be prepared before 
project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Xiaokai Li 
04/09/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/22/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross 
12/15/2010 
Comments:  approved. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
