Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/27/2010 
Report No.:  AC5841
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P114348 
Project Name:  Water Resources and Irrigation Sector Management Program 2 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaokai Li 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 23, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: January 27, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASIS 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Irrigation and 
drainage (50%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (67%);Rural services and infrastructure (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to assist the Government of Indonesia to improve 
the capacity for basin water resources and irrigation management, and increase irrigated 
agriculture productivity in the project basins, provinces and districts. Achievement of the 
development objectives would be evaluated through the following performance 
indicators: (i) Number of basin units(Balai PSDA)  for national and provincial basins 
fully functional; (ii) Number of Irrigation Commissions fully functional; and (iii) 
Increase in irrigated agriculture productivity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project covers a total 16 river basins (in 10 provinces) and 94 districts. It 
covers: (i) improvement of water resources and irrigation management capacity and 
effectiveness through investments in institutional strengthening, capacity-building and 
infrastructure; and (ii) interventions to increase irrigated agriculture productivity and 
farmers income. The project has three main components and a project management and 
implementation support component as summarized in the following.  
 
Page  2
Component 1.  Improvement of basin water resources management (Tentative Cost: 
US$37 million):  
 
This component aims at strengthening Basin Water Resources Management (BWRM) 
through improvement of operational effectiveness of basic management organizations 
and of physical system performance of BWRM for 10 selected national river basins and 6 
selected provincial river basins in ten provinces. This component will have the following 
two sub-components:  
 
A1:  Improvement of Operational Performance of Basin Management Institutions: 
Under this sub-component the project supports consolidation of institutional development 
initiatives in participating river basins through building the operational capacity of both 
the basin management organizations and coordination mechanisms for better planning 
and service delivery. This involves: (i) improvement of the information network and 
knowledge base; (ii) development/upgrading of appropriate decision making tools and 
operational plans; and (iii) improvement of basin management capacity, coordination and 
funding mechanisms.  
 
A2:  Improving Basin River Infrastructure and its Management:   Under this sub-
component the project will support in the selected basins, river infrastructure 
repairs/improvement and capacity building for O&M and asset management to enhance 
the physical system performance in delivering the core services.  
 
Component 2.    Improvement of participatory irrigation management (PIM) (Tentative 
Cost: US$ 60 million)  
 
This component is for improving the irrigation service delivery performance and 
sustainability.   It will provide continued support to replication of WISMP1 good 
practices of participatory irrigation management (PIM) which integrates institutional 
development (including capacity-building) with priority irrigation physical system 
interventions, in provincial and district irrigation schemes in 94 districts selected for their 
high level of commitment and performance under WISMP1.  
 
B.1.  Improvement of participatory irrigation management institutions: 
This sub-
component provides support to the establishment and enhancement of the local PIM 
regulatory frameworks and the capacity building and empowerment of local institutions 
such as government irrigation and agriculture agencies, WUAFs and Irrigation 
Committees, for improvement of irrigation service delivery and sustainable operation of 
the project irrigation systems.  
 
B.2.  Rehabilitation of Priority Irrigation System Infrastructure:  
   This sub-component 
supports light and medium rehabilitation and repairs of provincial and district 
government irrigation system infrastructure in the form of sub-projects which meet the 
agreed screening criteria (technical, economic, institutional, social and environmental).  
 
B.3.  Irrigated agriculture support and climate change adaptation:  It funds critical 
agriculture support activities and climate change adaption measures, particularly scaling 
up the technological innovations (e.g. replication of SRI in project areas), for improving 
agricultural productivity and raising farmers# farm income. The project will also 
facilitate farmers to  improve their capacity to: (i) adopt new technology to better respond 
to market demand; (ii) develop agribusiness management skills; and (iii) engage in public 
private partnerships.  
 
Page  3
Component 3: Jatiluhur Irrigation Management Improvement (Tentative Cost: US$40 
million).  
 
This component represents the first stage in the improvement and modernization of the 
management of Indonesia#s largest irrigation system -Jatiluhur Irrigation System (with a 
command area of 240.000 hectares). It involves introduction of participatory irrigation 
management principles, establishment and strengthening of management and governance 
institutions, improvement of high priority irrigation infrastructure, support for 
accelerating irrigated agricultural development and improvement of farm system 
resilience to increasing climate variability and competition for water. This component 
consists of three subcomponents:  
 
C1. Strengthening Jatiluhur Irrigation Management Institutions: it funds support and 
capacity-building activities including facilitation, monitoring, training and workshops, for 
establishment and strengthening of participatory irrigation management and governance 
institutions for Jatiluhur Irrigation System: Irrigation Commissions, Kabupaten and 
Provincial Services, PJT II, and the BBWS- Citarum;  
 
C2. Rehabilitation and improvement of irrigation and drainage infrastructure: it funds 
removal of bottlenecks in the East and North Tarum Main Canals and rehabilitation of a 
number of high priority secondary irrigation systems serving some 25,000 ha of 
farmland.  
 
C3. Preparation for overall system rehabilitation and modernization:  Technical 
assistance for (a) the implementation of the improvement and rehabilitation works and (b) 
preparation of Jatiluhur management, institutional and technical designs and tender 
documents for the rehabilitation and modernization of the ETC and NTC main canals and 
the rehabilitation of the remaining secondary irrigation systems in the West, East and 
North Tarum Command Areas.  
 
Activities specific for Kabupaten and Province within the Jatiluhur command area, such 
as development and strengthening of WUAs/WUAFs, establishment of Irrigation 
Committees, and implementation of  accelerated agricultural development support 
activities, will be covered under component B.1 and B.3 for convenience of organization 
and cost effectiveness.  
 
Component 4.  Project Management and Implementation Support (Tentative Cost: 
US$13.4 million):  
 
This Component would provide support to project management and project results 
M&E activities, including the PMTA and Independent monitoring & evaluation (IMEU) 
TA, and incremental operating costs for the project management and implementation 
units at the national level.  
 
Project Costs and Schedule.      The total project costs are expected to be around $150 
million, including a Bank loan of $100 million and $50 million different levels of 
Page  4
government. The project loan is expected to become effective in early 2011, immediately 
after the completion of WISMP 1. The project would last for 5 years from 2011 to 2015.  
 
Implementation Arrangements.   The implementation arrangements for WIMSP 2 are 
very similar to WISMP1 given that they are both parts of the WISMP Program, except 
that Jatiluhur Component will have a separate implementation arrangement due to its 
scale and complexity. The main line ministry agencies to be involved in the project 
would be Ministry of Public Works (MoPW), Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA), with MoPW and Bappenas as the anchor ministry 
and cross-sector coordination agency respectively. Project management units (PMU) and 
implementation units (PIUs) would need to be established at national (NPMU and 
NPIUs), provincial (PPMUs and PPIUs) and district (KPIUs) levels. There will be strong 
and wide participation in the program throughout the project cycle by the local 
governments. Civil society organizations would be engaged in project investment 
identifications and selections, as well as social mobilization and capacity building of 
irrigation water user community organizations (WUAs and WUAFs). In addition, to 
address the issue of inadequate implementation capacity at different levels, a number of 
implementation support TA consultant teams will be recruited to assist the PMUs and 
PIUs at various levels in project implementation.  The main areas of TA include technical 
studies, designs and supervision, project management, fiduciary and safeguards 
management, capacity-building, monitoring and evaluation. Based on the experiences of 
WISMP1, some necessary adjustments will be made in the TA structure for better cost 
effectiveness.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project as a national program covers 16 river basins and 94 districts in Java and 
several outer islands (Sumatra, Sulawesi, NTB and so on), involving 14 provinces. The 
proposed project activities under Components 1 and 2 largely overlap in geographical 
coverage (provinces and districts) with WISMP1. Activities under Component 3 are 
located in Jatiluhur Irrigation System in northern West Java Province, more specifically 
within the North and East Tarum Canal Systems. The nature of the infrastructure 
investments is of rehabilitation of existing schemes or works mostly very small in scale. 
The Jatiluhur component will however involve some larger scale works such as canal 
lining and normalization and control structure upgrading, with appreciable environmental 
impact and possible need for limited land acquisition.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ninin K. Dewi (EASIS) 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
On Social Safeguards:  
 
Scale of impacts of land acquisition:     Limited land acquisition may be needed for 
implementation of Components 1-3 activities. In all three components, the physical 
activities are rehabilitation and repairs of existing irrigation schemes and river 
infrastructure of small scales. Under the first phase of WISMP Program (WISMP-1), very 
similar physical works such as canals lining and other minor works were mostly carried 
out by the community organizations # Water User Association Federations (WUAFs). No 
land acquisition with compensation took place during the implementation of WISMP-1. 
The limited land required for the construction was donated by the concerned land owners 
who are WUAF members and direct beneficiaries of the WISMP-1 schemes. The 
situation with Components 1 and 2 of WISMP-2 is very similar to WISMP-1.  
 
The scale of physical works under Component 3 will be somewhat bigger, temporary 
land occupation for canal de-silting and normalization construction, and relocation of a 
undetermined number of temporary buildings on land owned by the PJT II (Operating 
Unit) along the right of ways of the secondary canals to be rehabilitated are likely to be 
required. For instance, in Benggala sub-system (CS Barugbug), there are about 15 houses 
with semi-permanent structures along the right bank of the canal to be rehabilitated. The 
residents are all tenants who pay annual rental fee for their occupation of the land; n 
Pawelutan sub-system (CS Pawelutan), about 3.6 km from off-take at ETC, there are 
about 35 temporary wooden buildings which are used as warung (kiosk). However, the 
implementation agency has confirmed that there will be no need for land acquisition and 
resettlement under the first year work program.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (IP):      The project will not undertake physical works or develop 
policies regarding resource (water) use that would negatively affect indigenous peoples.  
Experience of WISMP 1 showed that all the project activities are in existing irrigation 
schemes in the downstream area, where no indigenous vulnerable peoples reside. It is 
Page  6
confirmed that there are no indigenous communities present in the areas of the proposed 
first year work program of WISMP 2. However, since the proposed project will last for 
multiple years and some project sites are yet to be identified, there might be indigenous 
groups to be found in the areas of project activities. An Indigenous Peoples Policy 
Framework has thus been developed to ensure that the subprojects will be designed and 
implemented in such a way that foster full respect for IP#s dignity, human rights and 
cultural uniqueness so that they receive culturally compatible socio-economic benefits.  
 
On environmental safeguards:  
 
The project activities to be financed under Components 1 and 2 are continuation of 
WISMP-1 project activities. Majority of physical works will be limited to localized repair 
and rehabilitation activities within existing infrastructure and canal systems. Component 
2
#
Irrigation Management Improvement will not likely have significant, irreversible or 
unprecedented adverse environmental impacts, or affect vulnerable or protected sites or 
be on critical natural habitats, because of the nature and scale of rehabilitation work.  
 
Improving environmental conditions through improved water resources and irrigation 
management is an integral part of project design. The project is expected to have positive 
environmental impacts because it will: (a) support water quality management 
improvement in selected river basins, thereby reducing negative impacts on people#s 
health and the environment; (b) improve resource management both at local and basin 
levels, (c) improve coordination and cooperation between upstream and downstream 
water users; and (d) help enhance water use right management including the recognition 
of ecological and in-stream water uses.  
 
Component 3 is for Jatiluhur irrigation system management improvement and involves 
small to medium scale of irrigation and drainage rehabilitation works including canal 
lining and normalization, intake and control structures, etc. Potential negative 
environmental impacts may include increased erosion; temporary deterioration of water 
quality, scouring of canal banks, and other construction related impacts. Positive impacts 
include more effective water resources management (including water quality/pollution 
management) at basin, irrigation system and community levels, higher water use 
efficiency, improved water delivery services, increased capacity of farm communities in 
adapting to climate change and hydro-met variability.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant indirect negative impacts are expected from the proposed project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternative analysis was carried out for scale, contents and focus of the proposed project 
and components, and locations of different river basins and districts for various project 
interventions, including a #no project# option. The focus is on institutional development 
and capacity building for basin water resources and participatory irrigation management 
Page  7
with small scale rehabilitation of physical works. For the physical works rehabilitation, 
technical designs have been and/or will be optimized to minimize needs for resettlement 
and land acquisition, and environmental impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project entity has prepared an Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework 
(ESSF) which establishes a set of policies and guidelines to guide the implementing units 
in screening, appraisal and supervision of the environmental and social aspects of 
subprojects under different project components. The ESSF is designed to minimize 
adverse environmental and social impacts that may occur due to the implementation of 
the project activities. Given the project scope and design, it is anticipated that subprojects 
will generally not cause significant negative social or environmental impacts. However, 
there is a risk that some subprojects could involve small land acquisition. To minimize 
and mitigate such risks, a #Negative List#, safeguard screening, assessment and 
mitigation action planning are all spelled out in the ESSF to ensure that the issues are 
identified and adequate measures are included and undertaken.  
 
Based on the ESSF, detailed procedures for the environmental and social review of 
subprojects have been included in the Project Management Manual (PMM), covering 
subproject screening, appraisal, design, construction and operation.  The PMM specifies 
the roles and responsibilities of the different project units involved in civil works 
activities at each of the phases: subproject screening/preparation, construction, and 
operation phases. The implementing units are essentially the same as WISMP-1, will be 
assisted by the technical assistance consultants staffed with social and environmental 
management specialists. Hands-on training will be provided to the implementing and 
management unit staff concerned at national, provincial and district levels prior to loan 
effectiveness.  
 
Environmental Safeguards Instruments:    An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
has been prepared for system management improvement and physical system 
rehabilitation of the Jatiluhur Irrigation System in West Java, in particular for the first 
year sub-projects in the North and East Tarum Irrigation sub systems.  In the EMP, it is 
required to include in the construction contracts clauses that specify the mitigation 
measures contractors are responsible for implementation, for example, worksite access # 
the contractors must receive site hand-over certificates or equivalent from the employer 
documenting that either no persons or building need to be displaced and no land 
acquisition is needed, or saying that all necessary land acquisition, compensation, 
relocation assistance and relocations have been completed satisfactorily in accordance 
with the ESSF requirements. These documents have been prepared with the technical 
assistance from an international consultant team, on the basis of the Indonesian legal and 
policy framework for environmental protection and Bank environmental safeguard 
policies. In addition, an integrated pest management plan (IPMP) incorporating national 
and international good practices of pest management has been included in the ESSF and 
will be disclosed publicly, and followed in project implementation.  
 
Page  8
Furthermore, the Bank policy on Dam Safety is triggered by the Jatiluhur Dam as 
storage and regulating facility for Jatiluhur Irrigation System. Considering that the 
Jatiluhur Dam is part of an ongoing Bank-supported Dam Operational Improvement and 
Safety Project (DOISP), and both physical remedial measures and capacity-building 
interventions such as preparation of emergency action plan are included under DOISP, 
timely implementation of DOISP activities for the Jatiluhur Dam will be able to meet the 
Bank policy requirements. However, the implementing unit (BBWS-Citarum) will 
coordinate with the DOISP team, track and report regularly on the progress in 
implementing the dam safety management measures.  
 
Resettlement Instruments:   Any potential impacts from land acquisition will be 
identified and mitigated through development and implementation of appropriate 
resettlement instruments to ensure that all affected people will be adequately consulted, 
fairly compensated, not worse-off because of the project. The instruments will provide 
procedures for consultation, compensation scheme, grievance mechanism, and 
monitoring. The two main resettlement instruments are:  
 
(i) Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF), which is part of the 
ESSF:   The process of land acquisition and assets compensation during project 
implementation will follow not only the Government of Indonesia policy/regulations, but 
also the World Bank on involuntary resettlement policy. The ESSF which includes land 
acquisition and resettlement policy framework is developed to bridge the gaps between 
these policies, and provide general guidance for land acquisition and resettlement 
implementation. This ESSF has incorporated the experiences and lessons learnt from 
WISMP-1, and included consideration of bigger scale of land requirement for Jatiluhur 
Component.  The Framework   not only regulates land acquisition with compensation (for 
land and other assets, such as buildings and crops) but also provides procedures for 
marginal land or asset acquisition through voluntary  contributions which may happen in 
small irrigation system rehabilitation, as experienced in WISMP-1. The requirement for 
Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plan for each subproject involving land 
acquisition is also regulated by the Framework.  
 
(ii) Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plan (LARAP):  During the project 
preparation and implementation periods, the government project teams guided and 
coordinated by the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) will screen all 
subprojects to see if they involve land acquisition and  determine the scale of acquisition 
and compensation, and the land contribution needs. Any sub-projects that require a 
LARAP in accordance with the ESSF, should be developed and disclosed to those 
affected upon clearance by the World Bank, prior to the sub-project authorization for 
financing. The government project management will ensure that the LARAP will be 
followed during the land acquisition implementation. The Bank will supervise the land 
acquisition implementation to ensure its conformity with the agreed action plan.  
 
Indigenous peoples instrument: 
 To ensure that the indigenous community will get 
equal social and economic benefits as the majority groups in the project areas, the 
Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) is developed as part of the ESSF. Once IP 
Page  9
are identified in project areas    the sub-project design will include measures in 
accordance with the IPPF.  
 
Institutional capacity:    The MoPW (DGWR) has experiences in dealing with land 
acquisition following the regulations of Government of Indonesia, and has implemented 
over the years many Bank-funded projects. The NPMU within DGWR, with the help of a 
technical assistance consultant team, has successfully developed the ESSF (including 
LARPF, IPPF, and IPMP) through consultation process, and overseen the preparation of 
EA/EMP for Jatiluhur by another technical assistance team. During project 
implementation, the NPMU with assistance of implementation support consultants will 
lead the preparation of LARAPs and EAs/EMPs for subprojects involving land 
acquisition and having significant environmental impacts. The NPMU has become 
familiar with the safeguards policies of the World Bank through five years of managing 
WISMP-1 implementation. For Jatiluhur Component which  involve bigger physical 
activities with potentially bigger scale of land acquisition, the implementing unit, BBWS-
Citarum also knows the requirements of the Bank safeguards policies through 
implementing Bank and other donor (e.g. Asian Development Bank) funded projects. 
However, the capacity of Borrower#s project teams, especially that of the NPMU, and 
project implementation units (PIUs), particularly BBWS-Citarum need to be strengthened 
further, to ensure that the safeguards screening and assessment are properly done, 
documents are prepared timely in conformity with the Bank policy requirements and the 
agreed framework and plans are implemented satisfactorily. To this end, safeguards 
policy training focusing on environmental impact assessment, involuntary resettlement 
and indigenous peoples policies and application of the ESSF will be organized prior to 
loan effectiveness for implementing units responsible for physical works sub-projects. 
This will be followed by refreshment training sessions to be undertaken by the safeguards 
specialists of NPMU/TA team.  
 
For the community-level physical activities, as the land acquisition will likely be very 
minor and be done mostly through voluntary land contribution, the WUAFs facilitated by 
the community organizers are capable of managing it. The community organizers and 
District Irrigation Committees involved in the project will help ensure that the land 
acquisition (and contribution) follows the proper process and is documented by WUAFs 
concerned for record and review during supervision visits and that the indigenous groups, 
if present in the project areas, will be included in the program.  
 
Mechanism to monitor the implementation of agreed plan:    Internal as well as external 
monitoring of environmental management and land acquisition by project management 
units and M&E consultants respectively will be conducted. The NPMU will provide the 
Bank with report on the implementation progress and results of different subprojects, 
including consolidated information on community-level land contributions. It will enable 
the Bank to keep track of implementation of the agreed action plans. This will be 
enhanced by regular supervision visits to the concerned subproject sites by the Bank.   
 
Page  10
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders for the project include concerned national and local government 
agencies, civil society and beneficiary farmer and water user communities, including the 
indigenous community, if any. Potentially affected people will also be part of the project 
beneficiary groups among whom vulnerable households will be identified. The project 
design and implementation will follow program approach. The selection, preparation and 
implementation of each sub-project and irrigation scheme will be highly participatory. 
Similarly the safeguards assessment and management action planning will be based on 
intensive consultation and involvements of concerned stakeholders, as depicted in the 
ESSF. The mitigation mitigation/action plans will be disclosed to those affected before 
the sub-projects are authorized. The final version of the ESSF will be disclosed at the 
project#s website, in Jakarta Library and at all the project district irrigation services# 
offices, and at the World Bank#s InfoShop. During the ESSF peraparation, a workshop 
was held on August 31, 2010 as part of the disclosure and consultation of the draft with 
the local PIUs and relevant NGOs.  Prior to the workshop, the document was posted at 
the project#s website to allow the invitees and other parties to access the document. 
WISMP2 subproject specific safeguards instruments will be subject to consultations and 
disclosure by the Borrower, as required by World Bank policies. WISMP2 client will 
disclose EA reports, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plans (LARAPs), etc. in 
a
public place accessible to affected groups, local NGOs and other stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/26/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/19/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/25/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/19/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/25/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/19/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/26/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/19/2010 
 
Page  11
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2010 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  12
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Xiaokai Li 
10/28/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Andrew Daniel Sembel 
11/19/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ninin K. Dewi 
11/19/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/19/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Franz R. Drees-Gross 
11/19/2010 
Comments:   
