Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2011 
Report No.:  AC5648
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Iraq 
Project ID:  P123689 
Project Name:  Second Emergency Assistance Program for Primary Health Care 
Task Team Leader:  Eileen Brainne Sullivan 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 16, 2011 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Population and reproductive health (60%);Child health (20%);Tuberculosis 
(20%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Iraq Reconstruction Trust Fund 
1.20 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.10
1.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the proposed project is to increase access and quality of basic 
health services for vulnerable groups, including pregnant women and children, through 
improved partnerships between public healthcare service providers and community-based 
health services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would achieve its objective through the following four components:  
 
Component 1: Improving Service Delivery and Community Outreach. This component 
is designed to increase access to and capacity of primary health services in the 
Marshlands and Babil Governorate, and to improve quality of services.  Activities would 
include: (i) rehabilitating and operating twelve existing Primary Healthcare Centers 
(PHCCs) (eight in the Marshlands and four in Babil Governorate), including upgrades to 
PHCCs through the purchase of new medical equipment for the MCH departments and 
laboratories in the project area, and continuing support to the operation of the four 
PHCCs rehabilitated under the First Emergency Assistance Program for Primary 
Page  2
Healthcare (FEAP-PH); (ii) establishing and operating four tuberculosis-dedicated mobile 
clinics in Basra, Maysan, Thi-Qar and Babil Governorates; (iii) training Iraqi health 
professionals in primary healthcare in the project area, with emphasis on preventive care 
services, including immunization, birth monitoring (and MCH services more broadly), 
and diagnostic care, as well as on the management and treatment of disease, and 
emergency/rapid-response strategies and techniques, including community surveillance, 
to protect against health threats such as avian flu and polio; (iv) continuing support to 
AMAR#s existing Women Health Volunteer (WHV) Program which will be substantially 
increased in size and scope.  Besides the 360 current WHVs, an additional 240 female 
volunteers will be recruited from the communities served by the twelve PHCCs 
mentioned above.  These volunteers will receive regular training in preventive healthcare 
techniques, including basic hygiene and good nutrition, and will visit up to 50 families 
each in their respective communities to disseminate the new knowledge they have gained; 
and (v) continuing the operation of the three mobile primary healthcare facilities (Mobile 
Health Clinics) supported under the FEAP-PH to maintain their community outreach 
coverage of the remote areas.  The objective is to provide access to primary healthcare for 
the most isolated populations as well as individuals who are disabled or otherwise unable 
to reach a health facility.  
 
Component 2: Health Education and Promotion of Behavior Change.  This component 
is designed to increase and improve health knowledge in the project area, with particular 
emphasis on children.  This component will support two programs: (i) carrying out the 
Health Education in Schools (HES) Program; and (ii) carrying out the Health Education 
in the Community (HEC) Program.  These programs are designed to increase and 
improve health knowledge in the Marshlands and Babil with particular emphasis on 
children. The two programs will play a key role in promoting behavior change among 
members of the communities which it reaches.  The Health Education in Schools program 
under the proposed project will be expanded to include eight primary schools and four 
secondary schools in Babil Governorate in connection with the additional four PHCCs to 
be supported by the project.  Through the #Health Education in the Community 
Program,69 teachers and 3 teaching supervisors will each deliver four health education 
sessions per month at public meetings for local communities held in and around the 
PHCCs.  The sessions, which will reach approximately 3,500 local community members 
on a monthly basis, will discuss health issues directly relevant to local communities and 
will raise awareness of local health facilities available.  The health advice delivered to 
local communities through formal verbal health education sessions will be supplemented 
by the printing, publication and dissemination of Health Education leaflets, posters and 
digital media to further enhance health awareness activities.  The health activities under 
this component will be supplemented by the health education activities of the WHVs and 
the Mobile Health Clinics described above in Component 1, thereby disseminating health 
knowledge to isolated and remote communities in the project areas.  
 
Component 3: Health Monitoring and Engaging Local Health Authorities.  This 
component is designed to establish key baselines and trends to improve monitoring of the 
health of the targeted population and utilization of health services, with a view to 
facilitating local and regional planning and appropriate and timely allocation of resources 
Page  3
by health authorities and other decision-makers.  Two sets of activities will be supported: 
(i) enhancing diagnostic capacity through increasing the quality and usage level of the 
laboratory facilities; and (ii) carrying out activities aimed at increasing effectiveness of 
collaboration between AMAR and the MOH, including information exchange, joint 
development of health materials, training of MOH personnel, and joint development and 
implementation of a health database program to cover the marshlands and Babil 
Governorate.  These activities have been successfully launched under the First 
Emergency Assistance Program for Primary Healthcare which closed on November 22, 
2010, and will be further developed with this project.  
 
Component 4: Project Management.  This component is designed to strengthen 
AMAR#s capacity for project management, monitoring and evaluation through provision 
of goods, consultants# services (including project audit and training), and provide 
financial support and resources to manage and coordinate project activities. The project 
will provide support and resources for management and coordination of project activities.  
AMAR will be responsible for coordinating the activities of this project through a Project 
Management Team which will be based in AMAR#s Basra office, with oversight by the 
AMAR Iraq Country Manager, based in Baghdad, and by a Project Board of Trustees 
based in the London office, which will provide strategic direction and monitor project 
progress and reporting.  The in-country Project Management Team (PMT), which will be 
headed by a Senior Project Manager, will include financial, procurement, 
implementation, and Monitoring and Evaluation/IT specialists.  Project implementation 
personnel in the project Governorates will report to the PMT on a regular basis.  The 
team will in turn report regularly to the Project Board in the London office.  For 
monitoring and evaluation of project results, the PMT in Basra will collate data on 
project activities and prepare reports measuring achievements against project activities, in 
coordination with the London Office team.  The London office will ensure that reporting 
requirements for the project are met.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project activities will be centered in four Governorates: the three southern 
Marshlands Governorates of Basrah, Maysan and Thi-Qar; and Babil Governorate.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Samia Al-Duaij (MNSEN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The works programs are very modest and limited to the upgrading and refurbishing of 
existing PHCCs created under the first project, for a total cost estimated at US$24,000.  
There is no requirement for an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), however, 
Attachment 2 of the Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework 
(ESSAF) will be included as part of the technical specifications of civil works, goods and 
services contracts.  
 
Resettlement and Land Acquisition.  The project will not include new construction.  
Therefore, World Bank Operational Policy (OP4.12) on Involuntary Resettlement will 
not be triggered since there will not be any involuntary relocation of populations or 
expropriation of privately owned land.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long-term potential negative impacts are anticipated as a result of the 
proposed project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N.A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N.A.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/12/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/12/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/12/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
No 
Page  6
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Eileen Brainne Sullivan 
04/12/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
04/12/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/13/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Akiko Maeda 
04/14/2011 
Comments:   
