Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/10/2011 
Report No.:  AC5867
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Jamaica 
Project ID:  P112780 
Project Name:  Jamaica Energy Investments and TA 
Task Team Leader:  Michel E. Layec 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (100%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase energy efficiency and 
security through implementing Jamaica's National Energy Policy. Specific Project goals 
are to build capacity, to provide international best practice to the government and support 
its energy cost reduction and diversification efforts through investments in liquefied 
natural gas, energy efficiency (EE) measures, renewable energy (RE) investments, and to 
reduce GHG emissions from the energy sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
2. 
The Project includes three components:  
 
3. 
Component 1: Strengthening the Regulatory and Institutional Framework to 
Improve Sector Performance, Increase Private Investment and Transition to Cleaner 
Fuels (IBRD US$5.15 million.  It includes the following  sub-components:  
 
Sub-Component 1.1. Operationalization of the National Energy Policy (IBRD 
US$510,000; Implementation: MEM).  This sub-component will provide technical 
support to MEM to develop: (a) detailed policies on renewable energy in particular for 
Page  2
hydro, wind resources and biomass, energy efficiency, and gaz; and related regulations; 
and of the (b) related implementation strategies and plans.  
 
Sub-Component 1.2. Strengthening the regulatory framework and PPP monitoring 
capacity of the energy sector (IBRD US$1,170,000; Implementation: OUR). This sub-
component will allow OUR and MEM to access expertise and develop capacity to: (i) 
develop regulations required for the development of renewable energy (including tariff 
setting methodologies), and the gas/LNG initiative; (ii) extend OUR oversight to the gas, 
refinery and downstream petroleum sector; and (iii) develop the monitoring and 
benchmarking instruments.  
 
Sub-component 1.3.  Accelerating the development of cost-effective privately- 
financed generation investment in the power sector (IBRD US$1,620,000; 
Implementation: OUR). This sub-component will allow OUR and MEM to: (a) access 
international expertise in preparing the electricity generation projects; (b) interact 
effectively with the private developers; and to (b) build capacity.  
 
Sub-Component 1.4. Implementation of the LNG project (IBRD US$1,650,000; 
Implementation: LNG Project unit). The Project supports the Government off-oil 
diversification strategy in particular through the introduction of Liquefied Natural Gas 
(LNG) in Jamaica#s energy matrix. This sub-component will provide resources to access 
the international technical, commercial, financial and legal expertise critical for 
developing a sound LNG project and the related investments, for stakeholders# 
information and consultation.  
 
Sub-Component 1.5. Carbon credit mobilization (IBRD US$120,000; 
Implementation: MEM). This sub-component will provide technical assistance to MEM 
and other agencies for harnessing the carbon credit potential [clarify what you mean here; 
consult with Chandra) created through activities supported by the Government energy 
policy. These are activities related to energy efficiency, renewable energy development 
and fuel substitution/introduction of LNG.  
 
Sub-Component 1.6 Implementing the Energy Strategy/Project Communication 
and Information Program (IBRD US$80,000; Implementation: MEM). This sub-
component will provide resources to implement the Project communication and 
information program.  
 
4. 
Component 2: Developing Jamaica#s Energy Efficiency (EE) and Renewable 
Energy Potential (IBRD US$9.1 million). It includes the following sub-components.  
Component 1 supports the strengthening of the regulatory and incentive frameworks and 
of the mobilization of carbon finance.  
 
Sub-Component 2.1. Expansion of the appliances testing and labeling program of 
the Bureau of Standards. (IBRD US$1,150,000; Implementation: Bureau of Standards of 
Jamaica). As part of the increased energy efficiency efforts, the Bureau of Standards will 
extend its testing and labeling and information program. This sub-component will finance 
Page  3
an expansion of testing chambers to test all refrigerators and freezers air-conditioners 
imported in the country; and expand the related labeling and information program.  
 
Sub-Component 2.2.  Selection of Investors for Small Hydro sites. (IBRD 
US$2,760,000; Implementation: Center of Excellence on Renewable Energies).  This 
sub-component will provide resources to carry out investment promotion activitiesof 
small hydro sites that have been identified and to mobilize investors.  
 
Sub-Component 2.3.  Promotion of Wind Energy (IBRD US$170,000; 
Implementation: Center of Excellence for Renewable Energy). This sub-component will 
support the dissemination to potential investors, of the results of the on-shore wind 
resources assessment initiated with IDB support, and will promote private sector 
investment in wind energy. Subcomponent 1.2 supports the strengthening of the 
renewable energy regulatory and incentives framework.  
 
Sub-Component 2.4. Line of Credit for Energy Efficiency (EE) and Renewable 
Energy (RE) Financing (US$5,020,000; Implementation: The Development Bank of 
Jamaica).  This sub-component will finance the initial endowment for a demonstration 
Line of Credit/revolving facility supporting EE and RE private sector investments.  The 
retail financing to private firms for EE and RE projects will be provided by Approved 
Financial Institutions # AFIs) drawing from the LOC managed by the Development Bank 
of Jamaica (DBJ). The AFIs will be responsible for the subprojects due diligence.  .  
 
5. 
Component 3: Project Management and M&E (IBRD US$750,000). This 
component will be managed by MEM and includes the following 2 sub-components:  
 
Sub-Component 3.1. Strengthening of MEM project implementation capacity 
(IBRD US$670,000). Over the 4-year Project implementation period, this sub-component 
will finance access to expertise and capacity building in project management, 
procurement and financial management, and ensure compliance with the Project fiduciary 
requirements (accounting, financial management, procurement, audits, etc.).  
 
Sub-Component 3.2. Project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (IBRD 
US$80,000). This sub-component provides resource for the definition of the 
metrics/indicators to monitor and assess implementation progress of the project and 
related actions under the National Energy Policy.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
6. 
The Project geographical scope is Jamaica. It includes: (a) US$9.5 million for 
financing  technical assistance/preparation support for: (i) upgrading of the energy sector 
regulatory framework and for strengthening the sector institutions; and (ii) delineating 
projects, selecting developers and mobilizing financing for new power generating units, 
implementing the LNG strategy and developing small hydroelectric sites; (b) US$1 
million to extend the Bureau of Standard testing/labeling facilities; and: (b) US$4.5 
Page  4
million for supporting energy efficiency and renewable energies investments by private 
sector small and medium enterprises (SMEs).  
 
7. 
Prefeasibility/feasibility studies and other studies for small hydros and other 
energy infrastructure (renewable and non renewable such as the power generating units 
and the LNG project) will be financed by the Project. The terms-of-reference for these 
studies will include, when appropriate, an assessment of the potential environmental and 
social impacts of the project and alternatives considered.  The studies will also include 
the principles and procedures for planning and implementation to comply with Bank and 
national policies  
 
8. 
Extension of the testing and labeling program for electrical appliances of the 
Bureau of Standards with the objective of increasing the energy efficiency of 
refrigerators, freezers and air-conditioning units. Additional testing chambers will be 
installed within the Bureau of Standards existing office building in Kingston; no major 
equipment will be discarded.  
 
9. 
For the Line of Credit/Revolving Fund component of the Project (subcomponent 
2.2 of US$5 million), an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy Framework (IRPF) have been prepared and drafts will be disclosed 
prior to Appraisal. These frameworks will ensure that potential negative environmental 
and social impacts of the private sector EE and RE investments are adequately assessed 
and mitigated and comply with Bank and National policies and guidelines.  Potential 
investments financed through the line of credit could include, but not be limited to, RE 
and EE investments in solar panels, solar water heaters, retrofitting/replacement of 
lighting equipment, air conditioning facilities, chillers, etc. and are expected to be 
relatively small (US$150-200,000). They will only be confirmed once the SMEs 
proposals are assessed by the local financial institutions (AFIs), National Environmental 
and Planning Agency (NEPA) and by the Development Bank of Jamaica (DBJ).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Anjali Acharya (LCSEN) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The negative environmental and social impacts from Project-financed activities are 
expected to be low. Terms-of-reference for prefeasibility, feasibility and other studies for 
small hydros financed by the Project will include an environmental and social assessment 
of the alternative considered to ensure a clear definition of the scope of the potential 
impacts and to guide the elaboration of the management plans and of the Abbreviated 
Resettlement Plans (ARPs). As needed Terms-of-Reference for other Project supported 
technical assistance will include environmental and social reviews as required by the 
national and the Bank policies. Except for the energy efficiency and renewable energy 
activities carried out by the SMEs through the financing of the proposed line of 
credit/revolving fund and the extension of the appliances testing facilities of the Bureau 
of Standards, the Project does not plan to fund works.  The Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) includes screening criteria to evaluate SME sub-projects, as well as an 
environmental management plan covering potential environmental impacts and related 
mitigation activities.  The Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework (IRPF) defines 
involuntary resettlement principles, institutional arrangements,  criteria and procedures to 
be applied to the SME sub-projects.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is not expected to have long term impacts. The TORs of investment 
preparation studies financed by the Project will ensure that potential environmental and 
social impacts are assessed, and alternatives compared.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The subprojects to be financed through the Project Line of Credit are demand-driven, and 
the investments will not be defined before appraisal. Once specific enterprises and related 
investments are identified, the analysis of alternatives would be part of the specific 
environmental and social assessment process. The EMF and the IRPF include the 
methodology and criteria to screen and assess project alternatives for the investments 
financed through the line of credit/revolving fund.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and the Involuntary Resettlement 
Policy Framework (IRPF)  will support the implementing agencies and participating 
accredited financial intermediaries (AFIs) in incorporating environmental and social 
sustainability criteria within their screening of SME sub-projects, in a manner compliant 
with Bank Policies, while allowing the flexibility for sub-project identification 
subsequent to Bank approval. In order to ensure adequate safeguard capacity within the 
implementing agency, as well as AFIs, capacity building will be undertaken through 
training seminars and workshops to ensure proper implementation.   The team has been 
Page  6
coordinating with NEPA throughout the Project preparation process and NEPA will 
leverage its knowledge of WB Safeguards to work with the MEM and DBJ to prepare an 
EMF and an IRPF that will be disclosed prior to Appraisal to ensure that potential 
negative environmental and social impacts of the private sector EE and RE investments 
are adequately assessed and comply with Bank and National policies and guidelines.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are: (a) the SMEs using the proposed Line of Credit, the AFIs and 
DBJ for the activities financed through the line of credit; (b) Ministry of Energy and 
Mining, and the entities responsible for the investment studies (the Center of Excellence 
for Renewable Energy of PCJ, the LNG Project unit), and National Environmental 
Protection Agency (NEPA). The EMF and IRPF will be disclosed on MEM, DBJ, NEPA 
and Bank websites.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/21/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/05/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/05/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/21/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/05/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/05/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
A
Pest Management Plan is not expected because  
 
this safeguard is only being triggered as a precaution to allow flexibility to potential EE 
or RE investments and related facilities that may, among other things, store pesticides.  
No procurement of pesticides will be supported under this Project. Pesticides that could 
be stored would not be those that are on the exclusion list, which are the Class 1A 
pesticides.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
N/A 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
N/A 
Page  8
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel E. Layec 
01/05/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Anjali Acharya 
01/05/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
01/05/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
01/05/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
01/05/2011 
Comments:   
