Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5986 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/06/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jamaica 
Project ID: P112780 
Project Name: Jamaica Energy Investments and TA 
Task Team Leader: Michel E. Layec 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2011 
Managing Unit: LCSEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (100%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase energy efficiency and security 
through implementing Jamaica's National Energy Policy.  
 
Project Beneficiaries  
 
2.
The Project direct beneficiaries will be Jamaica's energy consumers (residential, 
commercial, industrial) in the public and private sectors, as the Project will contribute to the 
objective of reducing energy costs and increasing energy security through diversification, the 
development of renewable energy and energy efficiency investments by the private sector. The 
Project will also contribute globally in reducing GHG emissions.  
 
PDO Level Results Indicators  
 
3.
Progress towards achieving the PDO will be assessed through the evolution of energy 
costs, changes in  Jamaica's energy matrix (relative increase of the share of renewable energy, 
introduction of LNG, decrease in the role of petroleum products), new investment commitments 
in electricity generation and energy efficiency, and reduction in GHG emissions. The Project 
Outcomes and Intermediate Results indicators are presented in Annex 1.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components  
 
4.
The Project includes three components. The Project has been designed to provide a 
comprehensive support to the implementation of GoJ's energy policy and strategy covering the 
2010-2030 period. Successful implementation of the national energy policy and strategy will 
require a comprehensive and coordinate set of actions by: (a) GoJ to provide a transparent and 
enabling environment, and regulations and incentives on both the demand and supply sides; (b) 
the private sector in mobilizing investment financing and carrying out the investments; and by 
(c) Jamaica#s international partners.  
 
5. 
To help GoJ achieving these goals, the Project supports the: (a) strengthening of the 
sector regulatory framework and the relevant public sector institutions to increase sector 
performance, and mobilize private sector investment (component 1); (b) Tapping into Jamaica#s 
energy efficiency potential by testing electrical appliances for energy efficiency, proposing 
efficiency standards and by informing consumers, supporting private sector investment in energy 
efficiency and renewable energy (component 2); and (c) providing resources for the 
implementation of  GoJ energy program and of the Project  (component 3).  
 
6. 
Component 1: Strengthening the Regulatory and Institutional Framework to Improve 
Sector Performance, Increase Private Investment and Transition to Cleaner Fuels (IBRD 
US$5.15 million.  It includes the following  sub-components:  
 
a. 
Sub-Component 1.1. Operationalization of the National Energy Policy (IBRD 
US$510,000; Implementation: MEM).  This sub-component will provide technical support to 
MEM to develop: (a) detailed policies on renewable energy in particular for hydro, wind 
resources and biomass, energy efficiency, and gaz; and related regulations; and of the (b) related 
implementation strategies and plans.  
 
b. 
Sub-Component 1.2. Strengthening the regulatory framework and PPP monitoring 
capacity of the energy sector (IBRD US$1,170,000; Implementation: OUR). This sub-
component will allow OUR and MEM to access expertise and develop capacity to: (i) develop 
regulations required for the development of renewable energy (including tariff setting 
methodologies), and the gas/LNG initiative; (ii) extend OUR oversight to the gas, refinery and 
downstream petroleum sector; and (iii) develop the monitoring and benchmarking instruments.  
 
c. 
Sub-component 1.3.  Accelerating the development of cost-effective privately- financed 
generation investment in the power sector (IBRD US$1,620,000; Implementation: OUR). This 
sub-component will allow OUR and MEM to: (a) access international expertise in preparing the 
electricity generation projects (para..); (b) interact effectively with the private developers; and to 
(b) build capacity.  
 
d. 
Sub-Component 1.4. Implementation of the LNG project (IBRD US$1,650,000; 
Implementation: LNG Project unit). The Project supports the Government off-oil diversification 
strategy in particular through the introduction of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) in Jamaica's 
energy matrix. This sub-component will provide resources to access the international technical, 
Page  3
commercial, financial and legal expertise critical for developing a sound LNG project and the 
related investments, for stakeholders information and consultation.  
 
e. 
Sub-Component 1.5. Carbon credit mobilization (IBRD US$120,000; Implementation: 
MEM). This sub-component will provide technical assistance to MEM and other agencies for 
harnessing the carbon credit potential [clarify what you mean here; consult with Chandra) 
created through activities supported by the Government energy policy. These are activities 
related to energy efficiency, renewable energy development and fuel substitution/introduction of 
LNG.  
 
f. 
Sub-Component 1.6 Implementing the Energy Strategy/Project Communication and 
Information Program (IBRD US$80,000; Implementation: MEM). This sub-component will 
provide resources to implement the Project communication and information program.  
 
7. 
Component 2: Developing Jamaica's Energy Efficiency (EE) and Renewable Energy 
Potential (IBRD US$9.1 million).  It includes the following sub-components.  Component 1 
supports the strengthening of the regulatory and incentive frameworks and of the mobilization of 
carbon finance.  
 
a. 
Sub-Component 2.1. Expansion of the appliances testing and labeling program of the 
Bureau of Standards. (IBRD US$1,150,000; Implementation: Bureau of Standards of Jamaica). 
As part of the increased energy efficiency efforts, the Bureau of Standards will extend its testing 
and labeling and information program. This sub-component will finance an expansion of testing 
chambers to test all refrigerators and freezers air-conditioners imported in the country; and 
expand the related labeling and information program.  
 
b. 
Sub-Component 2.2.  Selection of Investors for Small Hydro sites. (IBRD US$2,760,000; 
Implementation: Center of Excellence on Renewable Energies).  This sub-component will 
provide resources to carry out investment promotion activities of small hydro sites that have been 
identified and to mobilize investors.  
 
c. 
Sub-Component 2.3.  Promotion of Wind Energy (IBRD US$170,000; Implementation: 
Center of Excellence for Renewable Energy). This sub-component will support the dissemination 
to potential investors, of the results of the on-shore wind resources assessment initiated with IDB 
support, and will promote private sector investment in wind energy. Subcomponent 1.2 supports 
the strengthening of the renewable energy regulatory and incentives framework.  
 
d. 
Sub-Component 2.4. Line of Credit for Energy Efficiency (EE) and Renewable Energy 
(RE) Financing (US$5,020,000; Implementation: The Development Bank of Jamaica).  This sub-
component will finance the initial endowment for a demonstration Line of Credit/revolving 
facility supporting EE and RE private sector investments.  The retail financing to private firms 
for EE and RE projects will be provided by Approved Financial Institutions (AFIs) drawing from 
the LOC managed by the Development Bank of Jamaica (DBJ). The AFIs will be responsible for 
the subprojects due diligence.  
 
Page  4
8. 
Component 3: Project Management and M&E (IBRD US$750,000). This component will 
be managed by MEM and includes the following 2 sub-components:  
 
a. 
Sub-Component 3.1. Strengthening of MEM project implementation capacity (IBRD 
US$670,000). Over the 4-year Project implementation period, this sub-component will finance 
access to expertise and capacity building in project management, procurement and financial 
management, and ensure compliance with the Project fiduciary requirements (accounting, 
financial management, procurement, audits, etc.).  
 
b.
Sub-Component 3.2. Project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (IBRD US$80,000). 
This sub-component provides resource for the definition of the metrics/indicators to monitor and 
assess implementation progress of the project and related actions under the National Energy 
Policy.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
9. 
The project geographical scope is Jamaica. It includes: (a) US$9.5 million for financing  
technical assistance/preparation support for: (i) upgrading of the energy sector regulatory 
framework and for strengthening the sector institutions; (ii) delineating projects, selecting 
developers and mobilizing financing for new power generating units, implementing the LNG 
strategy and developing small hydro sites; (b) US$1 million to extend DBS testing/labeling 
facilities; and: (b) US$4.5 million for supporting energy efficiency and renewable energies 
investments by private sector small and medium enterprises (SMEs).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
10. 
For the Line of Credit/Revolving Fund component of the Project (subcomponent 2.2 of 
US$5 million), potential investments financed through the line of credit could include, but not be 
limited to, RE and EE investments in solar panels, solar water heaters, retrofitting/replacement of 
lighting equipment, air conditioning facilities, chillers, etc. and are expected to be relatively 
small (US$150-200,000) but will only be known once the SMEs proposals are assessed by the 
local financial institutions (AFIs), National Environmental and Planning Agency (NEPA) and by 
the Development Bank of Jamaica (DBJ).  The NEPA is knowledgeable about World Bank 
environmental and social safeguards because its experience in preparing an Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) for the Jamaica Social Investment Fund project.  The team has 
been coordinating with NEPA throughout the Project preparation process and NEPA will 
leverage its knowledge of WB Safeguards to work with the MEM and DBJ to prepare an EMF 
and an IRPF that will be disclosed prior to Appraisal to ensure that potential negative 
environmental and social impacts of the private sector EE and RE investments are adequately 
assessed and comply with Bank and National policies and guidelines.  Training and capacity 
building will be offered to DBJ and participating AFIs on safeguard policies during Appraisal.  
 
The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and the Involuntary Resettlement Policy 
Framework (IRPF) will support the implementing agency and participating accredited financial 
intermediaries (AFIs) incorporate environmental and social sustainability criteria within their 
screening of SME sub-projects, in a manner compliant with Bank policies, while allowing the 
flexibility for sub-project identification subsequent to Bank approval. In order to ensure adequate 
safeguard capacity within the implementing agency, as well as AFIs, capacity building will be 
undertaken through training seminars and workshops to ensure proper implementation.   A brief 
Page  5
addendum will be added to the EMF and the Operational Manual stating that terms of reference 
for providing technical assistance or supporting studies for the preparation of energy projects 
should include, where appropriate, technical expertise to any address potential environmental 
and social implications on a case by case basis - depending upon the gravity of potential 
environmental or social impacts.  
 
11.
Extension of the testing and labeling program for electrical appliances of the Bureau of 
Standards with the objective of increasing energy efficiency. The new testing chambers will be 
part of the Bureau of Standards office building in Kingston; no major equipment will be 
discarded.  
 
12. 
Prefeasibility/feasibility studies for small hydros and other energy infrastructure 
(renewable and non renewable such as the LNG project) will be financed by the Project. The 
terms-of-reference for these studies will include an assessment of the potential environmental 
and social impacts of the alternatives considered. The studies will also include the  principles and 
procedures for planning and implementation to comply with Bank and national policies   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Anjali Acharya (LCSEN) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While small in size, the RE and EE investments financed through the proposed line of 
credit/revolving fund and carried out by the SMEs, could potentially have negative 
environmental or social impacts.  The potential impacts are expected to be relatively small and 
able to be mitigated.  The specific investments will however only be defined in detail during 
Project implementation.  To ensure that projects are screened, that their impacts are adequately 
assessed and mitigated, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and an Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy Framework (IRPF) laying out the applicable policies and guidelines is being 
prepared and will be disclosed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The Project is not expected to impact critical natural habitats. However, this policy is 
triggered as a precaution. The EMF will include screening procedures to ensure that potential 
SME sub-projects will not involve unprecedented or significant conversion of natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
This safeguard is being triggered as a precaution to allow flexibility for potential EE or RE 
investments that might involve management of natural forest areas.  No logging operations will 
be supported under this Project.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
This safeguard is being triggered as a precaution to allow flexibility to potential EE or RE 
investments that might involve facilities that may, among other things, store pesticides.  No 
procurement of pesticides will be supported under this Project.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The Project team does not foresee the activities financed by the project namely the 
preparation of prefeasibility/feasibility studies and the Line of Credit will cause involuntary 
resettlement. However, an Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework (IRPF) asses potential 
impacts and refer to the relevant safeguards policies and guidelines to be followed by MEM 
(Implementing Unit) and the participating accredited financial intermediaries during planning 
and implementation. The IRPF has been prepared for the prefeasibility/feasibility studies 
component and for the Line of Credit/Revolving Fund component, and defines the expected 
impacts, scope, manner in which the Project will address the involuntary resettlement measures. 
The IRPF states the guidelines for the preparation of   Abbreviated Resettlement Plans (ARPs) 
during implementation, which are required to be submitted to the Bank for approval as a 
condition for the financing of the respective sub-project.  The IRPF includes: (i) principles, 
review of policy regulations; (ii) institutional arrangements, roles and competences; (iii) 
consultations disclosure and grievance redress mechanisms ;(iv) monitoring and reporting 
process. The IRPF will be discussed with the Borrower during Appraisal and will be finalized 
during the Appraisal Mission.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The Project will not finance the upgrading, rehabilitation or new dams. The Project could 
however finance prefeasibility or feasibility studies for hydroelectric sites including dams. In 
such situation the terms-of-reference for the studies (prefeasibility, feasibility studies, and other 
studies) will include an assessment of the potential environmental and social impacts of the 
project and the alternatives considered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
U
-
Not Rated (for all adjustment operations except for SECA) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/22/2010 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Prior to Appraisal.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel E. Layec 
01/05/2011 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Francis V. Fragano 
01/05/2011 
Comments:  Acting for Glenn Morgan 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
01/06/2011 
Comments:   
