Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/21/2011 
Report No.:  AC5778
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kenya 
Project ID:  P113542 
Project Name:  Kenya Informal Settlements Improvement Project (KISIP) 
Task Team Leader:  Sumila Gulyani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 23, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%);Sub-national 
government administration (30%);General transportation sector (30%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (60%);Municipal governance and 
institution building (20%);Other urban development (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
45.00 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
10.00
65.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective of the KISIP is to improve living conditions in 
informal settlements in selected municipalities in Kenya.  This will be achieved by 
improving security of tenure and investing in infrastructure based on plans developed in 
consultation with the community.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Kenya Informal Settlement Improvement Program (KISIP) is the second in a series 
of programs that will support the Government of Kenya (GoK) in the urban and local 
Government sector. This program will have the following components.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening institutions and program management.  This component 
will support institutional strengthening and capacity building of the Ministry of Housing, 
the Ministry of Lands, and the participating municipalities.  It will also finance the 
Page  2
management activities associated with program implementation and establishment of a 
monitoring and evaluation system.  
 
Component 2: Enhancing tenure security.  This component will support systematization 
and scale-up of ongoing efforts to strengthen tenure security in urban informal 
settlements.  
 
Component 3: Investing in infrastructure and service delivery.  This component will 
support investment in settlement infrastructure, and, where necessary, extension of trunk 
infrastructure to settlements.  
 
Component 4: Planning for urban growth.  This component will support planning and 
development of options that facilitate delivery of infrastructure services, land and housing 
for future population growth.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
A
list of 15 urban municipalities are on the long-list of participants for this program.  
These municipalities include: Nyeri, Thika, Nairobi, Machakos, Embu, Kitui, Naivasha, 
Nakuru, Eldoret, Kisumu, Kericho, Mombasa, Malindi, Kakamega and Garissa. 
However, participation is voluntary and requires municipalities to meet certain rules of 
access.  The total population covered by these towns is about 6.4 million.  Nairobi is the 
largest, with 3.2 million inhabitants, and Embu is the smallest, with 60,673 residents. 
Most of these towns are administrative capitals of their provinces.  The number of people 
living in informal settlements is rising, due to rural to urban migration.  Informal 
settlements are characterized by inadequate drainage with flooding during the rainy 
season, lack of clean water and sanitation facilities, poor solid waste management, and 
absence of other infrastructure.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu (SASDI) 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The investments eligible for financing under KISIP include roads, bicycle paths, 
pedestrian walkways, street and security lighting, vending platforms, solid waste 
management, stormwater drainage, water and sanitation systems, electrification, public 
parks, and green spaces.  Environment and social impacts will be mostly construction 
related and will be mitigated by the preparation of management plans linked to the 
bidding process.  The screening criteria in the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will determine the nature and magnitude of impacts before these are 
taken up and management measures will be developed accordingly. Enhancement of 
positive impacts for the overall improvement of living quality in these settlements will be 
integrated with the community mobilization initiative and community enhancement plans 
will be prepared for each settlement.  There may be limited displacement of people due to 
the requirement of rehabilitation of infrastructure.  To the extent possible, they will be 
resettled within the settlements.  The Resettlement Policy Framework provides guidance 
on the resettlement and compensation process.  A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or 
abbreviated RAP will be prepared as necessary.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Initial reconnaissance carried out for the preparation of the ESMF indicates that there are 
no potential indirect and / or long term impacts due to the proposed activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environment and social impacts are minimized as a direct consequence of the settlement 
selection methodology adopted by the project.  This includes:  
 
-
Land tenure status: a settlement must be located on land that is owned by the 
government or on land with clear ownership status.  
 
-
Location: a settlement cannot be located on a hazardous site or in an 
environmentally fragile area.  
 
-
Settlement size and density: larger and denser settlements will receive priority to 
ensure that as many people as possible benefit from the investments.  
 
-
Scale of potential displacement of residents: physical upgrading of the settlement 
should not entail large-scale displacement (and, thereby, relocation) of residents.  
 
-
Proximity to trunk infrastructure: to maximize settlement coverage within a 
limited budget and to ensure that participating settlements receive connections to 
citywide infrastructure networks and maintenance systems, in the initial years of project 
implementation settlements that are in close proximity to core trunk infrastructure (such 
as roads and trunk lines for water, sewage or electricity) will receive priority.  
 
-
Sustainability of the proposed rehabilitation is ensured through community#s 
willingness to participate and remain engaged in the program.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Housing (MoH) has prepared an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) to screen and mitigate the impacts associated with the proposed 
infrastructure facilities.  This framework will provide guidance on the process to be 
followed for screening and mitigating the potential impacts.  
 
The Borrower has assigned environment and social/community development staff at 
ministry level who will be responsible for overseeing the preparation and implementation 
of environmental and social management plans at the participating municipalities# level.  
These officers are currently associated with an ongoing government program called the 
Kenya Slum Upgrading Program, and they are familiar and are experienced in dealing 
with the potential environmental and social issues that are likely to be encountered in this 
program.  The participating local authorities will have environment and social 
development specialists in their project teams to ensure the appropriate implementation 
of various management plans prepared as guided by the ESMF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the municipalities and council members, local residents, 
civil society, elected representatives and NGOs working in the respective municipalities.  
The preparation of the ESMF and the RPF has involved multiple focus group discussions 
with all city councils.  The draft ESMF and RPF will be discussed with these 
stakeholders and their feedback and suggestions will be incorporated appropriately. 
Further, during the preparation and design of specific investments in the selected 
informal settlements, there will be additional stakeholder consultations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/01/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/26/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/01/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/26/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sumila Gulyani 
01/21/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu 
01/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
01/21/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
01/21/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
01/21/2011 
Comments:   
