Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5814 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/25/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P122671 
Project Name: Partial Risk Guarantees for IPPs in Kenya 
Task Team Leader: Ritin Singh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 22, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 IDA 
Guarantee 
105.00
105.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the proposed project are to: (i) assist the Borrower to meet growing short-term 
demand in power generation; and (ii) the Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) will directly impact the 
capacity, efficiency, and in a timely manner, the power supply by adding more generation 
capacity to the grid by the Independent Power Producers (IPPs).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component:  Risk mitigation through a series of PRGs to increase short-term power generation 
from the IPPs as explained below.  
 
1. 
It is proposed that a series of PRGs with an IDA allocation of US$105 million be 
provided in support of payment obligations of Kenya Power and Lighting Company Ltd. (KPLC) 
under individual PPAs for the IPPs being considered by the Government.  
 
2. 
The proposed project would support the: (a) installation of three 60 - 80 MW capacity 
each Medium Speed Diesel (MSD) Power Plants.  They will be constructed by IPPs under a 20 
year Build Own Operate (BOO) arrangement.  Each IPP will be responsible for the construction 
Page  2
of a Fuel Storage Facility as well as the construction of an Interconnection Facility at each plant 
site to transmit the power to the national grid.  
 
3. 
The first PRG is expected to be in support of the PPA between KPLC and Gulf Power 
Limited (GPL), the IPP developer, for a total estimated Letter of Credit (LC) amount of US$35 
million.  Once Board approval is obtained of the proposed project, based on the PRG framework 
detailed in the PRG Term Sheet, it is proposed that the balance amount of US$70 million be 
deployed for the other subsequent two PRGs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The 3 MSD Plants are to be located at three different sites in the outskirts of Nairobi as follows:  
 
(1) Plant 1 at Export Processing Zone (EPZ), Athi River off Athi River-Namanga Road, 
approximately 30 km from Nairobi.  
 
(2) Plant 2 at Athi River Town on Mombasa Road approximately 35 km from Nairobi.  
 
(3) Plant 3 on Thika Road near Thika Town approximately 35 km from Nairobi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Kenya Power and Lighting Company Limited (KPLC) has sufficient capacity in managing the 
World Bank's safeguard policies under an ongoing project and has environmental specialists who 
shall undertake regular site visits, and progress reports shall be provided to the Bank.  
 
If social safeguards polices are triggered (OP 4.10 and OP 4.11) KPLC will retain a social 
scientist to prepare the required documents and supervise their implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS) 
Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01 will be triggered by the Athi River EPZ plant. Further 
clarification will be sought on wind patterns to determine whether pollutant emissions will be 
dispersed over the Nairobi National Park on a significant and regular basis, and if so, what 
measures can be taken to mitigate such emissions. The draft Environmental Impact Assessments 
(EIAs) include modeling for pollutant emissions at the sites.  Existing emission measurements 
indicate that by most measures, WHO definitions of what constitutes a degraded airshed are not 
exceeded.  Clarification on the sulfur content of the HFO will be sought from IPP developers.  If 
the sulfur content of the fuel to be used exceeds 2% the developers will be asked to prepare a 
cost-benefit analysis to determine if the costs of sulfur control measures are significantly higher 
than the health and environmental benefits of lower SO2 emissions.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The Environmental Assessment (EA) will determine if OP/BP4.11 needs to be triggered. If 
so, the impacts will be identified and a management plan developed as a part of the EA.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Should it be determined that there are vulnerable and marginalized groups in the vicinity of 
the three project sites, OP 4.10 will be triggered and the Government will prepare a vulnerable 
and marginalized group planning framework indicating how the communities will be informed as 
well as mitigation actions.  
 
Given the sensitivities with respect to the term "Indigenous People", the Government of 
Kenya (GoK) applied the nationally acceptable "vulnerable and marginalized groups" as used in 
the new Constitution of Kenya).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
It is not expected that there will be any resettlement or compensation for lost assets necessary 
at the three project sites.  If compensation payments are deemed necessary, a resettlement action 
plan will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal. The project is expected to positively affect 
the stakeholders through the provision of jobs and jointly agreed corporate social responsibility 
programs.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/12/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EA will be prepared, cleared and will be disclosed in the project areas and at the Bank 
Infoshop before appraisal.  The EA will ascertain if OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
needs to be triggered and if so will include an assessment of the physical cultural resources 
likely to be affected by the project and a management plan to address impact.  
 
OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.  It is expected that there will not be any resettlement 
or compensation for lost assets necessary at the three project sites. If compensation payments 
are deemed necessary, an abbreviated resettlement action plan will be prepared and disclosed 
before appraisal. The date for launching and completing the studies is 5/5/2011.  
 
OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples.  Should it be determined that there are vulnerable and 
marginalized groups in the vicinity of the three project sites, OP 4.10 will be triggered. If 
triggered, the Government will prepare a vulnerable and marginalized groups planning 
framework indicating how the communities will be informed of the project and its impact as 
well as mitigation actions. The document will be prepared prior to appraisal and disclosed at 
the relevant project sites and in the Infoshop.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ritin Singh 
04/25/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/26/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
04/25/2011 
Comments:   
