Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5425 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/21/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kiribati 
Project ID: P118552 
Project Name: Kiribati Food Crisis Response Operation 
Task Team Leader: Mona Sur 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 10, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 28, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASNS 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade (100%) 
Theme: Global food crisis response (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to contribute to the Government of Kiribati's short-term 
efforts to improve the availability and affordability of food on the outer islands of Kiribati.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
External economic shocks, particularly the food and fuel prices of 2008, hit Kiribati harder than 
almost any other country in the world. Worst hit were the people living in the outer islands of 
Kiribati who have little access to cash. Even before the food crisis of 2008, food expenditures 
accounted for a very high share of the average household budget (47 percent).  
 
One of the main mechanisms through which the Government of Kiribati is able to improve the 
affordability of major food items and reduce the cost of living in the outer islands of Kiribati is 
through its Import Levy Fund (ILF). The ILF is financed by a levy on all goods imported into 
South Tarawa. Funds from the ILF are then sued to subsidize the cost of transporting goods from 
South Tarawa to the outer islands. The freight of all food items shipped to the outer islands from 
South Tarawa is fully or partially subsidized. Following the 2008 food crisis and the global 
financial crisis, ILF receipts have fallen sharply. Since 2008, the ILF has had a negative balance 
Page  2
which has been financed from the Grants and Subsidies provision of the Government budget and 
thereby contributing to the drawdown of the Revenue Equalization and Reserve Fund (RERF). 
At the end of 2009, the ILF had a negative closing balance of AU$119,186. While Kiribati is not 
currently facing the acute pressures that it did at the height of the 2008 food and fuel crisis, the 
impact of the ILF persits. Unless the ILF is replenished immediately, it will continue to contrain 
Government's ability to ensure the affordability of food on the outer islands.  
 
The Project would consist of one component. The grant funds would be used to support the ILF. 
Under the project, disbursements would be made to reimburse the ILF for payments from the 
Fund for (i) subsidies related to the transport of food to the outer islands, defined as all islands in 
Kiribati except South Tarawa; and (ii) subsidies related to the transport of locally grown 
agricultural produce (excluding copra, seaweed and seacucumber) from the outer islands to 
South Tarawa. Except limitation to transport of food items only, all other provisions of 
Regulations 3(1)a; 3(1)b and 3(1)c under the Import Levy (Special Fund) Ordiance would apply. 
The Grant would permit continued operation of the ILF and would ensure that shipments of food 
to the outer islands are maintained while options for ILF sustainability are examined through 
separate technical assistance support.  
 
The project would use the existing implementation arrangements in the Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Development fo the ILF. The Accountant General would be responsible for the 
fiduciary aspects of the Project and for periodic reporting on progress.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Grant would be used to parially subsidize the transport of food to the outer islands of 
Kiribati. A small amount of the Grant would subsidize the transport of lcoal agricultural produce 
fromt he outer islands to South Tarawa.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project does not trigger any Bank safeguards policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASPS) 
Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
02/10/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not relevant   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mona Sur 
02/04/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/07/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
03/03/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
