Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/20/2011 
Report No.:  AC5478
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kiribati 
Project ID:  P122151 
Project Name:  Kiribati Road Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASNS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (75%);Other public sector governance 
(10%);Other urban development (10%);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (5%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.05 
 Asian 
Development 
Bank 
12.00 
 
Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund 
5.79
18.84 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is "The project will improve the condition of South 
Tarawa's main road network and help strengthen road financing and maintenance 
capacity."   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Civil Works - This component consists of the main civil works activities 
to be undertaken on the South Tarawa road infrastructure. The activities include:  
 
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of Paved Roads on South Tarawa. The road from St. 
Anne to the junction with the Ananau Causeway (~19.25 km), the Ananau Causeway to 
just past the airport terminal (~2.25 km), the road from the Ananau Causeway junction 
towards Temaiku 1 (~2.75 km), the road from Temaiku 1 to the south of the airport, and 
then west to the Ananau Causeway (~2.5 km), and the road from Tanaea to Buota island 
Page  2
(~2.5 km) will be reconstructed or rehabilitated (see map in Annex 7) with requisite 
safety improvements. About 7 km of water main adjacent to the road will be replaced.  
 
#
Rehabilitation of Betio Causeway. The pavement on the approximately 3.25 km 
long causeway will be rehabilitated, as well as potential repairs to the bridge deck.  
 
#
Rehabilitation of Paved Roads in Betio. Repairs to localized pavement failures 
and drainage improvements in Betio.  
 
#
Sealing of Feeder Roads. Up to 8 km of unsealed urban feeder roads with high 
traffic volumes will be sealed and provided with improved drainage. The roads were 
identified in consultation with the New Zealand Aid Programme (NZAP) financed STP  
 
#
Road Safety Improvements. Implementation of a road safety improvement 
program, including street lighting, road signage and pavement markings, to address road 
safety issues on paved roads not otherwise included in the civil works packages.  
 
#
Consulting Services. For the design and supervision of civil works.  
 
Component B: Road Sector Reform - Activities to strengthen the road sector and 
ultimately lead to more sustainable main road infrastructure in South Tarawa:  
 
#
Land Transport Institutional Review Study. Provision of technical advisory 
services for a land transport institutional review study to review the existing land 
transport sector framework, and develop and implement a road map for sector 
restructuring, including: (i) identification of options for reform of the GOK's concerned 
ministries and agencies; (ii) identification of cost recovery options available for provision 
of access to and maintenance of roads, using revenues from vehicle import duties, fuel 
taxes and registration fees; and, (iii) preparation of draft road legislation reflecting the 
chosen options.  
 
#
Micro-Enterprises for Routine Road Maintenance. Provision of assistance in the 
form of (i) training, (ii) procurement of basic plant and equipment, and (iii) operational 
support for the management and monitoring of contracts, in order to promote the 
establishment of micro-enterprises to undertake routine maintenance on the GOK's paved 
road network, using performance-based contracting methodology, and under supervision 
by MPWU.  
 
#
Road Safety Action Plan. Development and implementation of a multi-sectoral 
road safety action plan in consultation with the Kiribati#s National Road Safety Task 
Force Committee, including provision of breath testing equipment and radar guns for the 
traffic police to improve enforcement.  
 
#
Road Emergency Response Plan. The development and implementation of an 
emergency response plan to help mitigate the impact of any disasters to the Recipient#s 
road network.  
 
Component C: Project Support. Specialist support to the GOK for implementation of the 
Project. This includes:  
 
#
Establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) to ensure the smooth operation 
of the project. The PMU will handle procurement and financial management, as well as 
assisting in the preparation of work-plans, budgets, progress and impact reports, and 
coordination of the overall implementation of the project.  It will comprise a full-time 
Page  3
locally-recruited project manager and accountant, part-time internationally recruited 
procurement specialist;  
 
#
Project associated incremental operating costs (e.g. telecommunications, local 
workshops for stakeholders, procurement-associated activities, etc.);  
 
#
A
valuation specialist to identify the appropriate compensation rates for trees and 
other assets affected by the Project;  
 
#
An NGO to monitor implementation of the RPF; and,  
 
#
Audit of project accounts.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities will be located in South Tarawa. The investments are on the main road 
running east-west along South Tarawa, and also north towards the airport. All 
investments are on the existing road right-of-way.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASNS) 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment: The Project is rated as a Category B project due to the 
environmental impact.  
 
The environmental management plan (EMP) was prepared and was disclosed on 
September 6, 2010. The EMP summarizes all the anticipated environmental impacts and 
its associated mitigation measures during the design, construction and operational phases. 
It makes reference to the relevant law and contract documents, approximate location, 
timeframe, mitigation costs, and the responsibility for its implementation and 
supervision. A field monitoring checklist has been prepared based on the EMP and 
monitoring plan. The field monitoring checklist will be used by the supervising 
Page  4
engineers. The signed checklists will be provided to the MPWU who will be responsible 
for the appropriate follow-up and compliance reporting.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement Assessment: The project will rehabilitate the footprint of the 
existing road. While the acquisition of land will be avoided whenever feasible, and while 
all viable alternatives will be explored, it may be necessary to acquire small parcels of 
land adjacent to the existing road in order to build bus stops. This will not be clear until 
the design stage of the road works. Temporary acquisition of land may also be required 
for easements to provide drainage pipes. There may also be cases where assets such as 
coconut trees may be affected to make way for sidewalks or bus stops. In order to address 
this, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed that identifies principles to 
be followed in the event of temporary land acquisition, the damage or removal of assets 
such as coconut trees, the acquisition of land, or any livelihood impacts that may be 
experienced by people as a result of the road works. It also provides for any unforeseen 
impacts during project implementation. Consultations on the RPF toook place in Tarawa, 
September 20-21, 2010.  Comments and concerns raised during the consultations have 
been documented, and will be incorporated into the final RPF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environmental Assessment: The main potential environmental impacts identified include: 
(i) disturbance including noise and dust arising from loading and unloading, and 
transportation of construction materials (aggregates and bitumen) by dump trucks; (ii) 
noise and dust arising during scarifying the existing road base, construction of the new 
road base and construction of the new surface; (iii) erosion and sedimentation from 
exposed surfaces that may affect the lagoon environment during the construction 
processes; (iv) risks from the use and disposal of hazardous materials such as used fuel 
and lubricants; and, (v) increased risk of accidents from increased vehicle movements.  
 
A
key consideration during project preparation was where the materials for the road 
construction would be sourced. The bulk of the road construction materials will be 
imported from offshore such as Banaba, Nauru or Fiji. This will minimize the demand on 
the limited local resources.  
 
The earlier construction of over 3 km of causeways has significantly restricted the tidal 
flows from the lagoon which is having an impact on water quality and potentially health. 
The project will also seek to improve the tidal flow from the atoll by installing some new 
culverts into these causeways.  
 
The project will undertake an HIV/AIDS education campaign for workers and affected 
local residents.  
 
The improved road will result in higher speeds. To ensure that there is proper safety to 
road users and local residents, the project undertook a road safety audit of the design. 
This identified a range of actions to be taken to improve road safety. The audit will be 
Page  5
used to guide the designers and also be monitored during project implemenation. The 
project will also implement a multi-sectoral road safety action plan.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement: The government has an appropriate grievance system in place 
but it may need to be supported during implementation to ensure that grievances are 
sorted in a timely manner. Consultations took place in Tarawa, September 20-21, 2010 to 
disclose the project and documentation, and future consultations will take place with 
affected people to discuss compensation procedures.  
 
Traditionally, land plots in South Tarawa are situated in strips from the ocean to the 
lagoon side. In the 1940s the British Colonial Government built the existing road through 
the island, essentially dividing existing plots. No records exist to confirm how acquisition 
took place or what, if any, compensation was paid. Since then, the land had been 
recognized as public property. After independence in 1979, the GOK assumed 
responsibility for maintaining the road. In the early 1990s the GOK considered providing 
back-payments for the road acquisition for the land under the existing road but the issue 
was later dropped.  
 
There are no outstanding grievances in the country or complaints from landowners 
about the land under the road. This has been confirmed by the Magistrates Court. In fact, 
in recent years several projects have been undertaken to rehabilitate portions of the road 
and no ownership claims have been made. Currently, sections of the road are being 
maintained by MPWU and no ownership claims have been made. Moreover, the ADB 
financed the construction of a water pipe which is buried next to road in many places and 
no ownership claims were made. Finally, no concerns or compensation claims were 
raised in the recent consultations in Tarawa September 20-21, 2010 regarding the land 
under the existing road. Given this historical scenario, the Project will proceed 
recognizing the road as public property. However, the Project will be in a position to 
address any claims of ownership for the land under the road if necessary through the 
compensation system adopted for land acquisition for bus stops and sidewalks.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This is the only east-west corridor through South Tarawa so there is no alternative to 
ensuring that it meets the basic access needs to the community and remains passable.  
 
The main alternatives considered were with regard to road design options and, 
importantly, material selection. The normal practice for materials supply is the use of 
coral. While the government is considering implementing a dredge for deep-water 
dredging of coral from within the atoll, it was instead decided for the project to import 
high quality material from sustainably sourced suppliers in Banaba, Nauru and/or Fiji. 
This will minimize the negative environmental impact of the project.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
For resettlement, the Borrower has exiting institutional capacity for implementing the 
project. They are able to identify affected people and pay compensation payments.  If 
needed the project will provide additional support to the government's existing grievance 
system. The project will supply a valuation specialist to update compensation for assets 
such as trees. It will also finance an NGO to monitor implementation of the RPF.  
 
An EMP was prepared by the MPWU with assistance from a consultant procured by the 
ADB. It was reviewed by the Bank and found to be satisfactory.  
 
A
social development specialist was procured by the ADB to prepare a poverty 
reduction and social strategy for the project, as well as a gender action plan. Another 
consultant was procured by the ADB to assist with the preparation of the resettlement 
policy framework. If needed, the project will procure another consultant in the future to 
prepare an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan which can be overseen by the Lands 
Management Division. The consultants designing the road will assist the government in 
appropriately surveying the affected people when needed.  
 
During implementation, the foreign consultant responsible for construction supervision 
will be employed to ensure that the project is implemented in accordance with the EMP 
and resettlement framework. The EMP will form part of the bidding documents and 
therefore be binding on the contractor.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The road affects virtually the entire South Tarawa population.  
 
As required by the World Bank and Asian Development Bank Safeguards Policies, 
public consultations were undertaken during the preparation of EMP. Preliminary 
consultations were undertaken on July 10-11, 2010 during the environmental mission to 
Tarawa, and August 12-26, 2010 during the pre-appraisal mission. Additional public 
consultations and information disclosure took place in Tarawa September 20-21, 2010. 
The EMP and RPF will be available locally to the communities at the MPWU office and 
Community centers.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/16/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/06/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/07/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  7
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/13/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/21/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/22/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  8
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
01/12/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anil H. Somani 
01/12/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini 
01/12/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
01/21/2011 
Comments:   
