Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5856 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/10/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kiribati 
Project ID: P124363 
Project Name: Kiribati Aviation Infrastructure Investment 
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASNS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Aviation (100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (90%);Climate change (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
26.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives are: (i) to provide safe, secure, and reliable infrastructure for 
Kiribati's airports and air strips; (ii) to improve the aviation regulatory environment; and, (iii) to 
provide sustainable management and operations of the international airports.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A: International Airport Infrastructure Investments: (US$18 m): This component 
will invest in the aviation infrastructure at Kiribati's three international airports: Bonriki, Cassidy 
and Kanton. The project funds will complement parallel financing provided by NZAP grant 
(NZ$17m) for the resurfacing of the Cassidy runway and by a Taiwan, China loan (AUD 14 m) 
for resurfacing the runway and provision of a security fence at Bonriki.  
 
The project funds will be used for: (i) replacement of the terminal at Cassidy Airport; (ii) 
resealing the road from London to Cassidy Airport to maintain access; (iii) improvements to the 
terminal at Bonriki Airport; (iv) installation of new navigation aids, safety and security 
equipment at both airports; (v) provision of fire safety equipment for the Police Force; and, (vi) 
reestablishment of air service infrastructure for Kanton airport. The project will finance Design 
and Supervision services for all works, except Cassidy runway which is financed by NZAP.  
Page  2
All activities, except the road works, will be undertaken on the existing airport or air strips. No 
land acquisition is expected. However there is lack of clarity as to the ownership of the terminal 
land in Bonriki, this needs to be defined. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
prepared in case of any unforeseen impacts. If there are impacts an abbreviated Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared. An environmental management plan (EMP) will be 
prepared. The EMP will cover the entire project, with separate sections for each individual 
airport or airstrip.  
 
Since the NZAP and Taiwan, China financed activities will be undertaken at the same time as 
the other project investments, and are required to meet the project#s development objectives, 
these are considered to be linked projects. The Bank#s safeguard policies will therefore apply. 
The EMP will thus be applied to all activities, irrespective of the source of finance.  
 
Component B: Domestic Airport Infrastructure Investments (US$ 4 m): Resurface up to 14 air 
strips located in the outer islands as well as provide basic navigation aids.  
 
Component C: Sector Reform (US$ 1.0 m): Finance technical assistance to the MCTTD 
including: (i) development of civil aviation technical regulations and manuals; (ii) preparation 
and adoption of a Civil Aviation Master Plan (including a policy road map for separating the 
roles of regulator and airport operator); measures for airport security strengthening through penal 
code amendments and public awareness campaign; projections for air traffic demand, including 
over-flights; identifying sources of revenue, public service obligations and gap financing; needs, 
and prioritization of domestic airstrip needs; (iii) a Project Manager in the MCTTD; and, (iv) a 
short term aviation regulatory specialist to facilitate the necessary approvals and establishment of 
an independent KAL and to advise aviation staff in the MCTTD on adopting and enforcing 
manuals, etc as they are prepared.  
 
Component D: Strengthening airport operations and management capacity (US$ 3 m): An 
independent public entity (KAL) will be created to for the management and operation of all 
Kiribati international airports. Due to the acute lack of local specialized capacity to operate 
international airports capable of meeting ICAO standards, KAL will initially contract 
management expertise and on-site training capacity through a three-year management contract 
covering the operations of Bonriki, Cassidy and Kanton International Airports. The contract will 
include local staff development and preparation of a transition plan in the last year of the 
contract. The project will also finance a small technical assistance contract to support KAL with 
the review and implementation of the transition plan at the end of the management contract.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Airports and air strips located throughout the Republic of Kiribati.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has limited capacity for the implementation of the World Bank's safeguard 
policies.  
 
Page  3
The Ministry of Lands and the Environment has some regulatory capacity, but this is very 
weak. Should there be compensation claims, the Borrower has exiting institutional capacity for 
addressing the issues, with well established procedures. They are able to identify affected people 
and pay compensation payments, particularly if done on a small scale. The GOK has in place a 
grievance mechanism that allows people to file complaints at the Magistrates Court and make 
appeals at the High Court in Tarawa. Similar arrangements exist in the outer islands. However, 
these systems can be overburdened and slow. The project will work with the Magistrates Courts 
to ensure that they can address any grievances related to the project expediently if needed.  
 
The borrower will have an international consultant prepare the EMP. The EMP will cover the 
entire project, irrespective of the source of financing, with separate sections for the road and each 
individual airport or airstrip.  The EMP will include collection, transport and disposal of all 
debris from the works, as well as monitoring, reporting, and institutional arrangements for 
implementation. The EMP will be included as part of the specifications and included in the 
contract documents.  
 
During implementation, an international supervision consultant will be employed to ensure that 
the project is implemented in accordance with the EMP and RPF (and RAP if prepared). The 
EMP will form part of the bidding documents and therefore be binding on the contractor.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASNS) 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will lead to civil works to repair the existing runways, navigation lights and 
airport terminals.  An EMP will be prepared for the project, with separate sections for the 
activities to be done at each airport. The EMP will be included as part of the specifications and 
included in the contract documents. The EMP will apply to all activities, irrespective of the 
source of financing.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no natural habitats will be 
affected.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no forests will be affected.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will have no impact on pest management.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no physical or cultural 
resources will be affected.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The people affected by the project are from a single cultural group.  They are not considered 
by to be Indigenous People according to OP 4.10.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no land acquisition is 
expected. However, small vendors in Bonriki airport might be impacted, this will need to be 
clarified. The project will prepare an RPF which will be applied in the event that land issues 
arise, and an abbreviated RAP if land acquisition is required. There is an outstanding lease issue 
regarding the terminal land in Bonriki.. More information is needed regarding the outstanding 
claim in this land, whether there are any additional ones, and who is the rightful owner of the 
land. A consultant is being hired to conduct social due diligence in Bonriki, including clarifying 
the land issues, as well as confirm land tenure arrangements in all the airports in the outer 
islands, including any outstanding land issues, except Cassidy airport in Kirimati which is in 
government-owned land. However the consultant, nor the World Bank team, will be able to visit 
any of the outer islands (expect Kirimati which was visited by a World Bank team) due to 
logistical difficulties. However all efforts will be made to engage the Island Councils of these 
outer islands.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so does not involve dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so does not involve international 
waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken in Kiribati where there are no disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
03/01/2011   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
12/22/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
01/07/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
12/24/2010 
Comments:   
