Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5513 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/27/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kiribati 
Project ID: P112615 
Project Name: Kiribati Adaptation Phase III (LDCF) 
Task Team Leader: Emilia Battaglini 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASNS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (30%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (30%);Water supply (30%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Climate change (60%);Other social protection and risk management 
(10%);Water resource management (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 2.50 
 
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery 
2.70 
 
NEW ZEALAND, Govt. of (Except for Min. of Foreign Affairs)  1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.60
7.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
2.1 
The development objective of the project is to improve the resilience of Kiribati to the 
impacts of climate change on freshwater supply and coastal infrastructure. The project would 
achieve this objective by strengthening the government capacity and improving the management 
and governance of water resources and infrastructure.  
 
2.2 
The main project outcomes would include: (a) government capacity in asset management 
and strategic planning in the water and coastal engineering is improved; (b) community fresh 
water quality and storage capacity is increased; (c) targeted coastal areas are better protected 
from storm waves and flooding; (d) a pathway for improved governance and sustainable 
Page  2
management of groundwater reserves and infrastructure is identified.  Indicators will be defined 
during preparation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
3.1 
The rationale behind the proposed concept includes: (i) building on KAP II and 
reinforcing best practices in designing and implementing adaptation measures in water and civil 
works; (ii) aligning with the priorities of the NAPA, the Climate Change Policy Framework, the 
Kiribati Development Plan and the National Water Resources Policy and Implementation Plan; 
(iii) balancing expenditure between on-the-ground investments and capacity building; (iv) 
emphasizing community consultation/participation; and (v) leveraging other donors# activities in 
pursuing climate resilient investments.  
 
3.2 
It is proposed that the project will move quickly to the implementation of investments on 
the basis of the extensive technical and analytical work carried out during the preparation and 
implementation phase of KAP II.  More works investments were identified under KAP II than it 
was able to implement.  The experience that MPWU has acquired in assessing options and 
solutions, implementing more advanced or alternative techniques in the protection of important 
infrastructure, undertaking environmental assessments and strengthening procurement and 
contracting capacity can be reinforced through arrangements similar to those implemented under 
KAP II.  
 
3.3 
The project impact will be enhanced by the ability to integrate climate risk management, 
climate change adaptation, and disaster risk reduction measures in policies, operations and 
investments of government, including programs funded by donor partners. It will therefore be an 
objective of t he project to integrate its results in the work of other donor partners and 
government in water and infrastructure, including STP (NZAID), ADB/PRIF, EU and SOPAC in 
water, and ADB/WB in roads/infrastructure.   
 
3.4 
All of the activities represent both climate change adaptation and natural hazard disaster 
reduction measures.  In particular, expansion of the ground water reserves is crucial to managing 
severe droughts which, when they arise, impose severe public health risks and require a national 
emergency response, and shoreline protection to mitigate the effects of erosion of assets in the 
coastal zone, e.g. roads, and retain the width of water reserves to sustain freshwater lenses.  
 
3.5 
Component 1 - Improve water resource use and management: The National Water 
Resource Policy and Implementation Plan (NWRP) provide very clear direction and priorities for 
freshwater supply in Kiribati. Accessing increased sustainable groundwater reserves is the 
highest priority. The present reserves are insufficient to meet current needs, let alone future 
needs with an average population growth rate of 1.8% per annum.  Reticulated supply of treated 
water and reduction o f leakage are also high priorities for South Tarawa to meet the needs of a 
growing population and to reduce water-borne diseases.  Rainwater harvesting and other sources 
of water are also important, but often fail during sustained periods of drought, and can only 
supplement groundwater resources. A challenge in Kiribati is the existing land disputes and the 
lack of community water management group s.  The project is cognizant of these challenges and 
will work closely with communities to address these issues in the implementation of the 
subcomponents. The primary sub-components are expected to include:  
Page  3
a. 
Groundwater abstraction systems: Expand the installation of groundwater abstraction 
systems in North Tarawa based on investigations completed under KAP II. This will be done in 
close consultation with communities.  
 
b.
Leakage detection and repair: Reducing leakage is a key priority of the NWRP.  It is 
proposed to expand on the small pilot under KAP II supported with capacity development and 
community awareness raising under separate sub-components.  
 
c. 
Capacity building in MPWU, PUB and MOH:  Expand the KAPII training and 
development programs relating to effective water management and planning.  
 
d.
Community awareness and behavior management relating to freshwater conservation and 
protection: Also a short/medium term priority of the NWRP, undertake targeted campaigns 
linked to the leakage reduction program and to support MPWU, PUB, and MOH in their roles in 
managing safe water supply.  
 
e. 
Feasibility of developing treated water sources in South Tarawa:  Making use of 
investigation work done under KAP II, study the feasibility of reinstating previous water reserves 
with suitable treatment and, if practicable, to develop de signs.  Investment works would requires 
a
suitable funding partner.  
 
f. 
Upgrade water supply at Tungarau Hospital: Expand the program of priority works 
identified under KAP II of water systems improvements.  
 
g. 
Water management legislation: Consider and implement changes to the legislative and 
regulatory framework to support community management of water reserves.  
 
3.6 
Component 2 - Increase coastal resilience:  Expanding on work started under KAP II, 
sub-components may include:  
 
a. 
Investments in shoreline protection works in South Tarawa: Implement further works at 
priority sites identified and started under KAP II.  
 
b.
Advisory support and asset management of coastal infrastructure: Continue to further 
build MPWU#s capability in coastal assessment, options analysis, design and construction, and 
develop skills in coastal infrastructure asset management.  
 
3.7 
Component 3 - Strengthen capacity to manage the effects of climate change & natural 
hazards: Provide technical support to the Strategic Risk Management Unit, OB.  The OB has 
strongly supported having assistance to develop the SRMU, an original goal of KAP II but 
deferred due to delays in establishing the unit.  The exact scope is still to be defined, but might 
include support for policy implementation, agency coordination, applying a consistent donors 
framework, and measurement & evaluation for strategies, etc.  However, it is noted that there is a 
current NZAID proposal to appoint a Strategic Policy Mentor for an 18 month period 
commencing in August 2010 to carry out a similar, albeit loosely defined, role in the OB. If so, 
then the emphasis under this component will be reconsidered, perhaps emphasizing the strategic 
planning and asset management functions of MP WU/PMU and their relationships with other 
agencies including the OB.  
 
3.8 
Component 4 - Project management, monitoring & evaluation: Project management, 
monitoring and evaluation will be based in the Office of The President (Te Berentitenti OB), as 
under KAP II, and work closely with the Strategic Risk Management Unit with the OB.  It is 
proposed that the Permanent Secretary, OB, will be the Project Director, and that the multi-
Page  4
agency National Adaptation Steering Committee (NASC) will provide over all governance and 
be the project sign-off authority on behalf of the GoK.  
 
3.9 
PMU activities will cover operation of the PMU, accounting, development and 
application of KPIs, monitoring and evaluation.  It is proposed to keep the PMU as small as 
practicable supported by an international project advisor, and to limit the amount of professional 
services procurement.  Equipment and works contracting will be managed and supervised 
through professional firms using GoK NCB processes under the auspices of MPWU/PUB or ICB 
Bank processes as appropriate.  
 
3.10  The project#s M&E system will be based on relevant, simple indicators, in part based on 
the modified indicators developed under the KAP II project.  A detailed M&E plan will be 
prepared during preparation.  
 
3.11  The project would be financed with a grant of US$ 3 million from the Least Developed 
Country Fund (LDCF) managed by the GEF. NZAID, AusAID (co-financiers o f KAP II) and 
the EU will be approached for co-financing. The Global Facility for Disaster Reconstruction and 
Recovery (GFDRR) had also expressed interest in providing co-financing for DRR-related 
activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
South Tarawa and possibly Outer Islands (including North Tarawa)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project is a follow-on/scale-up of the Kiribati Adaptation Program Phase II. Under 
KAP II a SEA was carried out and small pilot investments are being implemented to increase t 
he protection of coastal assets and improve fresh water supply. The proposed project continues to 
remain focused on protection of coastal assets and fresh water supply and sustainability.  
 
As part of KAP II a Social Assessment (SA) was prepared which provides important 
information about the physical and cultural environment in Kiribati, power structures within 
society, the r ole of the church and other organizations, information on land tenure systems, 
political organization, perceptions and awareness on climate change related issues as well as 
local adaptation strategies. This SA i s found to be a thorough document that is well equipped to 
inform the preparation and implementation of KAP III as this is a follow on from     the previous 
project .  
 
Moreover, a Resettlement Planning Framework (RPF) was also prepared for KAP II given the 
potential for small assets, land acquisition or resettlement under the subprojects.  Once again, 
this is found to be a thorough and up-to date document that reflects the current situation in 
Kiribati, and should therefore be used in the preparation of KAP III and the implementation of its 
subprojects. The Recipient has existing institutional  capacity for implementing the project and is 
able to identify affected people and pay compensation, particularly if done on a small scale. 
However, to expedite the process, it is recommended that consultants be hired to prepare certain 
safeguard components, as it was done with the Resettlement Framework (or in the future with 
Resettlement Plans if needed).   
Page  5
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASNS) 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The SEA (prepared as part of KAP II) identified broad environmental implications related to 
the development and conservation of fresh water resources and coastal protections in Tarawa. 
The impacts associated mostly with construction and inc lude noise, land and coastal erosion, 
disruption of dail      y social and economic ac tivi ties, etc. Other impacts relate to sand mining 
and potential dredging operat ion to provide aggregates for in frastructure construction. The 
projects are small and the impacts are considered minor. As per the OP 4.01, an Environmental 
Man agement                          Plan (EMP) will be prepared to identify and mitigate the project 
related impacts. The mitigation measures wi ll be built into the project design and incl uded as 
part of the technical specifications and the bid documen                       ts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project is not expected to impact any protected areas, known natural habitats or 
established or proposed critical natural habitats. The EMP will verify and confirm these findings 
and include procedures to screen any potential impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not affect the health, quality or management of forests, forested areas or tree 
plantations.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not lead to any activities aimed at managing pests.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not impact Physical Cultural Resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The population of North and South Tarawa is from a single ethnic group so no indigenous 
people issues are expected.  The team#s Social Development Specialist ha s visited North and 
South Ta rawa on two separate occasions and can confirm that people are from a single ethnic 
group and, more importan tly, that people view th emse                          lves as one ethnic group 
and not as a distinct indigenous group. No separate political or cultural structure        s exist 
among groups and there is one unifying l anguage (Gilbertese) across all of Kiribati. For this 
reason        OP 4.10 is not trig gered.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project could potentially need to acquire assets or land and cause minimal resettlement 
due to the need to relocate crops, infrastructure or housing away fr om vulnerable areas as part of 
the subprojects (particularly water reserves).H owever this is will not be clear until specific 
subcompo nents are designed. This was                          the same case in KAP II and therefore a 
Resettlement Planning Framework (RP F) was prepared for KAP II, whic       h is found to be 
suitable to inform KAP III as w ell. This RPF is a thorough document and still very much up     
to date. Therefore i t is rec      ommended that it be used in the preparation and implementation of 
KAP II I. The RPF will form the basis of ag       reement with government concerni
ng approache           
s
to be taken in the event land acquisition and/or resettlement is necessary dur ing the impl 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
ementation of subprojects, and guide the preparation of appropriate Resettlement Plans, as 
needed. Consultations will be held in early 2011 to re-disclose the R                  PF and continue 
to update stakeholders on the continuation of the KA P programs.  
 
Lessons have been learned from KAP II implementation that show that there can be an 
implementation gap regarding the detailed steps needed in order to carry out thorough 
consultations with communities and develop appropriate livelihood rest oration measures. This is 
not a reflection of the adequa cy of the preparation do cume                         nts, but a lack of clear 
implementation guidelines. Therefore consultations, compensation and grievance step     -by-step 
guidelines will be developed as part of the Operations Manual. Moreover, continuous 
supervision and                    assistance from the World B ank will be extremely beneficial.  
 
During most of KAP II the RPF has not been utilized given that no land acquisition or 
livelihood impacts have been experienced. However, the last year of KAP II has seen 
consultations with stakeholders regarding the need to potentially acqu ire land or crops to 
establish water reserves. The exper ience shows that continu ous                         consultations are 
very important and that communities should help to design compensation or livelihood resto    
ration measures as appropriate. This is already happening in KAP II and this approach will 
continue in KAP I II, under the guidan ce of the existing RPF.  
 
Moreover the experience of KAP II is already informing KAP III design about the 
socioeconomic background of island communities, traditions, beliefs, land tenure arrangements, 
political organization and community consultations, among other t hings. A socioeconomic 
assessment of two villages in Nor th Tarawa that will pote ntia                         lly benefit from 
KAP III programs, for example, is currently taking place an d will be able to thoroughly inf       
orm the project (and appropriate resettlement pl ans) about the extent of impacts on people#s 
livelihoods. Ex                           isting documents pro duced bythe government also provide a 
significant amount of relevant informatio n on people#s assets and socioeconomic background 
that will be included as essen tial background reading in the Operations Manual.  
 
The government is currently reviewing its compensation rates and new rates are expected in 
the first quarter of 2011 which will be applicable for all subproject s under KAP III that involve  
asset, land acquisition and/or resettlement. Annual lease rates are also in place and these are 
updated eve ry three years. The gove rnme                          nt has existing grievance procedures 
in place that are found to be suitable and recognized by the communitie        s, but additional 
support may need to be provide d on occasions in order to speed up the process.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
No dams are involved.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project does not involve international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project does not involve disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  7
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
03/21/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Office of the President, in consultation with the Ministry of Environment, Land and 
Agriculture Development (MELAD) and Ministry of Public Utilities and Works (MPWU) 
has developed Term s of Reference (TOR) for the preparation of the Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP). The TOR were reviewed b y the Bank in November 2 010.  The 
Client will carry out preparation of project and site specific Environmental Management 
Plan, building on the broader environmental impacts already identified in the SEA and taking 
into consideration the lessons learnt during the implementation of the pilot projects as part of 
KAP II. The submission of the EMP to the Bank for review, comments and approval is 
expected for March 21st. In Kiribati the clearance of the EMP will follow the local 
requirements.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Emilia Battaglini 
03/02/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/22/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
03/03/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
