Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/19/2011 
Report No.:  AC6024
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P108080 
Original Project Name: Kosovo, Financial 
Sector TA 
Country:  Kosovo 
Project ID:  P122084 
Project Name:  Kosovo, Financial Sector Strengthening and Markets Infrastructure 
Project - Additional Finance 
Task Team Leader:  Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 19, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (45%);Payment systems, securities clearance and 
settlement (30%);Banking (25%) 
Theme:  Standards and financial reporting (40%);Regulation and competition policy 
(40%);Other financial and private sector development (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.85 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to enhance the Central Bank of Kosovo (CBK)'s capacity 
to oversee the financial sector's stability and strengthen its underlying market 
infrastructure.   
 
3. Project Description 
The original Project enhanced the capacity of the CBK to effectively supervise the 
financial sector and increased the stability of the sector.  In parallel to the Project, the 
CBK was supported through the Balkans FSD TA facility, which focused on building 
capacity for the payments systems.  The additional financing aims to build upon those 
earlier interventions by strengthening the market infrastructure for the financial sector. 
Specifically, the additional financing will have the following three new components:  
 
Page  2
(i) Establishment of a payments systems: a RTGS-CDS system will provide safe and 
efficient settlement of all systematically important payments including: (a) priority 
payments; (b) net interbank positions arising from the Kosovo's Electronic Interbank 
Clearing System (EICS) clearing operations, and potentially other payment circuits as 
they emerge (e.g. national card switch); (c) transactions in government securities; and (d) 
interbank money market transactions.  The additional financing will also fund the 
procurement and implementation of an interbank money market system as part of the 
procurement of the RTGS-CSD system;  
 
(ii) Establishment of a Business Continuity Centre (BCC): the BCC will assure 
continuous availability of core banking systems, RTGS-CDS system and other mission-
critical systems of the CBK.  The additional financing will support the setting-up of a 
stand-by computer and upgrade of an existing building.  
 
(iii) Provision of additional seed funding to the Deposit Insurance Fund of Kosovo.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Prishtina - Central Bank of Kosovo   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Esma Kreso (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project will include small-scale refurbishment of a floor in an old building used by 
the Central Bank of Kosovo in order to establish the Business Continuity Centre. The 
works on this subcomponent will include minor construction works (not to go beyond 
existing layout of the building) and will include associated environmental impacts such as 
dust and noise generation, and generation of construction waste. These impacts can 
Page  3
readily be identified and mitigated through adequate environmental due diligence 
documentation and implementation of adequate mitigation measures.  
 
The CBK building is not a protected historical monument or a building of historical 
value and there is no asbestos work envisaged.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long term or indirect impacts are envisaged.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
checklist will be developed in order to identify the any environmental impacts 
associated with the works on the Business Continuity Center. The checklist will be 
included as a part of standard contracted construction works for this segment.  
 
As the original project was a Category C with no environmental due diligence required, 
the Client may need some assistance from the World Bank team on preparing the 
checklist and the WB team will work in close cooperation to prepare the checklist.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
At the site of the minor refurbishment a checklist will be disclosed at the site to the 
public.  
 
There will be a public consultation and a feedback mechanism where grievances of 
affected parties can be addressed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  4
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
01/20/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Esma Kreso 
01/20/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/20/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
04/04/2011 
Comments:   
