Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/27/2011 
Report No.:  AC5009
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P118838 
Project Name:  Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sandra Broka 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 29, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Nutrition and food security (80%);Social risk mitigation (10%);Other rural 
development (10%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
6.85 
 LOCAL: 
BENEFICIARIES 
0.78
7.63 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project is to increase the productivity of the beneficiary 
farmers supported by the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project activities are expected to contribute to increased productivity in the 
agricultural sector, by improving access to finance to support investments in farm inputs, 
agricultural machinery and some marketing infrastructure, timely and reliable weather 
forecasts, and complementary capacity building activities for farmers.  
 
Component 1: Investment Support for Improved Farm-level Productivity (US$5.95 
million, of which RFPCR  US$5.17 million)  
 
Sub-component 1A: Credit Line for Farmers and Farmer Associations  (US$4.73 
million, of which RFPCR US$3.95 million)  
 
Page  2
The Credit Line will increase farmers# access to financing in order to facilitate the 
supply response. The Credit Line will be in line with the provisions of OP8.30. The 
Credit Line will consist of two products:  
 
i. 
Working capital loans, providing access to much needed short-term financing for 
spring and winter planting (agricultural inputs, such as seeds, fertilizers and fuel) and 
harvesting activities for small farmers and farmer cooperatives.  
 
ii. 
Investment loans and leases, to enable farmers and farmer cooperatives to 
purchase farm machinery, invest in warehouses and other productive assets in the heavily 
under-invested farming sector. Long-term investment loans and leases will be provided 
under the sub-component. The Credit Line will also complement the grant funds for 
cooperatives made available for investment purposes under the on-going Agribusiness 
and Marketing Project (ABMP).  
 
The Credit Line will target farmers with a greater potential to sell their agricultural 
produce and are able to borrow from commercial sources. The average working capital 
loan size is expected to be around US$2,000, while the average investment loans is 
expected to be in the range of US$15,000 equivalent. The Credit Line beneficiaries will 
receive sub-loans/leases in accordance with agreed eligibility criteria. The financial and 
commercial viability of the sub-projects and beneficiaries under this facility will be 
assessed by the PFIs (participating financial institutions - selected qualified commercial 
banks and microfinance institutions). PFIs will be selected according to transparent and 
objective criteria. It is estimated that around 2,000 farmers will have access to sub-loans 
under this program.  
 
Sub-component 1B: Support to Community Seed Funds (US$1.22 million, all RFPCR)  
 
The sub-component will finance further expansion of the network of the Community 
Seed Funds (CSF) aimed at supporting the poorer rural households with high quality 
seeds and fertilizers. The project will finance the CSF seed capital for seeds and 
fertilized, as well as complementary training for CSF members. The concept of CSF was 
initially tested under the Agricultural Support Services Project (ASSP). The 75 CSFs 
established under the ASSP have grown to cover 300 villages and nearly 24,000 
beneficiary households. The success of the ASSP experience and the continuing need for 
assistance to poor households after the 2008 food price crisis prompted the GOK to 
request additional support to the CSF. Accordingly, US$4 million were allocated from 
the GRFP fund to the ongoing Agricultural Investments and Services Project (AISP). As 
a
result, by the end of 2010, 103 new CSF were established with 4,359 members covering 
4.6 thousand hectares of land under food crops. These are complemented by 39 fodder 
crops growing CSFs, which are also financed under the AISP. Due to better quality seeds 
and fertilizer application, the yields in winter and spring cereals in the CSFs have 
increased, on average, 1.6 to 2.3 times compared to previous years.  
 
Rationale for Additional Support to CSFs. The recent new food price increase has 
shown that people remain vulnerable to economic shocks, in particular, the rural poor, 
because of limited or non-existent sources of non-farm income. For many families, 
farming still constitutes the major, if not the only, source of livelihood. Therefore, access 
Page  3
to agriculture inputs, improvements in the farming practices, and increasing agricultural 
productivity are critical for social and economic well-being of rural families. In this 
regard, the project aims to provide such support that would not be consumed at once but 
would be productive and long lasting. The project will finance the agricultural inputs 
(mostly expected to be seeds and fertilizer) which will be distributed to the members of 
newly created CSFs. It is estimated that the project will support the creation of 
approximately 65  CSFs, with a total membership of around 3,000 farmers. Given the 
modus operandi of the CSFs, it is expected that by the end of the project, around 5,500 
farmers would have benefitted from the sub-component activities. Similar to the on-going 
support to the CSF system, most of the demand is expected to be for wheat seed; 
however, other types of seeds will also be provided, based on demand.  
 
Partnership with UN Women. Partnership with the UN Women (formerly UNICEF) 
funded project on assisting the families of migrant workers will be formed under the 
project, under the framework of CSFs . Under the UN Women project, vulnerable 
families are selected where, in most cases, men have left their homes in search of 
earnings and women are left at home with children but little or no income to sustain the 
families. Such women are organized into groups, similar to those of CSF, and are 
provided with seeds of various vegetables on demand. Producing and selling these 
vegetables enable the beneficiary families both to improve their nutrition , most 
importantly, of their children, and also earn some cash by selling a portion of their 
vegetable produce. This partnership has also been tested under the AISP#s Food Security 
Component.  
 
Component 2: Technical Support for Improved Farm-level Productivity (US$1.05 
million, all RFPCR)  
 
Sub-component 2A: Weather Information for Farmers (US$0.45 million, all RFPCR)  
 
Agriculture is heavily dependent not only on weather but also on weather information. 
This sub-component will pilot delivery of weather information to farmers, including early 
warnings for adverse weather events, to reduce crop losses due to such weather events.  It 
will contribute to informed decision-making by farmers, which will result in increased 
production through savings from prevented losses or gains due to improved productivity. 
The experience of other countries has shown that timely provision of weather information 
can help to protect against weather events, such as frost, and improve the planning of 
agricultural activities, such as pest control measures, cutting of grass, shearing of sheep, 
movement of flocks, or harvesting of grain.  In Turkey, for instance, as a result of the 
improved weather information, the farmers were able to reduce the need for pesticide 
application to apple orchards, achieving a 30% reduction in pesticide costs. A very small-
scale pilot  of providing agro-meteorological posts to selected farmers was implemented 
on two sites in the Kyrgyz Republic in Chui and Jalal-abad regions in early 2010 with 
positive results. The spring 2010 in Jalal-abad, for instance, was rainy and cold, and 
many farmers had difficulty identifying when to plant, or they did not succeed planting at 
all. However, all farmers who participated in the weather information pilot were 
successful in planting their crops.  
Page  4
Acting on the lessons of global as well as Kyrgyz experience, this subcomponent will 
enhance availability of weather information to farmers in order to reduce crop/herd losses 
resulting from unforeseen weather. Savings from prevented losses and gains due to 
improved productivity resulting from informed farm and herd management will 
contribute to food security.  The subcomponent will finance three elements of a strategy:  
 
Startup cost for systems to deliver forecasts to farmers. Two approaches are envisioned 
by which to deliver forecasts to farmers in the Kyrgyz Republic: a system at the 
Hydromet and another at the Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC). Investments 
under this subcomponent will aim to promote the development of the two models of 
service delivery, each on a sustainable basis and neither falling short of an acceptable 
standard of support to the agricultural sector.  The two systems will serve partly but not 
entirely overlapping areas of the Kyrgyz Republic, each devising and undertaking a 
strategy of mixed point and regional forecasts as it sees best. The two service providers 
will select forecasting target areas, and overlap between the two systems will be 
permitted as providing a useful comparison between systems and beneficial competition 
to farmers in such an area. To help these programs develop, the subcomponent will 
finance start-up costs for systems housed in and managed respectively by the Kyrgyz 
Hydromet and ABCC.  
 
Upgrading of the underlying forecast capacity.  The capacity of the Hydromet to provide 
high-quality agriculture-relevant forecasts will be boosted with targeted support, such as 
an updating in agromet forecast skills, local area modeling, strengthening of IT resources 
relevant to forecasting for agriculture, digitization of the records of agriculturally-
relevant weather, and preparation of a database to make agriculturally-relevant weather 
information available to support preparation of forecasts that will be used by farmers.  
 
Data collection in agricultural microclimates.  The project will finance the installation of 
typical agricultural growers# weather stations, similar to those used by private growers in 
other countries, to measure and characterize agricultural microclimates in selected eight 
Pilot Raions. Growers# stations measure basic weather variables (temperature, pressure, 
wind speed and direction, precipitation, humidity) as well as soil temperature and 
moisture and leaf wetness, which help indicate optimal timing of planting and also to flag 
periods of vulnerability to pest infestation.  Data from these stations will be prepared and 
disseminated to enable growers in the Pilot Raions to time crop planting, harvesting and 
other activities for maximum productivity, e.g. by timing the planting of crops for periods 
when soil conditions are optimal for seed germination.  Data from the stations will enable 
farmers to measure the accumulation of the local growing season in terms of precipitation 
and heating degree days. After a period of several years, the data from the stations will be 
accumulated and analyzed, to establish parameters such as the local coefficients linking 
soil moisture to temperature and wind speed, the deviations between local conditions and 
regional averages, and the like.  
 
Sub-component 2B: Training and Extension Services (US$0.60 million, all RFPCR)  
 
Page  5
This sub-component will support training and extension services to farmers and farmer 
cooperatives on modern, sustainable agricultural practices (including pest management) 
to increase agricultural productivity and reduce on-farm losses, and quality management 
systems at the farm level. The services will be provided to a broad range of beneficiaries, 
including those cooperatives and farmers who will borrow under the project#s Credit 
Line in order to improve the effectiveness of fund use, those participating in value chains 
and those working with agribusinesses on contract farming basis. The sub-component 
will also finance outreach and training by a team of extension specialists in the weather 
information pilot areas (see paragraph 21) to teach farmers how to interpret/use modern 
weather forecasts to address selected agricultural issues. It will also ensure that the 
recipients of the growers# weather stations are properly trained in use and maintenance of 
these stations.  
 
Farmer information seminars will be held to disseminate the information on measures to 
be taken against adverse weather events. It is estimated that at least 2,000 farmers will 
benefit from the information seminars. After the initial technical assistance provided by 
an international consultant, the project will mobilize services of existing local consulting 
networks and companies. The project will also support small-scale capacity building 
activities for the public sector towards contributing of improved agricultural productivity, 
including training on public and private partnerships in the agricultural sector, 
optimization of functioning of value chains, and support to the Ministry of Agriculture 
(MOA) to improve its capacity in market analysis. The project will also provide support 
for a review of the existing emergency food distribution activities.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.63 million)  
 
The management of activities under Sub-component 1B as well as Component 2 will be 
carried out by the Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) (US$0.49 million, all 
RFPC), which is responsible for implementing the Market Development Component of 
the on-going ABMP. The ABCC will also undertake procurement function for the entire 
project. The Credit Line Management Unit (CLMU) (US$0.11 million, all RFPCR), 
under the Ministry of Finance, will implement Sub-component 1A (the Credit Line), 
financial transactions under Sub-component 1B, and undertake the Financial 
Management and Safeguards support functions for the entire project. Both units will be 
responsible for monitoring and evaluation under their respective components. At the 
project#s mid-term and end, independent evaluation of the achieved results will be 
carried out.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented countrywide based on demand for services and loans, 
and will not be located in protected areas. The focus will be on agricultural areas 
currently under cultivation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Amy Evans (ECSS1) 
Page  6
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSS4) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will be a Category B project as it will support mostly technical assistance 
activities, along with support to CSFs and a new Credit Line for farmers and farmer 
associations to support productivity increase in agriculture (including purchasing of 
agricultural inputs, such as seeds, fertilizers and fuel, as well as purchasing of farm 
machinery). These activities may generate some positive and adverse environmental and 
social impacts. The identified positive impacts of the project include: (a) increased food 
security and household income for the smallholder farmers, due to higher agricultural 
productivity; (b) improved nutritional status of the farmers due to increased agricultural 
production; (c) improved farmer skills from training in technologies, seed breeding, 
fertilizer use and land conservation; (d) improved soil fertility due to fodder crop sowing 
(enrichment by nitrogen), use of phosphorus-potassium fertilizers; and (e) increased 
opportunity for engagement in other income generating activities or small scale 
businesses by smallholder farmers due to increased food security for the households. The 
potential negative impacts that may result from implementation of the additional 
financing include the following: (a) increased pollution of ground and surface waters due 
to soil erosion and use of fertilizers and pesticides; (b) threats to human health and 
wildlife due to poor handling of treated seeds, fertilizers and pesticides; (c) increased 
siltation of water bodies due to soil erosion; (d) introduction of genetic monoculture 
through seed provided via the CSFs; and (e) construction waste.  These potential negative 
impacts will be mitigated through the capacity building component and EMP, to ensure 
sustainable agricultural practices are introduced in participating farmer communities and 
coops.  
 
The project will not finance purchase of genetically modified organisms (GMOs).  
 
While the project will not finance pesticides, it is possible that pesticide use will 
increase due to the increased intensity of cropping supported by the seed fund and credit 
Page  7
components of the project.  Therefore, OP 4.09 (Pesticide Management) is triggered, with 
provisions in the project design and EMP for the capacity building component to include 
resources and training for farmers and coops on reduced and safe use of pesticides.  
 
Most of mentioned adverse potential environmental impacts are minor and could be 
easily managed during the project implementation by applying a set of avoidance and 
prevention measures, which will be provided in the EMP.  
 
As application of the seeds and fertilizers will be done within existing agricultural lands, 
the additional financing will not have an impact on wildlife and natural habitats and thus 
OP/BP 4.04 #Natural habitats# is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impact 
on physical cultural resources, which are generally not placed in the vicinity of 
agricultural lands. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 #Physical Cultural Resources# is not triggered.  
 
The project will not support any sub-projects under the credit line that might result in 
resettlement. The lending guidelines under the ABMP have been amended to ensure that 
no resettlement will occur as a result of sub-project implementation.   Land acquisitions 
are also not supported under the project. The on-farm agro-meteorological stations are 
small scale collectively managed structures (no more than 3m2) that will be installed on 
privately owned land, with the full and voluntary agreement of the participating farmers.  
Furthermore, site inspections and due-diligence procedures similar to those used under 
the existing credit line will be adopted to ensure no unintended displacement of 
residences or livelihoods will occur and that those hosting the structures have agreed to 
do so voluntarily. Other activities to be supported primarily involve technical assistance 
and training and therefore will not require any land acquisition. Therefore, OP 4.12 
(Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered.  
 
There is a risk of elite capture within CSFs, and potential exclusion of members of 
ethnic minorities from Credit Line and CSFs, especially in the conflicted affected 
communities in the South of the Country. Grievance redress and complaints system are in 
place and will be strengthened for CSFs and the credit line to avoid elite capture and 
ethnic discrimination, and monitoring by CLMU and task team will take place. To date, 
although the PIUs of respective projects are available for hearing grievances related to 
any discrimination, there have been are no complaints of elite capture or ethnic 
discrimination relating either to the CSFs or the credit line. The risk of elite capture 
within CSFs will be reviewed during the upcoming Mid-Term Review Planned for May 
2011 for AISP, and the findings will be reflected in the Operational Manual and 
supervision strategy.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected cumulative impacts of the proposed activities are mostly positive and 
include improved knowledge on best agricultural practices as well as improved 
livelihood.   
 
Page  8
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project team has analyzed the alternative of no project or continuing with the same 
design of Agribusiness and Market Project (ABMP). It was concluded that the continuing 
with the ABMP design would exclude activities with a high social impact such as the 
community seed funds which target more marginal farmers. The no-project alternative 
would result in reduced funding for a sector that is already neglected in terms of 
investment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The management of activities under Sub-component 1B and Component 2 will be carried 
out by the Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) (US$0.49 million, all RFPC), 
which is responsible for implementing the Market Development Component of the on-
going ABMP. The ABCC will also undertake procurement function for the entire project. 
The Credit Line Management Unit (CLMU) (US$0.11 million, all RFPCR), under the 
Ministry of Finance, will implement Sub-component 1A (the Credit Line), financial 
transactions under Sub-component 2B, and undertake the Financial Management 
functions for the entire project.  For the ongoing ABMP, the CLMU has lead 
responsibility for environmental and social oversight and supervision of the credit line 
sub-projects.  The Participating Financing Institutions (PFIs), currently 3 banks, have 
responsibility for carrying our environmental and resettlement screening and assigning 
the appropriate environmental category to sub-project applications.   The capacity and 
procedures in place at the CLMU and PFIs were assessed by the team environmental 
specialist in October 2010, and previously in March-April 2009 during the ABMP Mid-
Term Review mission, and were found to be generally satisfactory. The CLMU and PFIs 
also have experience of screening for resettlement impacts of sub-projects implemented 
with credit line finance.  
 
The October 2010 supervision mission focused on the sub-loans.  Eligible investments 
under the ABMP Access to Finance component include development of storage, grading, 
packing and marketing of agricultural produce, investments in processing facilities and 
domestic marketing and export of agricultural products. These activities may generate 
some adverse environmental and social impacts mostly related to construction and 
operation of agro-processing enterprises, including: (a) dust and noise due to demolition 
and construction; (b) dumping of demolition and construction wastes, accidental spillage 
of machine oil, lubricants, etc; (c) solid waste, effluent discharges and air emissions; and 
(d) waste water treatment.  All three PFIs demonstrated a very high level of awareness of 
and attention to environmental screening requirements, to the point that category A 
projects would not be considered eligible for financing.  Two of the PFIs have EBRD as a 
shareholder and routinely follow EBRD safeguard guidelines, in addition to the ABMP 
guidelines.  Loan applications are screened for environmental impacts at both the branch 
bank level and at headquarters, and staff at both levels have received training under the 
project. However, the last environmental training was delivered in 2006, so the mission 
recommended to repeat the training for new loan officers at Aiyl Bank and KIBC who 
Page  9
have assumed their positions since 2006, and for all relevant staff at Kyrgyzstan Bank, 
which only began participating in the project in 2010.  
 
The CLMU and PFIs will follow similar environmental guidelines for the APAP.  It has 
been confirmed that the CLMU will undertake the environmental and social oversight 
function for the entire project, including support to the ABCC with respect to 
environmental and social aspects of procurement for civil works, training for farmers and 
cooperatives on sustainable agricultural practices, and for support to the CSFs with 
respect to selection of appropriate seed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key public sector stakeholders include the Ministries of Agriculture and Finance, the 
CLMU and the ABCC. Private sector stakeholders include the PFIs and representatives 
from the potential beneficiaries of the project.  These and non-government organizations 
interested in environment and community development as were invited to a round-table 
discussion (April 25, 2011) on the project during the preparation of the EMP. More 
importantly, the discussion was used to allow these organizations to express their views 
regarding important environmental issues as these relate to components of the Project, 
particularly agro-processing. The roundtable was advertised in Bishkek#s main 
newspaper in advance to invite interested members of the public wishing to participate.  
 
The final EMP has been disclosed on-line on the ABCC#s website and submitted to the 
World Bank InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/26/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/25/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/27/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  10
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/26/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/25/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/27/2011 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sandra Broka 
04/27/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Evans 
04/27/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan 
04/27/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
04/27/2011 
Comments:   
