Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2011 
Report No.:  AC6028
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P084977 
Original Project Name: Health & Social 
Protection Project 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P125470 
Project Name:  Additional Financing 2 Kyrgyz Health and Social Protection 
Task Team Leader:  Nedim Jaganjac 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 31, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (50%);Compulsory health finance (22%);Central government 
administration (18%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (40%);Child health (40%);HIV/AIDS (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
24.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
With the first Additional Financing, the amended original Project Development 
Objectives  (PDO) aims at: (i) improving the health status of the population of the 
Recipient through creating an effective, comprehensive and integrated system for the 
delivery of individual and public health services, including increased responsibility of 
every citizen, family, society and public administration bodies for the health of each 
person and for the society as a whole; and (ii) improving and protecting the health and 
nutritional status of said populations against the instability of national food prices as well 
as assisting poor families to manage and mitigate the impact of rising food prices through 
scaling-up and strengthening targeted cash transfers to said families and populations.  
 
The revised development objectives would be to: (i) improve the performance of the 
Kyrgyz health sector; (ii) strengthen the targeting of social benefits; and (iii) protect and 
improve health and nutritional status of vulnerable populations in the face of food price 
shocks.  The proposed additional financing would help finance the implementation of 
Page  2
expanded activities that scale-up the project#s impact and its development effectiveness 
under the revised PDOs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing (AF) for the Kyrgyz Republic Health and Social Protection 
Project (P084977) in an amount of US$24 million would be financed through an IDA 
Grant (US$10.80 million or 45% of the total amount) and an IDA Credit of US$13.20 
million or 55% of the total amount).  The proposed additional financing would help 
finance the implementation of expanded activities that scale-up the project's impact and 
its development effectiveness.  Specifically, it would finance activities necessitated by 
the conflict in the Osh and Jalal-abad provinces in June 2010, which exacerbated the 
already poor health, nutrition and social conditions in the South of the country.  The 
proposed AF would be the second AF Grant for the project.  The first AF was approved 
in June 2008 through the Global Food Crisis Response-Program.  A number of activities 
to improve health and nutrition conditions in the South are envisaged to reach to 
vulnerable populations in the community.  In addition, limited technical assistance in 
health and social protection is envisaged to support related reforms.  It is expected that 
the AF would have two components: (i) Protecting Health and Nutritional Status in Post 
Conflict Areas, and (ii) Sustaining Health Coverage and Enhancing Policy Reforms.  
Activities to be financed were confirmed during a mission in February 2011.  The AF 
would have the following two components linked to the original project components  as 
described below:  
 
Component 1:   Protecting Health and Nutritional Status in post conflict areas.  This 
component would be linked to Component 1 of the original operation.  It would have the 
following sub-components:  
 
1.A - Strengthening Regional Perinatal and Maternity oblast level services for three 
Oblasts in the South (Osh, Jalal-abad, and Batken) through the consolidation of two 
maternity hospitals (Osh Maternity Hospital and Osh City Perinatal Center) in one 
location.  The Additional Financing would support reconfiguration and works for the 
facility.  The aim would be to contribute to: (i) improve maternal health outcomes (ii) 
reduce levels of maternal mortality and (iii) ensure inter-regional equity in access to serve 
both the rural and urban population throughout the three oblasts.  
 
1.B - Package of Nutrition activities targeting women and children through the 
provision of supplements for micronutrients, iron and folic acid, premix for flour 
fortification, Vitamin A.  It would also support strengthening the role of village health 
committees to undertake community-based nutrition campaigns across different 
communities for improved health and increased social cohesion.  This activity would also 
include training of medical workers on improved perinatal care.  
 
1.C - Community based mental health in the three southern oblasts to address post 
conflict related mental health illnesses.  This activity would use the post conflict 
generated opportunity to introduce international best practice in treatment of mental 
health. This work would be strengthened by cooperation with the work of village health 
Page  3
committees and grass root initiatives.  Community based mental health services would 
further contribute to peace and reconciliation and social cohesion.  
 
Component 2: Sustaining Health Coverage and Enhancing Policy Reforms.  This 
component would be linked to Component 1 of the original operation with the exception 
of sub-component 2.C, which will be linked to Component 2 of the original operation.  
 
2.A - Continuation of support for recurrent costs of the Manas Taalimi Program 
(supported under the original project) and the new Health Strategy  to help finance the 
State Guaranteed Benefit Package (SGBP).  A working group of MOH and MHIF had 
analyzed the SGBP and found that the funding gap stands at about 37%.  However, 
because of the political events of mid 2010, a number of categories previously exempted 
were added resulting in widening the SGBP.  Efforts will need to continue to: (i) identify 
mechanisms for increasing financing options, (ii) review and revise exempted categories, 
and (iii) revise co-payment structures. In the interim, in an effort to support social 
cohesion, the AF would contribute funds towards reducing the SGBP gap.  
 
2.B - Technical assistance for policy enhancements to support further development of 
health policies in the following areas: (i) review of pharmaceutical pricing, (ii) costing of 
new Health Strategy, (iii) calculations of non-salary recurrent costs, (iv) budget 
formulation and execution, (v) development of master plan for hospitals, (vi) definition of 
functional and structural relationship between MOH and MHIF, (vii) determinants of 
health and health promotion activities, and (viii) quality of health.  
 
2.C - Technical Assistance to MSP to underpin the Policy Development Operation 
(PDO).  The task will focus on two areas: (i) design of a comprehensive Social Safety 
Net strategy, and (ii) building capacity of regional and local social protection staff.  
 
2.D - Maintenance Fund.  The AF would provide funding to jump-start the operations of 
this Fund and finance maintenance of equipment, starting in health institutions in the 
three Southern oblasts.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will concentrate on delivery of improved health services in the south of 
Kyrgyzstan, including Osh, Jalal-abad and Bakten oblasts, and would also provide 
capacity building support for health and social protection sector policy at the national, 
provincial and local levels country wide.  The main facilities relevant for safeguards 
analysis are the two maternity hospitals in Osh. The physical characteristics of the Osh 
facilities were assessed during the February 2011 identification/preparation mission, and 
were found to pose the expected safeguards issues relating to civil works and medical 
waste management, but not any additional concerns (e.g., these are existing facilities 
owned by oblast and municipality and currently used by the MoH, they are not in or 
adjacent to protected habitats or forests, no resettlement will be involved, no physical 
cultural resources are present at or near the site, etc.). It is possible that other minor 
Page  4
renovations would be carried out at ministry offices in Bishkek or other locations; 
provisions for such minor works are made in the EMP.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Amy Evans (ECSS1) 
Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim (YPP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Additional Financing will: (i) support social cohesion efforts with an emphasis on 
rebuilding healthy communities through improved maternal and child health and nutrition 
in the affected areas in the South, and provision of community-based mental health 
activities, and (ii) support MOH#s budget to reduce the gap of the State Guaranteed 
Benefit Program and enhance policy reforms. The AF will finance nutritional 
supplements and education targeted to mothers and children as well as technical 
assistance to support ongoing health and social protection reforms, and as such would not 
involve any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Component 1 of the 
project will support the renovation/construction of the consolidation of two maternity 
hospitals (Osh Maternity Hospital and Osh City Perinatal Center) in one location.  In 
addition to this, ongoing minor rehabilitation/renovations of existing selected medical 
facilities sponsored by other donors will continue under the SWAp program that supports 
implementation of the National Manas Taalimi health reform program. As this project 
will be implemented in the context of a SWAp, plans on a minor rehabilitation of 
FAPs/FGPs and SES facilities are addressed in the project EMP.  
 
The immediate impact on the environment from the envisaged rehabilitation works to 
consolidate the Osh maternal and Peri-Natal Hospitals are expected to be limited. Effects 
could comprise dust and noise related to demolition and construction; disposal of 
construction waste; and disposal of wastewater, emissions and hazardous materials 
(infectious waste) during operation of the facility. Infectious waste management practices 
at the two maternal hospitals are generally adequate, although neither facility has a waste 
Page  5
incinerator on site.   These risks can be effectively anticipated in advance of project 
implementation and will be addressed by appropriate mitigation measures in the design 
and implementation process, and reflected in the project EMP.  During the February 
preparation 2011 mission, agreement was reached with the Government on the specific 
works to be financed by the AF, and the EMP is being amended accordingly.  The March 
pre-appraisal mission confirmed an increased allocation for the works based on 
preliminary statements conducted by the MOH and the increased availability of funds 
under the Additional Financing.  
 
Social impact:  The AF activities will not involve resettlement, and is designed to have a 
positive impact on efforts to build social cohesion in the southern region of the country 
through improved maternal and child health and nutrition, and community-based mental 
health services.  The Bank team is employing a conflict filter to identify opportunities to 
strengthen reconciliation through improved health care delivery while maintaining ethnic 
integration of the health facilities (staff, patients) and equitable access to care for both 
rural and urban populations.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and / or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the  
 
project area are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The current project EMP will be reviewed and updated as needed to serve the AF 
activities.  The current EMP refers not only to Bank-funded activities, but also refers to 
the SWAp program which entails renovation of the selected PHC and SES facilities, as 
well as health waste management activities. The latter is being funded under parallel 
financing from other sources.  
 
The revised EMP (in Russian language) has been placed on the Ministry of Health's 
website, consulted with stakeholders and placed (in English) in InfoShop prior to 
appraisal.  
 
In addition to the current project, the Recipient has successfully implemented two 
operations in the health sector, and significant project management capacity has been 
built. A specialist has been identified within the Department of Sanitary Epidemiological 
Surveillance (SES), who - together with the staff of the MoH's United Directorate of 
Construction Enterprises # is responsible for coordination and supervision of the EMP 
and risk mitigation measures to be undertaken in the project. The specialist works closely 
with the MoH#s Department/Unit responsible for implementation of the project, staff on 
the ground, and with national and oblast level environmental officials. They: (a) 
Page  6
coordinate relevant training for staff, designers and local contractors; (b) disseminate 
existing environmental management guidelines and develop guidelines in relation to 
issues not covered by the existing regulations, for implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation of mitigation measures; (c) ensure contracting for construction and supply of 
equipment includes reference to appropriate guidelines and standards; and (d) conduct 
periodic site visits to inspect and approve plans and monitor compliance. These 
arrangements have proven effective for management of environmental safeguards issues 
in the construction of an annex to the Ministry of Health main building in Bishkek, which 
was financed under the current Health & Social Protection Project.  
 
A
site-specific screening process, as well as supervision of construction, is required by 
law for all civil works in the Kyrgyz Republic. Further details are described in the EMP, 
which are part of the Operational Manual for the SWAp.  Implementation of the EMP 
and relevant provisions by Kyrgyz law would be supervised by the MoH and oblast, city 
and rayon branches of the SES Department.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders with regard to safeguard issues are:  
 
-
the MOH,  
 
-
the MOH's United Directorate of Construction Enterprises,  
 
-
the Department of Sanitary Epidemiological Surveillance (including rayon SES  
 
stations),  
 
-
management and staff of the participating hospitals, PHC and SES facilities, local 
communities, patients, and contractors for civil works.  
 
-
local communities in the vicinity of the Osh Oblast Maternal Hospital and Osh 
Municipal Peri-Natal Hospital  
 
The original project EMP was the subject of a comprehensive stakeholder consultation 
in September, 2005.  The minutes of this consultation meeting are attached to the updated 
Environmental Management Plan.  Specific civil works projects under the Additional 
Financing will be subject to a consultation with the affected communities prior to 
finalization of the bid documents, so that community concerns can be appropriately 
addressed in the design phase. It is expected that this will primarily concern the 
renovation of the Osh Municipal Peri-Natal Hospital.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/29/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  7
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  8
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nedim Jaganjac 
03/27/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Evans 
03/27/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim 
03/28/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/30/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jesko S. Hentschel 
03/30/2011 
Comments:   
