Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6086 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/09/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P113350 
Project Name: Education SWAp/sector support program 
Task Team Leader: Dingyong Hou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: September 18, 2012 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (50%);Secondary education (50%) 
Theme: Education for all (67%);Education for the knowledge economy (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to improve the quality of general education for all 
through enhanced school accountability, incentives and resources for results.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have four components:  
 
Component One: Enhanced school accountability and autonomy  
 
This component aims to ensure that schools receive, manage well, and account for an equitable 
allocation of resources.  The focus will be on the national scaling up of per-capita financing; the 
capacity building of school leaders in School based Planning and Management, budgeting and 
reporting; and on the establishment and capacity building of school Boards of Trustees, including 
the active participation of communities and parents and the use of School Report Card to provide 
feedback and information to stakeholders  
 
Page  2
Component Two:  Reformed incentives for teacher effectiveness and performance  
 
This component aims to ensure that teachers have incentives and capacities to improve their 
professional practices.  The focus will be on supporting and building capacities for an improved 
incentives scheme designed to promote good professional practices; reward good performance 
and on improving and reforming the design and delivery of pre and in-service teacher-training 
programs. Support for more equitable distribution of teachers across the system linked with 
adjustment in school network and improved teacher-student ratio.  
 
Component Three: Improved curriculum, assessment and learning resources  
 
This component aims to ensure that more students learn a standards-based curriculum that 
provides for adequate time to master essential competencies, and have sustainable access to 
quality essential learning materials aligned with the curriculum.  The focus will be on support to 
the ongoing review and improvement of the general secondary curriculum, including its 
dissemination and use; and capacity building to introduce a textbook rental scheme/fund and 
reinforce autonomous mechanisms for textbooks approval and quality assurance. Improvement 
of the policy framework, institutions and instruments for assessment will be aligned to the 
reformed curriculum but financed under the Russian Education Aid for Development (READ).  
 
Component Four: Strengthened sector monitoring and evaluation for result  
 
This component aims to ensure that the MOES develops the capacity to monitor and evaluate 
its strategic action plan.  The focus will be on strengthening the institutional design and functions 
of units responsible for monitoring and evaluation; developing results framework aligned to the 
EDS; improving the design and operation of the monitoring process and system and improving 
the reporting to stakeholders and the use of data towards evidence based decision making.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kyrgyz Republic   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
02/14/2012 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
n/a   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dingyong Hou 
02/17/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/09/2011 
Comments:  Acting for Agi Kiss, ECA Safeguards Coordinator 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alberto Rodriguez 
03/17/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
