Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5062 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/07/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P120435 
Project Name: Kyrgyz Health Results Based Financing 
Task Team Leader: Tamer Samah Rabie 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 16, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (95%);Gender (5%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Health 
Results-based 
Financing 
11.00
11.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the Project are to:  (a) introduce alternative provider payment 
mechanisms through RBF and enhanced supervision, in randomly selected rayon hospitals, to 
pilot and test alternatives for improving the quality of health services, and (b) strengthen the 
Government#s and providers# capacity for collecting, monitoring and evaluating information 
regarding the quality of health services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will consist of the following components:  
 
Component 1:  Pilot and Test Alternatives for Improving the Quality of Health Services at 
Rayon-Level Hospitals.  
 
In order to test alternatives for improving the quality of health services, this component will 
introduce:  (a) enhanced supervision under a balanced scorecard, and (b) a performance-based 
incentive payment.  
 
Page  2
Component 2:  Strengthen the Government#s and Providers# Capacity for Collecting, 
Monitoring and Evaluating Information.  
 
The introduction of the enhanced supervision under the balanced scorecard, and performance-
based incentive payments will require extensive capacity building, not only for the MOH and 
MHIF, but also for the participating facilities as well.  Through activities under this Component, 
MOH and the MHIF will receive support to become more effective and efficient in the 
purchasing, regulation and quality control of health care services, and in monitoring and 
evaluating results.  Participating facilities will receive training and other support to understand 
the implications of the systems being piloted, and to diagnose issues and put in place 
mechanisms to improve quality.  In addition, this component will finance a small Project 
Coordination Unit to ensure that the piloted activities proceed smoothly.  
 
Component 3: Impact Evaluation of Pay-for-performance scheme.  
 
A
randomised controlled design will be employed to conduct a rigorous impact evaluation to 
assess the impact of incentivized payments as well as increased monitoring, against increased 
monitoring alone, on quality of care (using a balanced scorecard of indicators). This will be 
performed in hospitals at the rayon level. The randomized design will include 3 groups: (1) 
incentive payment + intensive monitoring in 20 hospitals; (2) intenisve monitoring alone in 20 
hospitals; and (3) pure control group with no intervention.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kyrgyz Republic   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This project is rated an environmental Category C. No safeguard policies are triggered. The 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is not triggered as no civil work is envisaged.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/15/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
05/20/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tamer Samah Rabie 
01/24/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/26/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jesko S. Hentschel 
01/24/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
