Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/08/2011 
Report No.:  AC6065
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P083235 
Original Project Name: Disaster Hazard 
Mitigation Project 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P112775 
Project Name:  Additional Financing to cover a gap of the Disaster Hazard Mitigation 
Project (DHMP, P83235) 
Task Team Leader:  Wolfhart Pohl 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (65%);Central government administration 
(20%);Sub-national government administration (15%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (40%);Pollution management and environmental 
health (40%);Other environment and natural resources management (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDOs for the Additional Finance (AF) activities are the same as those of the original 
(parent) project and are the following:  
 
Within the context of the country#s longer-term interests in disaster hazard mitigation, 
the project development objective is to: (a) minimize the exposure of humans, livestock, 
and fluvial flora and fauna to radionuclides associated with abandoned uranium mine 
tailings and waste rock dumps in the Mailuu-Suu area; (b) improve the effectiveness of 
emergency management and response by national and sub-national authorities and local 
communities to disaster situations; and (iii) reduce the loss of life and property in key 
landslide areas of the country.  
 
These objectives will be accomplished through key mitigation measures designed to: (i) 
isolate and protect abandoned uranium mine tailings and waste dumps from disturbance 
Page  2
by natural processes such as landslides, floods, and from  leaching and dispersal 
processes associated with ground- and surface-water drainage; (ii) create a disaster 
management and  response system that can be administered effectively by national and 
sub-national authorities, and local communities; and (iii) develop a system to detect and 
warn against active landslide movements in key hazard areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The AF will not cover any activities which deviate from those already envisaged for the 
parent project. Additional financing will be used to the largest part to close financial 
shortfalls caused by (i) damage to project infrastructure incurred during a major flood 
event in spring 2010; and (ii) additional quantities of radioactive waste, which have 
increased  relocation cost for the targeted facility (WD1). The details of the additionally 
financed activities are as follows:  
 
The additional funds would enable repairing of flood damage inflicted  during project 
implementation on crucial road infrastructure on the right bank of Mailuu Suu River 
necessary for the transport of radio-active materials from their currently unsafe locations 
to the new and engineered disposal sites, within the remaining project period. The road 
repair is also crucial to ensure long term, sustainable protection of the road from repeated 
damage by extreme flood events, thereby providing a safe alternative transport route in 
Mailuu-Suu valley as a benefit for the public. Besides the crucial role for the cleanup 
progress this would increase the safety of public transport by avoiding sections of high 
landslide risk on the existing road on the unsafe, left river bank.  
 
Furthermore, the additional financing would also contribute to the relocation of 
additional volumes of radioactive waste rock from waste dump (WD) #1, which were 
discovered during project implementation. WD #1 is one of the sites originally included 
in the cleanup activities, but was found to contain significantly more material than 
envisaged by design. This radioactive material is currently exposed to erosion, 
dislocation and dissipation by the surface water network. In addition, there is a risk of 
landslides occurring at the waste dump site, which could block and dam up the river and 
subsequently trigger flood waves and mudslides (mixed with radioactive materials) with 
catastrophic consequences for downstream population and ecosystems.  
 
Lastly, a minor part of the AF will be used to provide additional monitoring capacity for 
the local authorities, specifically the local branches of  MES and the Sanitary and 
Epidemiological Institute, strengthening capacities for measuring uranium and other 
toxicological elements in various water sources.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project locations relevant for the AF are entirely contained within the original 
project#s geographical boundaries. There will be no additional areas affected, and no 
geographical expansion of activities under the AF. The additionally discovered waste 
quantities will not increase the footprint of the receiving safe repository (the existing WD 
#
2,
which is large enough to receive all additional waste quantities).  
Page  3
The original project location is situated in the Southern rural mountainous areas of the 
Kyrgyz Republic, focusing on the Mailuu-Suu uranium ore mining and milling area in the 
Jalal-Abad Oblast. Mailuu Suu#s environmental baseline was characterized by poorly 
maintained tailings impoundments constituting pollution sources with a potential 
transboundary impact, polluting the environment and landslide activities threaten the 
stability of tailings. Mailuu-Suu has approximately 25,000 inhabitants and is located in 
proximity to 23 uranium tailing impoundments and 13 mine waste rock deposits. Smaller 
settlements are located in the valleys of the Mailuu-Suu, Kara-Agach and Aylyampa Sai 
Rivers. In most cases the tailings and waste rock dumps lie upstream of the communities, 
sometimes close to populated areas.  
 
The objects concerned by AF are the following: WD #1 which lies in a small tributary 
valley at the upstream end of Mailuu Suu town, about 500 m from the closest settlements, 
and a road section located on the orographically right bank of Mailuu Suu river, starting 
about 1 km upstream from the town and extending ca. 2.5 km further upstream.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Katelijn Van den Berg (ECSS3) 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSS4) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The parent project was designed to mitigate existing negative impacts by radioactive 
waste materials deposited in multiple locations around Mailuu Suu. The overall project 
impact was expected to be highly positive, and the original environmental due diligence 
instruments addressed mainly temporary impacts due to civil and construction works. The 
same principle applies to the AF activities, which will only cover repair works of 
infrastructure built under the parent project, and address additionally discovered 
quantities of waste. The geographical scope of the AF activities is entirely aligned with 
the parent project's.  
Page  4
An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) were prepared during preparation of the parent project (financed by the EU-
funded Joint Environmental Program). The EIA report contains an EMP which describes 
the necessary environmental management procedures and technical prerequisites for 
maintaining good environmental practice regarding the proposed interventions at the 
project sites.  
 
The AF activities do not entail any new or additional types of activities, but only include 
road repair works and waste relocation as environmentally relevant activities.  Both are 
covered in terms of their potential impacts by the original EIA, and mitigation and 
management measures are ensured by the EMPs, which have been applied to all project 
activities since implementation inception.  
 
The scope of the EIA and EMP#s will be extended to the AF activities as a legal 
covenant of the loan agreement.  
 
Several families were resettled under the parent project, as they had been living on 
radioactive waste deposits. Meanwhile all resettlement activities envisaged under the 
original project have been successfully concluded and no major grievances or complaints 
were recorded. Under the additionally financed activities no additional resettlement is 
envisaged, thus the existing resettlement instruments and arrangements will remain 
unchanged. However, none of the activities under the AF would, by themselves, trigger 
OP4.12.  
 
The parent project triggered OP 4.37 as some of the tailings facilities have dams of 
relevant height and the area is overall seismically active.  During parent project 
preparation the necessary reports (geo-technical, risk management, hydrology, and 
seismic) were prepared to ensure the tailing facilities' stability.  
 
The AF activities will not involve tailings deposits with dams which would fall under 
OP4.37. The activities under the AF would, by themselves, not trigger OP4.37.  
 
The parent project triggered OP 7.50 as the Mailuu-Suu river is a transboundary river 
that flows into the Naryn and Syr Darya rivers, which are defined as international 
waterways by Paragraph 1(a) of OP 7.50. During parent project implementation potential 
changes in water flow or deterioration in water quality during the construction works 
would have been be mitigated through implementation of the EMP. As required by 
OP7.50 a notification letter was sent to Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Kazakhstan in 
February 2004 to inform these riparian states about the proposed project activities.  
 
While the applicability of OP7.50 remains valid, the AF activities are not expected to 
cause any additional, or for that matter perceptible, impact on international water ways, 
which would require an update of the notification.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project activities augment the relocation and safe deposition of radioactive waste 
rock and tailings, which will have a long term, positive impact on the areas 
environmental, health and safety conditions and the quality of life for the population. 
Minor negative impacts are related to transient, short term, minor disturbances due to 
noise, dust, emissions and increased traffic during the construction period. These will be 
managed and mitigated using the EMP prepared under the parent project, the scope of 
which fully covers the AF activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project alternative considered would be to leave the situation as it is. This would 
pose a continued significant risk of radioactive waste rock being dissipated into the 
environment by natural processes such as landslides and floods. Alternatives for the 
planned waste receptacles were not considered, as the optimal solution (WD #2) was 
determined by a FS during the parent project and remains valid for the AF activities. The 
designer has verified that WD #2 has sufficient capacities to receive all remaining waste 
rock from WD#1.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has installed a PIU which about two years ago, upon relocation from 
Bishkek to Osh, saw a complete staff turnover. Nevertheless, and despite the adverse 
political conditions in Southern Kyrgyzstan during the last year, the PIU's operational 
capacity has quickly rebound and the PIU has since performed well in the project's 
technical and environmental management. The PIU has a very experienced and dedicated 
director who, coming from MES, has brought both technical and administrative 
experience, as well as the political weight within the Ministry to bring key Project issues 
to the attention of the relevant decision makers.  
 
The PIU is supporting and fully dedicated to the activities planned under the AF, and is 
cognizant and supportive of the Bank's safeguards policies.  The implementation of the 
EMP so far has a very good track record due to several enabling factors: Construction 
works are supervised by a Consultant with profound, hands-on experience in 
implementing good international practice in radioactive waste remediation projects. In 
addition the PIU has good technical capacities for oversight of the remediation works and 
has been diligent in EMP implementation. Furthermore, the public authorities represented 
by local branches both from MES and the Epidemiological and Sanitary State Committee 
(ESSC) are proactive and technically versed in assuming their regulatory oversight 
mandates. These factors combine to an environment of high awareness and good 
technical skills for environmental monitoring, management and diligent implementation 
of mitigation measures. During the recent supervision missions the Bank team's 
environemntal specialists could verify and confirm diligent EMP implementation.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are the Ministry for Emergency Situations (MES), the local 
authorities and the affected local population. There is great concern among the local 
population and authorities, including the environmental inspector and sanitary and 
epidemiological center of Mailuu-Suu as well as the Ministry of Emergency Situations, 
regarding the remaining waste materials at WD#1. The initial remediation concept was 
exhaustively discussed with the key stakeholders during implementation of the parent 
project and the current remediation approach found general support among the 
stakeholders. There is an ongoing stakeholder dialogue which is managed by MES and 
PIU, which have several staff, among them a PR specialist, based in Mailuu Suu. This is 
evident through high interest and awareness of the project activities by the local 
population and frequent inquiries and complaints received by affected stakeholders. The 
PIU and local MES staff has been and continues to be open and responsive, and justified 
grievances have so far been satisfactorily resolved. As confirmed during community 
meetings and consultations in November 2010 the population still is highly supportive of 
relocating WD #1.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/19/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/06/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2004 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  8
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
02/03/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Katelijn Van den Berg 
02/03/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/08/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John V. Kellenberg 
03/08/2011 
Comments:   
