                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/10/2011                                      Report No.: AC6292
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P096409                 Original Project Name: Second On-farm
                                             Irrigation Project
Country: Kyrgyz Republic                     Project ID: P126390
Project Name: AF-ON-FARM IRRIGATION PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Pieter David Meerbach
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2011        Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011
Managing Unit: ECSSD                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (75%);Central government administration (25%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (33%);Other rural development (33%);Water
resource management (34%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             15.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.05
                                                                       0.05
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective (PDO) of the OIP-2 and the Additional Financing
(AF) is to improve irrigation service delivery on a sustainable basis that will contribute to
increased agricultural productivity among irrigation farmers. The PDO is achieved
through further development of Water Users Associations (WUAs) and rehabilitation and
modernization of on-farm irrigation and drainage (I&D) systems.

3. Project Description
Building on the successes of OIP-2, the proposed AF would scale-up the project activities
and finance: (i) the rehabilitation of on-farm irrigation and drainage (I&D) systems for
another 22 WUAs on 45,500 hectares, which would directly benefit some 44,000
farmers; (ii) the training and goods for 474 WUAs in order to increase their capacity to
sustainably manage the on-farm I&D systems; and (iii) the operating costs of the PIU.
Under the AF there are no changes to the project components, project activities or
implementation arrangements.
 The improved water delivery and the capacity building of the WUAs, with water users
of various ethnic backgrounds, will also contribute to mitigating ethnic tensions. The
OIP-2 and the AF have the following three components:

 i)     Component 1: WUA Strengthening The component will provide assistance to
ensure that WUAs are able to efficiently and productively utilize their rehabilitated on-
farm irrigation systems on a sustainable basis, with special emphasis on water and asset
management aspects.

 ii)    Component 2: Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Modernization The component
will focus on rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation and drainage systems for
about 45,500 ha managed by around 22 WUAs.

 iii) Component 3: Project Management The component will provide funding for the
staffing and operation of a small project implementation unit, integrated within the State
Committee for Water Resources and Land Improvement (SCWRLI), which will be
responsible for the daily management, administration, and coordination of the project,
including procurement and financial management.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The AF will be implemented on a country wide basis, but the new AF activities will be
focused on the southern Oblasts (Regions) of the country. The AF will target a number of
irrigation systems that withdraw water from rivers that are international waterways for
purposes of OP 7.50. However, since the AF activities will be demand-driven, the exact
locations of the WUA-managed irrigation systems that will benefit from rehabilitation
and modernization are not known at this point. Nevertheless, as with OIP-2, the most
likely rivers to be affected by the AF include the Naryn River and its tributaries, the Talas
River and its tributaries, and the Chui River and its tributaries.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr David M. Colbert (LCSSD)
   Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim (YPP)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment.
  The AF has been classified as Category ’B’ for purposes of OP 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment because it is not expected to involve any large- scale, significant or
irreversible adverse environmental impacts. Experience with both OIP-1 and OIP-2 to
date has shown this to be the case. The AF will involve neither land acquisition nor the
construction of new irrigation systems or the resettlement of people. Any potential
adverse environmental impacts are not expected to be significant and can be effectively
prevented or minimized by application of the appropriate preventive actions and/or
mitigation measures identified in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared
for OIP-2, which applies to the AF as well.

 The overall environmental impact of the AF is expected to be positive. The
rehabilitation of selected irrigation and drainage infrastructure will realize definite
environmental benefits by improving irrigation water management, decreasing water
losses, and reducing soil salinity and waterlogging. Furthermore, the AF support for
strengthening environmental monitoring and analysis in SCWRLI and the WUA Support
Units will improve the SCWRLI#s overall ability to monitor the environmental impacts
of project interventions and take appropriate actions where necessary.

 The potential adverse environmental impacts are basically the same as those for the
OIP-1 and OPI-2, i.e. increased agrochemical pollution and water contamination from
increased use of pesticides (see discussion of this below), soil erosion associated with
existing agricultural practices, and environmental impacts resulting from construction
activities, including improper disposal of excavated sediments from canals. These
adverse impacts are not significant and can be effectively prevented, minimized, or
eliminated by the appropriate preventive actions or mitigation measures identified in the
site-specific EMPs.

  The framework EMP prepared for OIP-2, which reflects lessons learned from OIP-1 and
applies to the AF activities, with a minor modification to reflect the additional
rehabilitation areas. This EMP, recommends several broad preventive actions and
mitigation measures to address the potential adverse environmental impacts identified.
These include: (i) training and extension services on integrated pest management (IPM)
and improved pesticide management practices to address the agrochemical pollution
issues; (ii) training and advice on improved on-farm soil and water management to
address the soil erosion issues; and (iii) environmental clauses in the contracts of
contractors that will perform the civil works (monitored and enforced by field-based
construction supervisors) to address the construction-related impacts.

 The framework EMP also requires, and provides guidelines for, the preparation of site-
specific EMPs for WUA-managed irrigation systems that will be rehabilitated under the
project. These EMPs will recommend additional measures specific to the circumstances
and environmental conditions at the irrigation system to be rehabilitated. To complement
these measures, the EMP also recommends continuing and expanding the environmental
monitoring program for irrigation and drainage water quality initiated under OIP-1 and
continued under OIP-2 and strengthening the environmental monitoring and analysis
capabilities of SCWRLI and the WUA Support Units.

 Safety of Dams.
 As did OIP-2 before it, the AF will follow a programmatic approach, with the WUA-
managed irrigation systems eligible for rehabilitation to be selected during the first years
of AF implementation. Experience under OIP-1 and OIP-2 indicates that it is likely that
several systems selected will have small (less than 15 m in height) dams for night storage
reservoirs, but at this point the EA was unable to determine exactly which irrigation
systems these might be. However, once this has been determined for the AF, appropriate
actions to ensure dam safety, including more detailed inspections and safety measures,
will be taken, as was done under OIP-2. In the case of small-scale irrigation dams and
night storage reservoirs that may be part of a selected irrigation system, special guidelines
governing this situation were prepared and included in the EMP.

 Before any rehabilitation activities can take place under the AF at an irrigation system to
which these guidelines apply, the PIU will contract a qualified national design firm to
make an engineering and safety assessment of the irrigation dam or storage reservoir in
question, and prepare designs for the recommended measures. The consultants who will
carry out the safety assessment will also look into the potential consequences of dam
failure, including such principal criteria as the number of people at risk, and economic
assets downstream that should be used to prioritize any intervention aimed at improving
dam safety. The design engineers will also be retained to provide construction
supervision of the rehabilitation works.

 The PIU will contract a qualified engineering contractor, one that has experience with
small earthen dams and/or small storage reservoir systems, to perform the remedial
measures recommended in the engineering and safety assessment. The PIU, through the
engineering team, will oversee the implementation of any remedial measures performed
at irrigation dams or storage reservoirs under the project.This procedure has worked
satisfactorily under OIP-2.

 Projects on International Waterways.
 Many of the irrigation systems that will be rehabilitated under the AF of OIP-2 draw
water from rivers that are international waterways shared by the Kyrgyz Republic with
neighboring Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. Potential changes in water flow or
deterioration in water quality during the construction works will be mitigated through
implementation of the EMP. As there will not be any enlargement of existing irrigation
systems or development of any new irrigation areas, project interventions are not
expected to adversely affect the quality or quantity of water flows to downstream riparian
states. The rehabilitation and modernization of infrastructure and improvements in water
management should result in an increase in system efficiency, thereby generating water
savings and providing reliable water supply to the users. Considering all this, the AF falls
under the exception to the notification requirement contained in the safeguard policy,
approved by the Vice President for Europe and Central Asia Region for OIP-2 on March
20, 2007. The task team has submitted a request for a waiver stating that this continues
to apply to the interventions under the AF.

  Pest Management. The EA determined that the project does not trigger the pest
management safeguard policy because the project will not procure any pesticides nor will
it alone induce an increase in the use of pesticides in the project area. Although the EA
determined that current pesticide use levels in the project area are relatively low due to
economic conditions, the EA recognizes that the long-term recovery of the agricultural
sector is likely to result in an increase in pesticide use in the future. This recovery,
dependent not only on increased agricultural production but also on improved rural
economic conditions, expanded access to markets, and higher agricultural prices, is likely
to occur well after project completion. Anticipating these long-term impacts, however,
the EA recommends training and agricultural extension for farmers in the project area on
IPM, and improved pesticide management practices to reduce future pesticide demand
and minimize the environmental impacts from any pesticide use. Farmers are receiving
such training under OIP-2 and will continue to receive such training under the AF.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
As noted above, depending on improved rural economic conditions, expanded access to
markets, and higher agricultural prices in the project area, one of the long-term impacts of
the project may be an increase in the use of pesticides by farmers at project sites. This, in
turn, may result in increased risk of soil and water pollution by these agricultural
chemicals. While this long-term impact is not a direct result of project interventions, the
EMP addresses this future concern by providing farmers with training and extension on
IPM and improved pesticide management practices.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable, as this is a rehabilitation and modernization project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has proven its technical and managerial capacity, based on experience with
OIP-1 and OIP-2, to effectively address the safeguard policy issues raised by the AF and
to implement the preventive actions/mitigation measures recommended by the EMP. The
proposed AF will continue these same OIP-1 and OIP-2 practices, which were
satisfactory to the Bank. This includes implementation of the EMP, which involves
supervision of project impacts during and after construction activities, environmental
monitoring of soil conditions and water quality, and associated capacity building in
environmental monitoring and management.

 Under OIP-1 and OIP-2, the PIU undertook a number of activities to implement the
recommendations of the EMP prepared for the project. The PIU employed a national
environmental specialist on a part-time basis to draft guidance for environmental
supervision of project activities, design a project-related water quality monitoring
program, purchase field equipment for water sampling, and train engineers in the Oblast
Support Units and Raion Support Units to conduct the environmental supervision and
water sampling. The results of the environmental supervision and monitoring activities
for OIP-1 are contained in the environmental specialist’s reports that were prepared at the
end of 2005 and in March 2007. The reports found no significant adverse environmental
impacts from the rehabilitation works completed under the project and relatively few
instances of high mineralization or pesticide residues in water at various sampling points
around the country. The environmental specialist has performed the same functions for
OIP-2, submitting an inception report in January 2010 identifying the various measures
necessary for implementation of the EMP, providing initial training to water engineers in
the Oblast and Raion Support Units in December 2009, and designing the water quality
monitoring network to be used for OIP-2.

 The challenge for OIP-2, as well as for the AF, is to institutionalize these
accomplishments of OIP-1 within the SCWRLI. This may include on-the-job training for
water management specialists in the central office of SCWRLI to help them assume the
management responsibilities for these environmental activities. This may also include
additional technical training in water quality monitoring and analysis. Furthermore, the
EMP recommends that OIP-2 support the PIU in extending better outreach to the WUAs
and WUA members on environmental issues and disseminate information on the
environmental compliance and water quality monitoring activities of the SCWRLI.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The principal stakeholders are members of the WUA, yet to be identified, who will
participate in the identification of rehabilitation investments, decide on the investment
package, participate in the tendering process and oversee construction in the field. They
will have copies of the contracts, which will include relevant environmental clauses and
in which the EMP is embedded, to enable them to assure compliance with environmental
measures. The EMP for the OIP-2 was disclosed for public consultation on April 13,
2007, and the EMP for the AF was re-disclosed in-country for public consultation on
May 2, 2011 with disclosure of the final EMP following on May 10, 2011.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 05/02/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/02/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/10/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                         N/A
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts    N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements      N/A
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                       N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification         Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                      No
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s     Yes
Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Pieter David Meerbach                     05/09/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr David M. Colbert                          05/09/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim                        05/09/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Dina Umali-Deininger                      05/10/2011
  Comments:
