Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/05/2011 
Report No.:  AC6287
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P107608 
Original Project Name: National Road 
Rehabilitation (Osh-Batken-Isfana) 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P126606 
Project Name:  National Road Rehabilitation (Osh-Batken-Isfana) Project Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Cordula Rastogi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 4, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (90%);Public administration- Transportation (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Trade facilitation and market access 
(40%);Regional integration (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are: (i) to contribute to the reduction of transport 
costs and travel time along the Osh-Batken-Isfana Road corridor; and (ii) to improve road 
safety planning and road asset management; and (iii) repair and rehabilitate road 
infrastructure in and around Osh and Jalal-Abad cities thereby creating temporary jobs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additionally financed section is part of the ca. 360 km long road corridor from Osh to 
Isfana through Batken in the South-Western parts of the Kyrgyz Republic. The Osh-
Batken-Isfana road corridor is one of the six major corridors identified that constitute the 
backbone of the national road network of the Kyrgyz Republic. The rehabilitation of this 
corridor has been identified as one of the priorities in the Road Transport Development 
Strategy of the Kyrgyz Republic for the period 2011-2015.  
 
Page  2
The corridor, once rehabilitated will open up the only land transport connection between 
the main Kyrgyz cities in the Fergana Valley to the rest of the country. It will address the 
specific development challenges of the Batken Oblast which are a combination of relative 
isolation, higher than average poverty rates and potential conflict with neighboring 
countries.  The most critical sections of the Osh-Batken-Isfana road corridor (phase I) are 
in the process of being rehabilitated through parallel financing from EBRD, EC and the 
World Bank totaling about US$89 million equivalent. To complete phase I of the road 
corridor rehabilitation and ensure greatest return on these investments, the 18 kilometer-
long section of the corridor in Nookat region (Nookat pass) is proposed to be 
rehabilitated with financing from the proposed additional credit/grant.  
 
The proposed activities under this second Additional Financing (AF2) will scale-up the 
activities of the on-going project and consist of the following:  
 
Activity 1: Road Repairs and Rehabilitation (US$14.3 million equivalent). This activity 
will finance the rehabilitation of about 18 km of the Osh-Batken-Isfana Road Corridor as 
well as consultancy services for construction supervision.  
 
Activity 2: Road Asset Management (US$1.5 equivalent). This activity will finance the 
development and setting up of a road asset management system.  
 
Activity 3: Project Management and Implementation (US$0.2 equivalent).This activity 
will finance provision of goods, consultants# services, training, operating costs, and 
financial audit, to support project coordination, implementation and management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed additional financing relates to a road section starting at around km 10.5 
West of Osh and running towards South-Westerly direction, with a total length of about 
18 km. The section mostly is situated in a landscape of wide valleys and rolling hills up 
to 1,700-1,800 m elevation, with mostly moderately steep slopes. The land use around the 
corridor is predominantly grazing land and rangeland and some scattered farms and small 
villages (all in considerable distance from the road). In the Western part of the section 
some limestone cliffs and steep slopes are characteristic landscape elements, and land use 
in these areas is limited to low intensity husbandry of mainly sheep and goats.  
 
At about half-way point the section culminates in the Nookat Pass (elevation ca. 1,500 
m). At Nookat pass about a dozen small shops, kiosks and restaurants are located.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim (YPP) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSS3) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
For the section of the road corridor proposed to be financed under this additional 
financing, overall the environmental conditions and impacts are moderate and have 
already been identified and characterized during the EA process of the original project, as 
the ESIA report of the parent project spans the entire road corridor from Osh to Isfana.  
The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (EIA) was carried out by the 
Consultant Finnroad in 2009 and concludes that for the entirety of the corridor the 
environmental impacts are localized and easily mitigeable with standard measures which 
are contained in an EMP attached to the EIA report . Thus, the category B safeguards 
classification according to OP4.01 is maintained for the proposed second additional 
credit/grant, and the existing EIA and EMP will be the guiding environmental safeguards 
documents.  
 
The World Bank's Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) is triggered. Along the 
proposed section (Nookat Pass), roadside vendors are present. There is a possibility that 
they may have to be temporarily moved during the construction works. The exact scope 
and scale of the impacts on the roadside vendors will only be known once designs are 
finalized. The existing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) fully and adequately 
addresses all potential compensation mechanisms and processes which may have to be 
followed to preserve and retain the affected vendor's livelihoods.  
 
The main findings of the EIA, including a social assessment undertaken as part of the 
feasibility study and financed out of the original credit/grant were that the loss of land 
and buildings would not be significant. This is mainly due to the fact that the works 
contain rehabilitation of an existing transport corridor. The RPF which was prepared for 
the original credit/grant remains valid and is comprehensive enough to deal with any 
possible resettlement impacts and if necessary to enable the preparation of Resettlement 
Action Plans (RAPs) once designs are finalized.  
 
The proposed road section is already included in the existing safeguards instruments: an 
EIA, and an RPF prepared by Finnroad in2009 include the proposed section and 
Page  4
adequately covers its environmental baseline conditions, potential resettlement impacts, 
project impacts and foreseen mitigation measures, the latter contained in an 
environmental management plan (EMP). This framework provided by the existing EIA 
and RPF is considered to sufficiently cover environmental and social issues of the new 
section for project preparation. Once detailed designs are available (estimated after the 
appraisal) further safeguards preparation works to be accomplished by the selected 
contractor will require more detailed, site specific EMPs (and potentially RAPs) which 
would be conducted under the construction works contracts. Site-specific EMPs will be 
prepared and included in the bidding documents and works contracts. Applicability of 
safety workers requirements during construction works will be monitored during works 
given the characteristics of the terrain during the proposed 18 KM rehabilitation (e.g., 
mountainous and going through the Nookat pass).  
 
The RPF and EIA for the original credit/grant were disclosed on August 1-4, 2009 on 
the website of the MoTC, including an abbreviated version of the RPF and relevant 
information about the Project, date/location of the public consultations on KyrgyzToday, 
Akipress, Kabar (publications) and EuropaPlus (radio), as well as distributed flyers about 
the Project in Batken Oblast along the project section.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As the project area has been in use as transport corridor and settlement area for several 
decades an equilibrium between natural processes and conditions as well as human land 
use has been established. A key limiting factor to the expansion of human habitats 
appears to be the availability of fertile land in reach of perennial water courses. Thus the 
sustainable use of natural resources is not expected to be significantly impacted by the 
better transport capacity the improved road corridor will offer, i.e. no additional pressure 
on land, especially not sensitive natural habitats, is expected. Key positive impacts will 
be improved access to markets, better service delivery to the population, safer road use 
and generally enhanced mobility. There is a very low probability that the project would 
trigger or contribute to major economic shifts, such as development of large areas, 
construction booms or similar.  
 
Also, it is anticipated that permanent land acquisition will be kept to a minimum along 
the entire corridor, as the road primarily runs through arid unoccupied land. The only 
instances where land acquisition is likely to occur is where the road enters and exits 
settlements, and this process will be governed by the resettlement policy framework for 
the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The road section proposed under this Additional Financing follows closely the existing 
road alignment and no deviations or bypasses are planned. If the EMP is duly 
implemented the rehabilitation works will have minimal environmental impacts and 
social disruption. Alignments adjustments by a few meters, such as minor adjustments of 
curve radii, also will have no significant impacts. By retaining the existing alignment the 
Page  5
Project will minimize land acquisition and, at the detailed design stage, will take all 
measures to reduce the amount of land to the absolute minimum taking into account 
adequate safety measures. The detailed design that will be implemented is intended to be 
the option that minimizes land take and loss.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Kyrgyz Government shows a high degree of ownership and interest in the Project 
due to its strategic importance. Under its auspices a number of technical and 
environmental studies were prepared, both by local the local firms (e.g. 
Kyrgyzdortransproekt - KDTP), and international Consultants (Finnroad, Oy). This 
allocation of responsibilities for the production of safeguards documents mitigates 
shortcomings identified during a mission in 2007 by the Bank team, when KDTP, then 
the main designer for the corridor, was found to have insufficient staff resources and 
capabilities in the areas of environmental and social safeguards.  
 
Environmental oversight of the existing roads project is satisfactory. The EMP for the 
roads project was received and reviewed by the regional environmental protection 
authority (EPA) before the works started and approved without qualifications, comments 
or additional requirements. In principle EPA's 'Environmental Protection Unit' carries out 
site inspections, the last one took place in fall 2010. The inspections focus on compliance 
of site conditions with design and EMP, so far no significant deviations were flagged by 
EPA, and no penalties were paid in the World Bank financed section. No complaints 
from the local population were directed to the EPA.  
 
There is in principle an information flow from the site to EPA in terms of sharing design 
and environmental documents. However, the EPA apparently does not receive regular 
site reports, such as monitoring reports, and does not participate in regular project 
meetings. This will be an area which will be strengthened during further project 
implementation and for the AF section.  
 
Under the existing safeguards framework the Contractor is largely complying with 
international good practice, as far as possible under the country conditions in the Kyrgyz 
Republic. Construction management is cognizant of the FS stage EMP and appears 
experienced in site management, including basic environmental issues. The Contractor 
has hired an on-site environment, health and safety specialist and has provisioned a clinic 
in the camp with both a Kyrgyz doctor and a Chinese nurse.  Overall construction works 
are carried out with sufficient regard for environmental protection.  
 
The capacity of the IPIG to deal with resettlement has been built through their 
experience with resettlement planning under ADB projects, the recruitment of a social 
specialist for ADB projects, and the active engagement of the IPIG in the resettlement 
planning process for the Project with Finnroad experts. The IPIG#s environmental and 
social specialist is operational and has been closely involved in project management and 
monitoring and has been a valuable contributor to achieve and maintain a level of due 
diligence compliant with international good practice.  
 
Page  6
Thus, the overall safeguards implementation arrangements remain the same as in the 
parent project, as they have been found to lead to satisfactory site management and 
environmental practice during recent missions. Similarly, the Resettlement Policy 
Framework remains valid and is comprehensive enough to deal with any possible 
resettlement impacts and if necessary to enable the preparation of Resettlement Action 
Plans once designs are finalized.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders in this process include the IPIG within the Ministry of Transport and 
Communication (the project implementing entity), The Ayl Okmotu's (local self 
government Rayon Administrations (regional government), local NGOs and Community-
Based-Organizations (such as village councils) and most importantly - the potentially 
affected people. As part of the social assessment, meetings have already been held with 
people who have been affected by previous works along the road, and who may 
potentially be affected by future works. However, a comprehensive consultation cannot 
take place until designs are finalized and the exact number and location of people to be 
affected is known. The procedures for conducting consultations are specified in the 
Resettlement Policy Framework.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/26/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/25/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/27/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/26/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/25/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/27/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  7
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cordula Rastogi 
05/03/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
05/03/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan 
05/03/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
05/03/2011 
Comments:  cleared on behalf of Agi Kiss 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
05/03/2011 
Comments:   
