Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5955 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/29/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P118838 
Project Name: Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader: Sandra Broka 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 22, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Nutrition and food security (80%);Social risk mitigation (10%);Other rural 
development (10%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.10 
 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
6.85
6.95 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To increase the productivity of the beneficiary farmers supported by the project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project activities are expected to contribute to increased productivity in the 
agricultural sector, by improving access to finance to support investments in farm inputs, 
agricultural machinery and some marketing infrastructure, timely and reliable weather forecasts, 
and complementary capacity building activities for farmers.  
 
Component 1: Investment Support for Improved Farm-level Productivity (US$5.94 million, of 
which RFPCR  US$5.16 million)  
 
Sub-component A: Credit Line for farmers and farmer associations (US$4.74 million, of which 
RFPCR US$3.96 million)  
 
Page  2
The Credit Line will increase farmers# access to financing in order to facilitate the supply 
response. The Credit Line will be in line with the provisions of OP8.30. The Credit Line will 
consist of two products:  
 
i. 
Working capital loans, providing access to much needed short-term financing for spring 
and winter planting (agricultural inputs, such as seeds, fertilizers and fuel) and harvesting 
activities for small farmers and farmer cooperatives.  
 
ii. 
Investment loans and leases, to enable farmers and farmer cooperatives to purchase farm 
machinery, invest in warehouses and other productive assets in the heavily under-invested 
farming sector. Long-term investment loans and leases will be provided under the sub-
component. The Credit Line will also complement the grant funds for cooperatives made 
available for investment purposes under the on-going Agribusiness and Marketing Project 
(ABMP).  
 
The Credit Line will target farmers with a greater potential to sell their agricultural produce, 
who are able to borrow from commercial sources. The average working capital loan size is 
expected to be around US$2,000, while the average investment loans is expected to be in the 
range of US$15,000 equivalent. The Credit Line beneficiaries will receive sub-loans/leases in 
accordance with agreed eligibility criteria. The financial and commercial viability of the sub-
projects and beneficiaries under this facility will be assessed by the PFIs (participating financial 
institutions - selected qualified commercial banks and microfinance institutions). It is estimated 
that around 2,000 farmers will have access to sub-loans under this program.  
 
Sub-component B: Support to Community Seed Funds (US$1.2 million, all RFPCR)  
 
The sub-component will support the existing nascent system of Community Seed Funds (CSF). 
Previous World Bank-financed projects have supported the development of CSFs, which has 
proven to be a sustainable institutional arrangement to ensure community-driven access to 
quality seeds for farmers. Each farmer participating in a CSF receives seed and/or fertilizer. Each 
year the equivalent of 120 percent of the seed and fertilizer value received must be returned to 
the CSF for subsequent distribution to new members. Under the most recent Additional 
Financing to the Agricultural Investment and Services Project (AISP), 63 CSFs were mobilized 
with a membership of 2,271 farmers. They received 790 tons of grain seeds (wheat and barley), 
1,254 tons of fertilizers. Additionally, 300 tons of potato seeds were distributed to 5,502 
families; 51 groups of 301 women received vegetable seeds. All seeds were from certified 
sources. Due to better quality seeds and fertilizer application, the yields in winter and spring 
cereals have increased, on average, 1.6 to 2.3 times compared to previous years, even after 
accounting for better weather conditions.  
 
The project will finance the agricultural inputs (mostly expected to be seeds and fertilizer) 
which will be distributed to the members of newly created CSFs. It is estimated that the project 
will support the creation of 65 or so CSFs with a total membership of around 3,000 farmers. 
Given the modus operandi of the CSFs, it is expected that by the end of the project, around 5,500 
farmers would have benefitted from the sub-component activities. Similar to the on-going 
support to the CSF system, most of the demand is expected to be for wheat seed; however, other 
types of seeds will also be provided, based on demand.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Technical Support for Improved Farm-level Productivity (US$1.09 million, all 
RFPCR)  
 
Sub-component A: Weather Information for Farmers (US$0.50 million, all RFPCR)  
 
Agriculture is a heavily climate and weather dependent activity. This sub-component will pilot 
delivery of weather information to farmers, including early warnings for adverse weather events, 
to reduce crop losses due to such weather events.  It will contribute to informed decision-making 
by farmers, which will result in increased production through savings from prevented losses or 
gains due to improved productivity. The experience of other countries (e.g. Turkey) has shown 
that timely provision of weather information can help to protect against weather events, such as 
frost, and improve the planning of agricultural activities, such as pest control measures, cutting 
of grass, shearing of sheep, movement of flocks, or harvesting of grain.  In Turkey, for instance, 
as a result of the improved weather information, the farmers were able to reduce the need for 
pesticide application to apple orchards, achieving a 30% reduction in pesticide costs. A very 
small-scale pilot  of providing agro-meteorological posts to selected farmers was implemented 
on two sites in the Kyrgyz Republic in Chui and Jalal-abad regions in early 2010 with positive 
results. The spring 2010 in Jalal-abad, for instance, was rainy and cold, and many farmers had 
difficulty identifying when to plant, or they did not succeed planting at all. However, all farmers 
who participated in the weather information pilot were successful in planting their crops.  
 
The subcomponent comprises two related parts: a) strengthening of the source of forecast 
information for farmers, and b) delivery of the weather forecasts to farmers. It is expected that 
Kyrgyz Hydromet will be the provider of the agricultural meteorological information. For the 
benefit of farmers, the project aims to support Hydromet to expand its current publicly available 
one-day forecast span to three-day forecasts. For this purpose, the project will provide Hydromet 
with selected equipment (computers and a server) in order to reduce the lead times for 
agricultural meteorological information forecasting, as well as strengthen skills of selected staff, 
responsible for developing of the three-day forecasts, in local area modeling. In addition, the 
project will finance installation of a few small agro-meteorological posts on selected farms in 
two rayons of the country. This small-scale (the cost per unit will be US$300 # 400) weather 
equipment will measure basic weather variables:  temperature, wind speed and direction, 
barometric pressure, relative humidity, and accumulated precipitation.  These will help pinpoint 
development of weather patterns such as frost, monitor agrometeorological variables such as 
cumulative heating-degree-days and precipitation, and in the long run will calibrate the 
difference between local weather and model forecasts, allowing the farmers to take the necessary 
measures to protect their crops and animals.  
 
The distribution of the agro-meteorological forecasts is planned by Short Message Service 
(SMS) directly to subscribed farmers# cell phones. Two main cell phone operators have country-
wide coverage, which makes SMS distribution technically feasible and efficient. Other means of 
distribution will not be excluded albeit some of them have their limitations. For example, radios 
have fragmented coverage and newspapers are limited in circulation and delivered to rural areas 
with significant delays making the forecasts a history. A limited pilot of forecasts distribution by 
SMS has shown that some farmers are willing to pay nominal fees (US$0.5 per month) for 
Page  4
subscription to this service. At the project#s start a few models of operation will be tested in 
limited areas to determine and scale up the most optimal model for sustainability of the services.  
 
Sub-component B: Training and Extension Services (US$0.59 million, all RFPCR)  
 
This sub-component will support training and extension services to farmers and farmer 
cooperatives on modern, sustainable agricultural practices (including pest management) to 
increase agricultural productivity and reduce on-farm losses, and quality management systems at 
the farm level. The services will be provided to a broad range of beneficiaries, including those 
cooperatives and farmers who will borrow under the project#s Credit Line in order to improve 
the effectiveness of fund use, those participating in value chains and those working with 
agribusinesses on contract farming basis. The sub-component will also finance outreach and 
training by a team of extension specialists in the weather information pilot areas (see paragraph 
21) to teach farmers how to interpret/use modern weather forecasts to address selected 
agricultural issues.  
 
Farmer information seminars will be held to disseminate the information on measures to be 
taken against adverse weather events. It is estimated that at least 2,000 farmers will benefit from 
the information seminars. After the initial technical assistance provided by an international 
consultant, the project will mobilize services of existing local consulting networks and 
companies. The project will also support small-scale capacity building activities for the public 
sector towards contributing of improved agricultural productivity, including training on public 
and private partnerships in the agricultural sector, optimization of functioning of value chains, 
and support to the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) to improve its capacity in market analysis and 
forecasting. The project will also provide support for a review of the existing emergency food 
distribution activities.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.6 million)  
 
The management of activities under Sub-component 1B and Component 2 will be carried out 
by the Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) (US$0.49 million, all RFPC), which is 
responsible for implementing the Market Development Component of the on-going Agribusiness 
and Marketing Project (ABMP). The ABCC will also undertake procurement function for the 
entire project. The Credit Line Management Unit (CLMU) (US$0.11 million, all RFPCR), under 
the Ministry of Finance, will implement Sub-component 1A (the Credit Line), financial 
transactions under Sub-component 1B, and undertake the Financial Management functions for 
the entire project. Both units will be responsible for monitoring and evaluation under their 
respective components. At the project#s mid-term and end, independent evaluation of the 
achieved results will be carried out.  
 
Key safeguards issues  
 
The project will be a Category B project as it will support mostly technical assistance activities, 
along with support to CSFs and a new Credit Line for farmers and farmer associations to support 
productivity increase in agriculture (including purchasing of agricultural inputs, such as seeds, 
fertilizers and fuel, as well as purchasing of farm machinery). These activities may generate 
Page  5
some positive and adverse environmental and social impacts. The identified positive impacts of 
the project include: (a) increased food security and household income for the smallholder 
farmers, due to higher agricultural productivity; (b) improved nutritional status of the farmers 
due to increased agricultural production; (c) improved farmer skills from training in 
technologies, seed breeding, fertilizer use and land conservation; (d) improved soil fertility due 
to fodder crop sowing (enrichment by nitrogen), use of phosphorus-potassium fertilizers; and (e) 
increased opportunity for engagement in other income generating activities or small scale 
businesses by smallholder farmers due to increased food security for the households. The 
potential negative impacts that may result from implementation of the additional financing 
include the following: (a) increased pollution of ground and surface waters due to soil erosion 
and use of fertilizers and pesticides; (b) threats to human health and wildlife due to poor handling 
of treated seeds, fertilizers and pesticides; (c) increased siltation of water bodies due to soil 
erosion; (d) introduction of genetic monoculture or genetically modified organisms (GMOs) 
through seed provided via the CSFs; and (e) construction waste.  These potential negative 
impacts will be mitigated through the capacity building component and EMP, to ensure 
sustainable agricultural practices are introduced in participating farmer communities and coops.  
 
The project will not finance purchase of genetically modified organisms (GMOs).  
 
While the project will not finance pesticides, it is possible that pesticide use will increase due to 
the increased intensity of cropping supported by the seed fund and credit components of the 
project.  Therefore, OP 4.09 (Pesticide Management) is triggered, with provisions in the project 
design and EMP for the capacity building component to include resources and training for 
farmers and coops on reduced and safe use of pesticides.  
 
Most of mentioned adverse potential environmental impacts are minor and could be easily 
managed during the project implementation by applying a set of avoidance and prevention 
measures, which will be provided in the EMP.  
 
As application of the seeds and fertilizers will be done within existing agricultural lands, the 
additional financing will not have an impact on wildlife and natural habitats and thus OP/BP 4.04 
#Natural habitats# is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impact on physical cultural 
resources, which are generally not placed in the vicinity of agricultural lands. Therefore OP/BP 
4.11 #Physical Cultural Resources# is not triggered.  
 
The project will not support any sub-projects under the credit line that might result in 
displacement. The lending guidelines under the ABMP have been amended to ensure that no 
displacement will occur as a result of sub-project implementation.   Land acquisitions are also 
not supported under the project. The on-farm agro-meteorological stations are small scale 
collectively managed structures (no more than 3m2) that will be installed on privately owned 
land, with the full and voluntary agreement of the participating farmers.  Furthermore, site 
inspections and due-diligence procedures similar to those used under the existing credit line will 
be adopted to ensure no unintended displacement of residences or livelihoods will occur and that 
those hosting the structures have agreed to do so voluntarily. Other activities to be supported 
primarily involve technical assistance and training and therefore will not require any land 
acquisition. Therefore, OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered.  
 
Page  6
There is a risk of elite capture within CSFs, and potential exclusion of members of ethnic 
minorities from Credit Line and CSFs, especially in the conflicted affected communities in the 
South of the Country. Grievance redress and complaints system will be established for CSFs and 
the credit line to avoid elite capture and ethnic discrimination, and monitoring by CLMU and 
task team will take place. To date, although the PIUs of respective projects are available for 
hearing grievances related to any discrimination, there have been are no complaints of elite 
capture or ethnic discrimination relating either to the CSFs or the credit line. The risk of elite 
capture within CSFs will be reviewed during the upcoming Mid-Term Review Planned for May 
2011 for AISP, and the findings will be reflected in the Operational Manual and supervision 
strategy   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented countrywide based on demand for services and loans, and will 
not be located in protected areas. The focus will be on agricultural areas currently under 
cultivation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The management of activities under Sub-component 1B and Component 2 will be carried out by 
the Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) (US$0.49 million, all RFPC), which is 
responsible for implementing the Market Development Component of the on-going Agribusiness 
and Marketing Project (ABMP). The ABCC will also undertake procurement function for the 
entire project. The Credit Line Management Unit (CLMU) (US$0.11 million, all RFPCR), under 
the Ministry of Finance, will implement Sub-component 1A (the Credit Line), financial 
transactions under Sub-component 1B, and undertake the Financial Management functions for 
the entire project.   For the ongoing ABMP, the CLMU has lead responsibility for environmental 
and social oversight and supervision of the credit line sub-projects.  The Participating Financing 
Institutions (PFIs), currently 3 banks, have responsibility for carrying our environmental and 
resettlement screening and assigning the appropriate environmental category to sub-project 
applications.   The capacity and procedures in place at the CLMU and PFIs were assessed by the 
team environmental specialist in October 2010, and previously in March-April 2009 during the 
ABMP Mid-Term Review mission, and were found to be generally satisfactory. The CLMU and 
PFIs also have experience of screening for resettlement impacts of sub-projects implemented 
with credit line finance.  
 
The October 2010 supervision mission focused on the sub-loans.  Eligible investments under 
the ABMP Access to Finance component include development of storage, grading, packing and 
marketing of agricultural produce, investments in processing facilities and domestic marketing 
and export of agricultural products. These activities may generate some adverse environmental 
and social impacts mostly related to construction and operation of agro-processing enterprises, 
including: (a) dust and noise due to demolition and construction; (b) dumping of demolition and 
construction wastes, accidental spillage of machine oil, lubricants, etc; (c) solid waste, effluent 
discharges and air emissions; and (d) waste water treatment.  All three PFIs demonstrated a very 
high level of awareness of and attention to environmental screening requirements, to the point 
that category A projects would not be considered eligible for financing.  Two of the PFIs have 
EBRD as a shareholder and routinely follow EBRD safeguard guidelines, in addition to the 
ABMP guidelines.  Loan applications are screened for environmental impacts at both the branch 
Page  7
bank level and at headquarters, and staff at both levels have received training under the project.  
However, the last environmental training was delivered in 2006, so the mission recommended to 
repeat the training for new loan officers at Aiyl Bank and KIBC who have assumed their 
positions since 2006, and for all relevant staff at Kyrgyzstan Bank, which only began 
participating in the project in 2010.  
 
The CLMU and PFIs will follow similar environmental guidelines for the APAP.  The Bank 
team and counterparts will decide prior to appraisal whether the CLMU will undertake the 
environmental and social oversight function for the entire project, or whether additional capacity 
will be developed within the ABCC to support environmental and social aspects of procurement 
for civil works, and for training for farmers and cooperatives on sustainable agricultural 
practices, and for support to the CSFs with respect to selection of appropriate seed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Amy Evans (ECSS1) 
Mr Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSS4) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Main issues include environmental impacts of civil works and from intensification of 
agriculture   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Pesticides will not be financed, however the project could result in increased pesticide use.  
This will be mitigated through the capacity building component and EMP, to ensure that 
sustainable agricultural practices are introduced in participating farmer communities and coops.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
04/15/2011 
 
Page  8
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ABMP EMP will be reviewed and revised as needed prior to appraisal to serve the new 
APAP.  No new safeguards-related studies an expected to be needed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sandra Broka 
03/29/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/29/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
03/29/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
