Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/21/2011 
Report No.:  AC5989
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID:  P117177 
Project Name:  GEF Project: Lao Rural Electrification Phase II Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jie Tang 
GEF Focal Area: Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 21, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 22, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASTS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (85%);Renewable energy (15%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Climate change (20%);Regulation and 
competition policy (20%);Rural non-farm income generation (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.40 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
1.82 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.20 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 0.58 
 
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program 
0.50 
 
NORWAY: Norwegian Agency for Dev. Coop. (NORAD) 
2.95
7.23 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives (PDO) of the Rural Electrification Phase II Project 
(REP II) are to (a) increase access to electricity of rural households in villages of project 
provinces and (b) further improve the fi
nancial performance of Electricité du Laos.  
 
Global Environmental Objectives. The proposed GEF Additional Financing to the REP 
II will support achievement of (a) an increased efficiency of energy supply by EdL and 
consumption by consumers; and (b) a substantial adoption of renewable energy in the 
government#s program. Green house gas emissions reductions are expected from 
increased energy efficiency as increased hydropower exports to and reduced electricity 
import from Thailand reduce thermal power production in Thailand; and from renewable 
energy development to avoid diesel-based electricity generation for rural electrification.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed GEF Grant for additional financing to the REP II will support activities that 
(a) will generate global environment benefits; (b) are a natural continuation of the GEF-
supported activities under the Rural Electrification Phase I Project (REP I); and (c) are 
critical for the achievement of the global environmental objectives and PDOs of the REP 
II. The grant supports four components closely linked to the selected activities of the REP 
II.  
 
The project comprises four components: (1) EdL System Loss Reduction; (2) Demand-
side Management (DSM) and Energy Efficiency (EE); (3) Renewable Energy (RE) 
Development; and (4) Project Management.  
 
For Component 1: EdL System Loss Reduction, the additional financing will support 
technical assistance in distribution system analysis and preparation of investment projects 
for technical loss reduction and capacity building at EdL, especially its branch offices in 
the 17 provinces for preparation and implementation of loss reduction activities.  
 
For Component 2: DSM and EE, the additional financing will support EdL in the 
implementation of pilot projects identified for energy saving at central government 
agencies, hiring of 10 local energy coordinators to review energy saving potentials at 
both the central and provincial government buildings, and public awareness campaigns to 
increase awareness of EE and adoption of EE technologies and practices among targeted 
consumers.  
 
For Component 3: the additional financing will finance the design, supply, installation, 
and supervision of four pilot biogas generation projects in a total capacity of 120 kW, of 
which pre-feasibility studies were completed under REP I. The GEF additional financing 
will also finance identification, preparation, and installation of two pilot biomass 
generation projects to achieve a total installed bio-energy generation capacity of 300 kW 
as a base case during the implementation period of REP II, in addition to replication of 
the pilot experience for future scale up. In addition, GEF additional financing will 
support hiring of RE experts to help the development of Rural Electrification Fund 
pipeline projects.  
 
For Component 4: the additional financing will provide financing resources to support 
incremental operating costs of the implementing agencies to endure smooth 
implementation of the GEF REP II project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The GEF additional financing will support reduction of losses of EdL#s distribution 
system covering the entire country, implementation of DSM and EE projects in Vientiane 
City, and implementation of four pilot biogas generation in four locations in Vientiane, 
Khammouane, Suvannakhet provinces as identified during REP I and 2 pilot biomass 
projects in Xaignabury province.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASIN) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASTS) 
Mr Jun Zeng (EASCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
For Renewable Energy Development.  
 
This GEF additional financing project will not create any potential large scale, 
significant, and/or irreversible impacts.  The safeguard issues/impacts will be limited 
only to those related to the implementation of pilot biogas and biomass subprojects of 
which the issues and proposed mitigation measures would be similar to those described 
for the REP II and the one related to this project are summarized below:  
 
Environment: The supply and installation of very small scale renewable energy 
development at various sites (such as household biogas, village hydro, and village 
biomass) are not anticipated to have any major adverse impacts.  Given that the 
subproject locations and scale have not been identified, the off-grid ESSF, which includes 
a
RPF and EGDF, has been prepared to ensure that a diligent process will be followed for 
project screening to identify adverse impacts, if any, and that the identified impacts will 
be adequately addressed.  
 
Indigenous Peoples: The project is not expected to generate adverse impacts on ethnic 
peoples.  However, some renewable energy development subprojects may be located in 
areas inhabited by ethnic minority groups, but community-specific negative impacts on 
ethnic groups' culture or traditional means of livelihood are not likely to occur. Indeed, 
ethnic group communities generally expect to benefit significantly from improved access 
to electrification.  To make sure that the ethnic groups are aware of, and have access to 
the potential benefits from the project, a revised Ethnic Group Development Framework 
(EGDF) has been prepared (as part of ESSF). The EGDF describes the screening 
Page  4
requirements, the principles and procedures for consultation, and reporting and 
monitoring activities to be followed, includes guidelines for conducting free, prior and 
informed consultations with ethnic communities.  This is to ensure that (a) any concerns 
they may have are identified and (b) opportunities to provide culturally appropriate 
benefits are considered. The consultation process will be applied during the identification 
and preparation of the subprojects.  
 
Resettlement and land acquisition: The project is not expected to cause significant land 
acquisition nor resettlement.  However, renewable energy projects may involve minor 
land acquisition or restrictions (temporary or permanent) on land use.  A Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared (as part of the ESSF) and will be applied to 
these renewable energy subprojects.  
 
For DSM and EE  
 
The Project will also support implementation of DSM and EE projects in government 
office buildings and selected hospitals and shopping markets by EdL. The activities will 
be mainly installation of energy efficient lighting equipment, and change of switches and 
controllers to make more efficient electricity consumptions. Little environmental and 
social impacts are expected. However, the ESSF for EdL Component of REP II is 
updated for the GEF REP II to ensure a proper process will be followed for identification 
and mitigation of possible impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
EdL will be the implementing agency for technical assistance on loss reduction and DSM 
and EE components while the Department of Electricity under the Ministry of Energy 
and Mines (DOE/MEM) will be the implementing agency for the renewable energy 
development component.  
 
Safeguard measures described for REP II applies. The two Environmental and Social 
Safeguard Frameworks (ESSFs): one for the grid-extension by EdL and one for the off-
grid subprojects by DOE, which include a Resettlement Policy Framework and Ethnic 
Group Development Framework will be applied for the activities proposed for the GEF 
additional financing. The same safeguard management for REP II, including monitoring 
and reporting, will be applied for the GEF REP II.  The two ESSFs for the on-grid and 
off-grid components updated for both REP II and GEF REP II have been disclosed in 
country as well as in the Bank InfShop. The ESSFs were also publically disclosed locally 
in Lao PDR on Jan 19, 2011.  
Page  5
Safeguard capacity building: Most of the safeguard training will be carried out through 
IDA-funded REP II. For implementation of pilot renewable energy project by DOE, 
International or regional consultant will be hired to assist DOE/MEM for supervision of 
the project implementation under the Component 3. This would also contribute to 
capacity building of DOE/MEM and address any safeguards issues that may arise with 
the supply and installations of the pilot renewable energy subprojects to be funded by 
GEF Additional Financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Extensive consultation with local communities and local authorities will be one factor for 
site selection and this will be part of the planning process.  
 
If land acquisition or restrictions (temporary or permanent) on land use are involved, 
consultation with the affected people will follow the guidelines provided in the 
RPF/ESSFs applicable for REP II and GEF REP II. If the subprojects are located in the 
area involved ethnic minority groups, the consultation will follow the guidelines provided 
in the EGDF/ESSFs. The ESSFs, including the RPFs and EGDFs, were disclosed in Lao 
language in Vientiane on Jan 19, 2011 for EdL and January 20, 2011 for DoE, and would 
be distributed to the local authorities and communities to be affected by the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/19/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/20/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/19/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/19/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/20/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/19/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/25/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/20/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/19/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jie Tang 
01/19/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr James Orehmie Monday 
01/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jun Zeng 
01/20/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul 
01/21/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex 
01/21/2011 
Comments:   
