Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5879 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/25/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID: P123480 
Project Name: LA-Poverty Reduction Fund II 
Task Team Leader: Ingo Wiederhofer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 22, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASTS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (25%);Sub-national government administration 
(25%);Public administration- Other social services (20%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (15%);General education sector (15%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (30%);Participation and civic engagement 
(20%);Other human development (20%);Other public sector governance 
(15%);Indigenous peoples (15%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
10.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the access to and the utilization of 
basic economic and social infrastructure and services for communities in PRF II targeted poverty 
locations through processes of inclusive community and local development planning, 
implementation and monitoring.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project would focus on the following activities: (i) grants to communities for the financing 
of small-scale infrastructure; (ii) training for communities and for local government officials in 
the identification, planning, implementation, supervision and monitoring of community and local 
development investments; and (iii) national project management. It is envisaged that the Project 
would consist of the three main components:  
Page  2
i) 
Component 1: Community Development Grants: The main activity in PRF II, similar to 
PRF I, would be the construction of economic and social infrastructure requested by the target 
communities. This component includes (a) planning for community development (e.g., 
preparation of subproject proposals) and (b) funds for community block grants. The selection of 
activities would be open except for items specifically excluded through the project's negative list.  
 
ii) 
Component 2: Local Development Capacity-Building Support: This component would 
support the PRF objective of empowering communities by building their capacity to assess their 
own needs, discuss these with local authorities, and implement and supervise the construction of 
public infrastructure. It would also support community training activities associated with sub-
project investments. The component would finance, inter alia, PRF provincial and district office 
costs (including operating costs, equipment and staff salaries), the costs associated with various 
village meetings (e.g., village needs assessments, prioritization and decision meetings), 
community training on financial management, procurement, sub-project implementation, O&M, 
monitoring, etc.  
 
This component also provides implementation support, training and technical assistance to PRF 
staff at the provincial and district levels to manage the program and to local and provincial 
authorities to strengthen their capacity to support PRF approaches and investments throughout 
the project cycle. It would also finance the development of Information Education 
Communication (IEC) tools. Finally, this component would fund most project training efforts.  
 
iii) 
Component 3: National Project Management: This component would finance the costs of 
managing, monitoring, reporting and operating the PRF. It would include salaries and fees of 
national PRF staff; associated equipment and operating costs not covered by Government 
counterparts; evaluations; technical assistance in the areas of training, monitoring, Management 
Information System (MIS), accounting, procurement assessments, legal services, auditing, and 
other specialized areas. This component would also provide support at national level to ensure 
further integration of PRF in the government machinery at this level.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project areas expected to be covered are the existing PRF I provinces i.e. Champassak, 
Huuaphanh, Luang Namtha, Saravanh, Savannakhet, and Xiengkhouang.  In addition, the 
province of Attapeu, in which the PRF is active as an implementing agency under the Lao 
Upland Food Security Investment Project (LUFSIP), will be added.  Further provinces may be 
considered if requested by the Government.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project Management Team (PMT) of the present PRF I project (PMT/PRF) will continue to 
be the implementing agency for the proposed PRF II project.  Despite the possibility of changing 
staff members at various levels, it is unlikely that this will weaken the PMT/PRF's capacity to 
plan and implement safeguard measures.  A social and environmental safeguard training will be 
provided in early 2011 to ensure that the PMT/PRF is able to conduct a quick assessment of 
safeguard implementation of the PRF additional financing and to update the safeguard policy 
Page  3
instruments (negative list, ESMF, CRPF, EGDF) and the safeguard operation manual for the 
PRF II as necessary.  
 
Improving knowledge and experience of PRF staff, local authorities, and local people on 
various livelihood development options may be necessary to prevent/mitigate the indirect 
impacts on natural environment while addressing poverty and improving living standard of the 
local people.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASIN) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS) 
Mr Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS) 
Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASTS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The scope of the individual sub-project activities is expected to be small, but this policy is 
triggered to ensure that appropriate measures are undertaken to mitigate the residual negative 
impacts and that when possible measures will be carried out to enhance positive impacts on 
protection and management of natural habitats and forest.  
 
A
safeguard review conducted in June 2010 confirmed that most of PRF subprojects 
involved small civil works of community type and unlikely to create any adverse negative 
impacts.  The review suggested that it is a good practice for PRF to make an effort to mitigate the 
residue negative impacts, to keep proper records on safeguard performance, and when possible 
enhance the positive impacts on the local environment.  Given that indirect impacts due to 
improved access to some remote areas could significantly increase degradation of natural 
habitat/forest over a long term, PRF should make an effort to increase knowledge and awareness 
as well as building capacity of local people/communities to protect and sustainable manage 
forest, natural habitats, and other natural resources.  Discussion with local people suggested that 
there is some awareness on the needs to protect watershed areas for maintaining water supply 
source and on conservation of community forest and fishing zone and these activities are good 
practices and should be promoted as much as possible.  Pilot activities to be implemented under 
PRF II will be identified during the preparation of this project.  
 
On the safeguard side, PRF will review the scope and nature of the PRF II activities and 
update the safeguard policy instruments as well as the safeguard operation manual as 
appropriate.  This includes identification of roles and responsibility of each unit and ways to 
improve record keeping and reporting mechanisms.  
 
No major indirect and/or long term impacts are envisaged given the scale and nature of the 
subprojects.  
 
The negative list will also be reviewed in light of the scale and nature of the subprojects to 
be implemented under PRF II.  The subprojects which may potentially involve substantial 
environmental issues will be screened out upfront rather than considering subproject alternatives.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project is not expected to have any adverse impact on the natural habitats. The task team 
would ensure the inclusion of mitigation measures, if an
y, in the ECOP for positively 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
contributing to natural habitats (e.g., promote conservation of fish habitats; promote 
reforestation, revegetation, and  
 
conservation of water sources; and increase awareness and ownership of local community to 
protect and management forest, wetlands, wildlife, and biodiversity; but excluding harvesting of 
NTFP (non-timber forest products) and/or aquatic life, and those related to involuntary 
restriction of access to legally designated parks and protected areas resulting in adverse impacts 
on the livelihoods).   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not affect forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Although the project will not procure and promote use of chemical pesticides and fertilizers, 
which are included in the current negative list, the project may support community livelihood 
efforts through a related grant supported under a related Japanese Social Development Fund 
grant which may involve agricultural production. It may be unrealistic to totally prevent all 
farmers from applying the chemical inputs. The PRF will work closely with agriculture sector to 
apply the Conservation Agricultural Technology approved by MAF in 2006 for the agricultural 
activities and specify this technology in the ESG and OM. The Pest Management Plan, prepared 
for LUFSIP project, could be used as a sample.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The project area will involve a larger number and diversity of ethnic groups. The PRF's 
ethnic group development plan (EGDF) described in the PRF's existing Social and 
Environmental Guideline (SEG) and Operational Manual (OM) will be reviewed in light of the 
implementation experience of PRF I and PRF additional financing.  Below is a summary of the 
principles and approaches adopted under PRF I and PRF additional financing and they will also 
applied for this project (PRFII):  
 
With the majority of the population in the project constituted by minority ethnic groups, the 
entire project is considered as an ethnic group development plan.  The ethnic composition of the 
districts will influence the design of communication materials to ensure messages are well 
targeted and appropriate to the population groups. Any activity unacceptable or culturally 
inappropriate to an ethnic group in a village of mixed ethnic composition cannot be funded 
without WB prior review. Activities that will have significant adverse impacts on ethnic groups 
in neighboring villages shall not be funded. In addition to these safeguards for ethnic groups 
incorporated into the planning phase as described in the Operations Manual, the project itself has 
been designed to ensure that all ethnic groups will be included and benefit in appropriate ways.  
 
The EGDF will be updated to strengthen the free, prior and informed consultation process 
leading to broad ethnic community support for and participation in the PRFII. Specific measures 
to support the involvement of all ethnic groups include: hiring staff, as far as possible and 
needed, that come from local smaller ethnic groups, and providing additional training if needed; 
training of project staff and facilitators on ethnic minority issues; grievance redress mechanism 
that provide all ethnic groups with access to raise their concerns and complaints; and particular 
attention to indigenous peoples issues in monitoring and evaluation.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is possible that the Project could involve small land acquisition and/or land donation to 
facilitate the construction of small-scale infrastructure. Therefore, this policy will be triggered.  
 
It should be noted that PRF II sub-projects shall not be used as an incentive and/or condition 
to support the on-going government policy on physical or administrative village consolidation to 
relocate ethnic minorities into majority Lao communities.  The Resettlement Policy Framework 
included in the PRF#s SEG and OM will be updated in line with this policy (OP 4.12) and the 
government Decree 192 on compensation and resettlement compatible with (OP 4.12).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/28/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/28/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Given that most of the PRF activities and investments of PRF II would be similar to those 
being implemented under the current PRF I and the Lao Upland Food Security Improvement 
Project (LUFSIP), the safeguard measures will be similar to those being applied to these 
projects.  The PMT/PRF will update the safeguard policy instruments (negative list, ESMF, 
CRPF, EGDF) and the safeguard operation manual for the PRF II.  The updated documents 
will be submitted to the World Bank for review and clearance before appraisal, i.e., by March 
15, 2011.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ingo Wiederhofer 
01/14/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr John R. Butler 
01/25/2011 
Comments:  Acting Safeguards Advisor 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex 
01/22/2011 
Comments:   
