Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/24/2011 
Report No.:  AC6124
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 
Project ID:  P123480 
Project Name:  LA-Poverty Reduction Fund II 
Task Team Leader:  Ingo Wiederhofer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASTS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Public administration- Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Participation and civic engagement 
(50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
12.00 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
10.00
32.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the access to and the utilization of 
basic infrastructure and services for PRF II targeted poor communities in a sustainable 
manner through inclusive community and local development processes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project would be financed as a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) from IDA of 
approximately US$25 million implemented over a period of five years, from 2011-2016.  
 
The Project would consist of three component: (i) grants to communities for the 
financing of small-scale tertiary public infrastructure; (ii) training for communities and 
local government officials in the identification, planning, implementation, supervision 
and monitoring of community and local development investments; and (iii) project 
management.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The PRF II would provide assistance to approximately 274 rural kum banhs in 37 
districts and 10 provinces. Specifically, the Project would provide support to villages in 
Savannakhet, Saravanh, Houaphanh, Luang Namtha, Sekong, Xiengkhouang, Phongsaly, 
Oudomxay, Luangphabang, and Attapeu provinces.  
 
Key physical and social characteristics of these areas are summarized below.  
 
The southern part:  The southern area covers five provinces (Saravanh, Sekong, Attapeu 
and Savannakhet).  Saravanh, Sekong, and Attapeu are located in the most southern part 
of the country. The eastern part, along the Vietnamese border, is mostly mountainous 
areas and form part of the watershed of the Sekong river basin.  Forest and upland 
agriculture are the major land use.  Both Sekong and Attapeu are small provinces (about 
10,000km2), sparsely populated, with a total population of about 100,000 in each 
province. Most of these populations belong to vulnerable ethnic groups that are part of 
the Mone-Khmer group. They tend to live in remote areas with limited access to roads 
and infrastructure. The majority of this ethnic population is not self-sufficient in rice and 
shifting cultivation is still a common practice. Nearly half (45 percent) of the total 
population of these provinces live below the poverty line.   Savavankhet are located along 
the Mekong River and form part of the Mekong flood plains.  Most of the areas are flat, 
including a number of large and small islands and rice farming is the major land use.  
Local people comprise of Lao Tai, Phouthay as well as various ethnic groups including 
Makong, Katang, Tri, Xuay, Sadang under the, Mon-khmer linguistic family. Although 
they are better off compared to those live in Saravanh, Sekong, and Attapeu, poverty 
remains dominant in many remote areas, especially in the eastern part of Savannakhet.  
 
The northern part:  In the north, PRF is expected to cover the provinces of Luang 
Namtha, Xiengkhouang, Huaphanh, Oudomxay and Luangphrabang. Most of the areas 
are mountainous with extensive slash and burn practices.  Upland agriculture is the major 
land use in the northern part, particularly shifting cultivation of rice, corn and cassava, 
which are mainly for household consumption. An increasing amount of corn and cassava 
is being exported to Vietnam and China. Rapidly growing land concessions for private 
investments in agribusinesses, hydropower development and mining have brought about 
issues related to land and forest access restriction for local community. The largest 
amount of land concession is granted for rubber tree plantation. The majority of ethnic 
groups belong to the Mon-khmer, Hmong Iu Mien and Chine-Tibet linguistic families. 
These ethnic groups are mostly concentrated in remote upland areas with limited access 
to social services and market.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASIN) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS) 
Mr Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS) 
Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASTS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Social Aspects:  
 
The overall impacts of the project are expected to be socially positive and would benefit 
local communities, especially the ethnic population, in both the medium and long terms.  
Improved access as well as capacity of local community to construct, operate, and 
maintain basic infrastructure related to education, health, water supply, and road services, 
which meet communities' particular needs are expected to speed up the poverty reduction 
process and enhance sustainability and effectiveness of community investment. By 
expanding PRF's investments to mainstream disaster risk issues, communities' capacity to 
be responsive to disaster risk would be enhanced.  
 
Community empowerment, participation, and transparency have been considered as the 
main thrust of PRF, and these efforts will be continued under PRF II.  Capacity building 
in the context of Koumban development will be strengthened at villages and district 
levels to increase local responsibilities and ownership and sustainability of local 
investment.  PRF II will also improve connection and coordination between PRF, sector 
agencies, and local authorities to promote cooperation and transfer of knowledge in the 
longer term. Due attention will be given to the poor, women, and vulnerable groups.  
Gender equality will also be promoted during the implementation of PRF II.  
 
OP 4.12:  
 
Infrastructure sub-projects, however, may result in minor negative direct and indirect 
social impacts, leading to vulnerability if not adequately mitigated, especially when such 
sub-projects involve land acquisition or land donation.  Indirect impacts may also occur 
especially in the case of an open access (due to road and bridges) which could increase 
risky behaviors (such as drug use, transmittal diseases, debt, human trafficking, etc.) due 
to outsider influence and/or the lack of awareness and knowledge. Therefore, the Bank#s 
policy on resettlement (OP 4.12) has been triggered.  
 
Page  4
Review of PRF I found no major land acquisition and/or adverse negative impacts on 
local population.  The land requirements stemming from sub-projects have been minor 
(ranging from 81m2 to 7,850m2), and were addressed through land donations.  It was 
further found that the Framework on Resettlement and Acquisition of Land and Assets 
(FRALA), which was developed under PRF I and is in line with the Bank's OP 4.12, was 
applied to the voluntary donation processes to ensure that the affected people make 
informed decisions about contributing land or assets, to the benefits of the overall 
improvement of community livelihoods as well as the affected people. Given that PRF II 
investment will be similar in nature to PRF I, it was decided that the FRALA process be 
applied under PRF II.  The FRALA version for PRF II, however, has been updated, 
taking into consideration the lessons learned from PRF I, as well as PRF II's support to 
natural disasters and livelihoods activities.  
 
A
Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework (CRPF) has been developed and 
will be applied under PRF II. CRPF describes the general policies and procedures set out 
under the expanded FRALA, and identifies overall policies and procedures that would 
apply when land needs to be acquired under the Project, whether through voluntary 
donation or against compensation.  The CRPF also describes entitlements for 
compensation and mitigation measures for all losses (if any), including a grievance 
procedure and contents of an abbreviated RAP (Resettlement Action Plan).  
 
OP 4.10:  
 
PRF II will continue to operate in areas that are home to numerous ethnic groups. PRF's 
approach for inclusion of all ethnic groups, (developed during for PRF I and further 
updated for PRF II) is specifically designed to ensure that the concerns of all ethnic 
groups are met through the design of the project. The PRF's planning and implementation 
process has thus been designed to incorporate various aspects of ethnic issues. Due 
attention will continue to be given to ensure that ethnic groups do not suffer adverse 
impacts during the project and that they receive culturally compatible social and 
economic benefits. Throughout the PRF's subprojects' implementation, steps are included 
to make sure that the cultures of the multi-ethnic society are respected and that gender 
issues are integrated at all levels. Specific measures addressing ethnic community issues 
have been included in the Ethnic Group Policy Framework (EGPF) which was prepared 
as a standalone document in line with OP 4.10 requirements.  
 
In line with the government's regulations and the Bank's policies on resettlement and 
indigenous policies, PRF I feedback and resolution mechanism will be strengthened. 
strengthened to ensure that the Project Affected Population (PAP) will be satisfied or at 
least be sufficiently informed if they have concerns or grievances related to the Project, 
including its safeguard aspects. Specifically, these mechanisms will provide the PAPs 
with an 'on-the-ground' platform for monitoring and reporting on the RAP and/or EGPF 
implementation.  Feedback and resolution mechanisms would also allow affected persons 
to seek satisfactory resolution to grievances that they may have in relation to project 
interventions.  
 
Page  5
Adverse impacts on the known archeological, paleontological, historical, or unique 
natural values in the subproject areas are unlikely, therefore the Physical Cultural 
Resources policy (OP 4.11) is not triggered.  However, a standard clause for 'chance 
find's' will be included in the Environment Management Plan.  
 
B. Environmental Aspects:  
 
The Project is rated as a Category B project and two environmental safeguard policies 
i.e. environmental assessment (OP 4.01) and pest management (OP 4.09) are triggered.  
Safeguard review of PRF I confirmed that most civil works are small, community-driven 
investments, which could be mitigated through good construction practices and 
housekeeping.  
 
OP 4.09:  
 
Although the project will not procure and promote use of chemical pesticides and 
fertilizers, which are included in the current negative list, the project will support 
community livelihood activities which will involve agricultural production. It is 
therefore, unrealistic to prevent farmers from applying chemical inputs, as rehabilitation 
of irrigation, building of small irrigation/agriculture production, and/or control of 
infestation of diseases, may involve the use of pesticides and/or procurement of small 
amount of pesticides, herbicides, and insecticides. To mitigate this potential impact, a 
simplified Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been prepared outlining clear regulations 
and procedures for management of pesticides and/or toxic chemical as well as providing 
knowledge and training on health impacts and the safe use of pesticides and/or, when 
possible, promotion of non-chemical use alternatives such as organic farming.  
 
OP 4.01:  
 
A
screening criterion has been developed to exclude subprojects with potential large 
and/or significant impacts using the "negative list" and to prepare and implement 
appropriate mitigation measures according to the nature and extent of the potential 
impacts.  An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared based on the environmental management framework of the safeguard guidelines 
used for PRF I and its implementation experience.  The ESMF describes clear guidelines 
for safeguard screening and actions to be carried out according to the sizes and locations 
of the subprojects and a minimum environmental code of practices, which will be applied 
to subprojects.  Implementation of the ESMF will be integrated into the PRF II planning 
and implementation process and the results will be included as part of the progress report.  
 
There are also opportunities to promote clean community in areas where infrastructures 
(like dispensary, markets, school, etc.) are provided.  Increasing knowledge on this aspect 
will be explored during the PRF planning process.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
PRF II is not expected to create any potential indirect and/or long term negative impacts.   
 
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project alternatives analysis is not applicable to PRF II. Investments will be small and 
community driven. Adverse impacts are not anticipated.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Four WB safeguard policies are triggered, including: environmental assessment (OP 
4.01), indigenous peoples (OP4.12), involuntary resettlement (OP 4.10), and pest 
management (OP 4.09) (the latter was not triggered for PRF I).  
 
To comply with these policies the CRPF, the EGPF, the ESMF, and the simplified PMP 
have been prepared as a standalone documents based on the Social and Environmental 
Safeguard Guidelines (SESG) developed for PRF I and they will be applied to all PRF II 
subprojects.  These policies are in line with the Government's EIA regulation as well as 
the Bank's respective operational policies.  PRF staff at the central and local levels will 
be responsible for the implementation of these frameworks, including ensuring 
compliance with the IEE requirement per EIA regulation if needed.  Large subproject that 
required an EIA will not be financed by PRF II and this has been included in the 'negative 
list'.  
 
Through the implementation of PRFI, PRF staff has gained extensive experience with 
the application of World Bank safeguards policies. Their capacity to implement these 
policies in a satisfactory manner is solid. However, given that new staff will be brought 
on board and the PRF's reach is expanding, an assessment of safeguard capacity 
suggested that safeguard training (both environment and social) will be necessary and a 
budget of $80,000 have been allocated for the first three years.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are local communities in the target provinces and the mechanism for 
consultation will be part of the participatory planning process. The planning process 
would be elaborate and include a series of close interactions/  consultations with the 
beneficiary communities, including through an introductory meeting and training on PRF 
II concepts. The planning process would also include a detailed assessment of 
communities' needs using social mapping and other relevant tools to identify priorities 
and ensure voices of vulnerable groups are heard and included in the selection of the 
priorities. The vision and priorities of the Koumban would be discussed and agreed upon 
by community representatives during planning meetings. A Koumban integrated 
development plan would be prepared and validated by local authorities. Direct 
beneficiaries would also be involved in the actual implementation of sub-projects, and 
receive technical training (such as on procurement processes, Financial Management and 
Operation & Maintenance) aimed at assisting the Community to implement and manage 
the sub-projects.   
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/16/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/16/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/16/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/16/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/16/2011 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
Yes 
Page  8
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ingo Wiederhofer 
03/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Viengkeo Phetnavongxay 
03/23/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong 
03/23/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex 
03/24/2011 
Comments:   
