Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/06/2011 
Report No.:60830  
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Liberia 
Project ID:  P124664 
Project Name:  Emergency Monrovia Urban Sanitation Project (EMUS) - Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Ventura Bengoechea 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to solid waste collection 
service in Monrovia. This would be achieved through: (a) investments in selected areas of 
the primary collection system to expand service coverage at the household level; (b) 
investments in the secondary collection system to collect, haul and dispose waste 
captured through primary collection; (c) a public education campaign on handling and 
disposal of solid waste; and (d) technical assistance to the Monrovia City Corporation 
(MCC) to enhance municipal capacity for proper revenue administration, financial 
management, and management of the solid waste service.  
 
The Project Developmental Objective of the original project will remain unchanged.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project aims to scale up ongoing activities in solid waste management (funded under 
an earlier emergency IDA operation, see below) and includes the following components:  
 
Component 1: Solid waste collection and disposal - increased funding under the 
additional financing  
Page  2
Component 2: Technical assistance to MCC  
 
Component 3: Development of sanitary landfill cells - additional component under the 
additional financing  
 
Initial emergency assistance to the Government of Liberia for sanitation services was 
provided in 2006 under the Emergency Infrastructure Project Supplemental Component 
(EIPSC). The EIPSC funded a one-time citywide clean-up campaign and the introduction 
of a simple collection system for about 30% of daily generated waste. Solid Waste 
collection continued to be funded under the EIP project until EMUS began funding 
collection in December, of 2009 without any interruption in service.  
 
The EMUS project builds on activities initiated under EIPSC but will fund collection on 
a
four-year declining basis. During this time, the Government is expected to put in place 
a
financing mechanism to assume the full operating cost of collection by the end of year 
four. It is expected that a combination of municipal and central government financing 
will generate the required funds.  
 
The EIPSC project also funded construction of cell zero and cell one at the Whein Town 
landfill.  It was envisioned that EIPSC would subsequently fund the completion of the 
sanitary landfill at Whein Town.  However, due to limited funds under the project, 
construction of additional landfill cells will have to be done under the EMUS project, 
which necessitates this additional financing to the EMUS project.  
 
The proposed additional financing responds to the Government's concern that 
interruption in service delivery may compromise the fragile public faith in publicly 
delivered services. It also will assist the Government's objective to start building capacity 
at the Monrovia municipality - the institution responsible for solid waste service 
provision.  
 
Component 1: Solid waste collection and disposal (USD 14.4 million)  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Primary collection (USD 0.4 million). This sub-component will 
provide TA to strengthen the primary collection system and increase the number of 
households served by door-to-door collection. It will: (i) improve Community Based 
Enterprises (CBEs') managerial and operational capacities to provide service to 
households; (ii) assist MCC to strengthen its supervision capacity and oversight of 
primary collection; and (iii) create an environment that will enable MCC to track and 
report on CBEs' performance based on an easy to use database system.  
 
Primary collection in Monrovia was initiated in 2007 as a pilot project with funding 
from the International Labor Organization (ILO). It is estimated that only around 5,000 
households in Monrovia are benefitted from it. The collection is based on the franchising 
model and the city is divided into zones serviced by CBEs. The EMUS project has 
enhanced the basic model piloted under the ILO and the MCC has recently awarded 
contracts for collection in 11 zones within Monrovia, in addition to a larger Central 
Monrovia primary collection area.  
Page  3
Sub-component 1.2: Secondary collection (USD 13.7 million). This sub-component will 
finance the construction of two transfer stations, and transportation of municipal solid 
wastes from the collection areas to transfer stations/disposal site and from transfer 
stations to disposal site as required.  
 
Secondary collection covering about 30% of produced waste in Monrovia has been 
introduced under the EIPSC project. Through the collection program, private contractors 
operate up to eight skip trucks to collect waste from up to 120 communal skip containers. 
In addition, the contractors occasionally use their own vehicles to collect waste around 
the skip containers. The city is divided into three lots and through a competitive bidding 
process, private firms were awarded the contracts for collection and disposal. A third 
party Engineer supervises all project activities. A local NGO has been working with 
communities to explain the collection system. All waste is disposed of at Whein Town 
site, the completion of which is the focus of this additional financing.  Original 
developments at Whein Town were done on an emergency basis and in order that the 
open dump-site within city limits (Fiamah site) could be closed and capped without 
halting the newly re-established routine collection of waste.  Development of additional 
cells at Whein Town will be done with additional environmental safeguards, described 
below.  
 
Two small transfer stations are in the process of being built under the subcomponent. 
Large trucks will transport the waste from the transfer stations to the landfill, while 
smaller size trucks hauling smaller volumes will serve the city-areas and transport waste 
to the transfer stations. The number of collection areas around town will be increased 
beyond the current number to allow increased service coverage.  
 
The aspects of Component 1 that could have adverse environmental and social impacts 
are the construction and operation of two small waste transfer stations in Monrovia and 
the continuing operation of the Whein Town Landfill.  These have been addressed in the 
original EMUS project safeguards section.  
 
Sub-component 1.3: Public education campaign (USD 0.3 million). The sub-component 
will consist of a public awareness campaign (PAC), which will seek to encourage 
Monrovia residents to use the solid waste collection services; it will also sensitize citizens 
about the impact of unsafe handling and use of waste. This will be achieved by a 
combination of communication techniques (i.e. radio, town hall meetings, jingles) on the 
benefits of using the collection systems and hazards of unsafe handling of waste. This 
sub-component will help to increase awareness and use of the solid waste services. Solid 
waste management is a relatively new concept in Monrovia following years without 
regular collection. Presently, the majority of the population handles waste by burning, 
disposing it in drains, rivers, using it to reclaim land on which to build homes.  
 
Component 2: Technical assistance to MCC (USD 4.9 million)  
 
Page  4
This component aims to strengthen the capacity of MCC for proper revenue 
administration, financial management, and technical oversight related to the provision of 
solid waste services in Monrovia.  
 
Sub-component 2.1 (USD 1.0 million): Financial and Organizational Management TA.  
 
This sub-component will provide TA for financial and organizational audit and 
governance improvement. The financial and organizational audit include TA to carry out 
financial and organizational diagnostics of MCC in order to: (i) overhaul the revenue 
administration system, redesign procedures, introduce revenue accounting; develop a 
database of commercial entities; (ii) strengthen the budgeting process; develop a proper 
accounting system and the generation of accounting reports; and (iii) develop 
organizational flow charts, HR assessment tools, manuals and policies. The governance 
improvement would include TA on policy options and assistance to develop the MCC 
Charter.  
 
Sub-component 2.2 (USD 3.9 million): Project Implementation and Technical 
Supervision. It is envisaged that a small unit (Project Implementation Unit (PIU) would 
be established first to address project management and procurement issues, and that over 
a
period of time this unit will also build the capacity of the line departments. FM 
functions under the project will be handled by the Project Financial Management Unit 
(PFMU) already established at the MOF. During mid-tern review of the project, the MOF 
and the Bank will re-assess the systems and may consider transferring the financial 
management responsibilities to MCC. Other than the PIU, the Design and Supervision 
Engineer will be located at the MCC premises, work closely with staff of the Sanitation 
Department and as such, provide on-the job training.  
 
Component 3: Development of Sanitary Landfills (USD 2.3 million): The proposed 
additional financing will fund construction of landfill disposal cells at the current disposal 
site at Whein Town, Monrovia. This was not envisaged under the original EMUS project. 
Instead, some support for landfill cells was provided under the Emergency Infrastructure 
Project Supplemental Component (EIPSC), implemented by UNDP. Currently, available 
funds under EIPSC have been largely expended, while available disposal space at Whein 
town is inadequate to accommodate incoming waste. As a result, unless new cells are 
developed, Monrovia would run out of safe disposal options.  This component will fund 
the development of cells 2-5 in accordance with appropriate environmental safeguards. 
EIPSC will fund the final development of leachate ponds and administrative buildings at 
Whein Town.  
 
The total project, including the additional financing of 4.0 million, will amount to USD 
22.4 million:  
 
Component I  
 
1.1
Primary Collection (USD 0.4 million)  
 
1.2
Secondary Collection (USD 13.7 million)  
 
1.3
Public Awareness Campaign (USD 0.3 million)  
 
Sub-total: USD 14.4 million  
Page  5
Component 2  
 
2.1
Financial and Organizational Management (USD 1.0 million)  
 
2.2
Implementation and Technical Supervision (USD 3.9 million)  
 
Sub-total: 4.9 million  
 
Component 3  
 
3.1
Development of Sanitary Landfills (USD 2.3 million)  
 
Audit, Training, Operating Costs (USD 0.5 million)  
 
Contingency (USD 0.3 million)   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities will be located in Monrovia.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASNS) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
EMUS was originally a Category B project and required only EMPs, since two small 
solid waste transfer stations were the only infrastructure it was financing.  Because the 
new component involves construction of new cells and a new leachate treatment system 
at  the Whein Town Landfill, the EMUS Additional Financing has been classified as 
Category A, requiring a full ESIA. The borrower prepared an ESIA for the Whein Town 
landfill in 2008 in connection with the Emergency Infrastructure Supplemental Credit 
(P103276). This ESIA includes an ESMP that was updated in July 2010 and is included 
the Operations Manual. It was reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in December 2008 
and is being used for EMUS and the proposed additional financing.  The EMP that 
Page  6
includes an operations manual for the landfill has been updated and disclosed.  No 
additional land acquisition is involved as the new cells can be accommodated within the 
existing site boundaries which are uninhabited.  
 
The main impacts of the additional financing are beneficial:  provision of additional 
space for waste disposal so that progress in expanding waste collection and improving 
sanitation in Monrovia can continue, and improvement in the quality of the facilities and 
operations of the landfill, including management of potential adverse environmental and 
social impacts.  A collateral benefit is improved water supply to nearby villages; by 
drilling a deep well for the communities as compensation for springs that were on the site 
and as a safeguard against possible leachate contamination, MCC has  provided an 
alternative to local shallow wells, all of which evidenced unhealthy bacteria counts 
unrelated to the landfill during the project's baseline monitoring.  The potentially 
significant adverse impacts are possible degradation of the quality of surface water or 
groundwater. There are seasonal wetlands and small streams near the landfill, and 
groundwater is used for local water supply.  The site is partially underlain by the 
Paynesville Sandstone, which is a water bearing formation of regional importance.  
Leachate contamination in this formation would constitute a significant adverse impact of 
regional scale, Other potential impacts are fires caused by gas from biodegradation of the 
waste, odors, flies, vermin, increased truck traffic, blowing trash, and visual impact.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main indirect impact that could occur is in-migration of scavengers that derive part 
or all of their livelihood from collection and sale of recyclable materials.  In the long 
term, the landfill will be closed, and closure will involve installing an impermeable cap, 
re-vegetating the site, maintaining the leachate treatment system in operation, and 
continuing the water quality monitoring program.  Eventually, low-intensity uses of the 
site will be possible - e.g. recreational open space or agriculture.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The feature of the landfill that was the subject of alternatives analysis was the design of 
the liner for the cells and the facultative leachate treatment ponds.  A number of options 
were considered, including compacted clay, compacted clay with bentonite, and synthetic 
geomembrane.  The alternative selected was membrane of high-density polyethylene 
(HDPE) sheeting; although it is the most expensive of the options, it will provide the 
most reliable protection for the groundwater.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As explained above, the borrower prepared an ESIA for the landfill in 2008 and disclosed 
it in connection with the Emergency Infrastructure Project Supplemental Credit 
(P103276).  The ESIA included an EMP, and it remains on file in the InfoShop and in 
effect for EMUS and its proposed additional financing.  During the implementation of 
EMUS, the then-embryonic Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for solid waste 
Page  7
management has been fully established and staffed by MCC.  Its staff includes an 
environmental engineer to oversee environmental management in solid waste collection 
and disposal.  The PIU is supported by an engineering consulting firm to assist with 
landfill design, preparation of bidding documents, and supervision of construction. 
During 2010, the engineering consultants prepared an Operations Manual for the landfill, 
and the manual includes a more detailed ESMP that reflects the design of the new cells 
and improved leachate treatment system.  The manual and ESMP are included in the 
bidding documents for the new cells.  
 
Four wells were drilled during 2010 - two new groundwater monitoring wells up-
gradient and down-gradient from the landfill, one for water supply at the site, and one for 
community water supply.  Based on the two rounds of water quality testing that have 
been completed (August and December, 2010), the water supply wells meet drinking 
water standards and the monitoring wells show no evidence of groundwater 
contamination.  Samples of the influent and effluent of the leachate treatment ponds 
collected on the same two occasions show that the treatment system is robust, reducing  
the ammonia concentration in the leachate, for example, by 60% in August and 95% in 
December. MCC acquired an unoccupied and rarely used site for the landfill during 
implementation of EIPSC in a commercial transaction with a single owner, and a RAP 
was therefore not required.  The land is sufficient to accommodate the new cells, and so a 
RAP is not needed for the proposed additional financing.  (The abbreviated RAPs that 
have been previously disclosed for EMUS pertain to the solid waste transfer stations.)   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the people of Monrovia and the group of persons living near the 
landfill.  They were consulted extensively during preparation of the ESIA, and both the 
landfill operators and the consulting engineer established ongoing communications then 
with the local community that have continued to this day.  Local citizens raised concerns 
about their needs for water supply, protection of water resources, health care, 
transportation, health and safety, odors and vermin, and employment.  Most of these 
concerns have been addressed in the EMP for the landfill.  All parties have agreed on the 
importance of continuing communication during the life of the landfill, and Bank 
missions to supervise EMUS have confirmed that the operating contractors and PIU are 
maintaining liaison with the community.  
 
During 2010, there has been extensive consultation with a subgroup of stakeholders - 
the scavengers or "reclaimers" as they prefer to be called, that visit the landfill.  One 
product of the consultation is a detailed socio-economic survey based on interviews with 
48 of the reclaimers.  As a result of the survey and consultations, MCC decided to allow 
reclaimers to continue to work at the landfill, provided that they use the safety equipment 
MCC is providing and follow agreed rules that, among other things, prohibit reclamation 
activity near heavy equipment that is spreading, compacting and covering waste.  The 
livelihoods of the reclaimers are thus not adversely affected, risks to their health and 
safety are reduced, and the valuable service they provide by reducing the volume of 
waste being placed in the landfill can continue.   
Page  8
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/03/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/31/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  9
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ventura Bengoechea 
04/06/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
04/06/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
04/06/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/06/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
04/06/2011 
Comments:   
