Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/24/2011 
Report No.:  AC5897
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Liberia 
Project ID:  P121213 
Project Name:  Liberia Road Asset Management Project - LIBRAMP 
Task Team Leader:  Emmanuel A. James 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Liberia Reconstruction Trust Fund 
113.00
113.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Project will achieve if successful the following development objectives:  
 
a) Reduction of the cost road transportation borne by road users as the connectivity of 
the key road corridor will be restored and sustained at the desirable service level over the 
life of project (10 years);  
 
b) Reduction of the  life cycle cost of road asset management borne by the public sector 
through leveraging efficiency and management capacity of private sector; and  
 
c) Enhancement of the performance of the road sector in road asset management and its 
other business areas, including financial management, monitoring, and project 
management. The enhanced institutional capacity of the Infrastructure Implementation 
Unit (IIU) will accelerate its transformation into a semi-autonomous road agency.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project will finance a 10-year management contract for a critical primary 
road corridor, connecting Monrovia, Gbarnga, and Ganta to the Guinea border. The 
Page  2
Project will also finance independent supervision and monitoring of output and 
performance of the contract, and institutional capacity building in areas of planning, 
monitoring and project management in the road sector. The project consists of the 
following components.  
 
Component 1: OPRC of Monrovia - Ganta Road Corridor  
 
This component will finance Output and Performance-based Road Contracts (OPRC) 
for 10-year management of two road lots, Monrovia (Red Light) - Gbarnga (180.4km) 
and Gbarnga - Ganta to the Guinea border (68.6km), including rehabilitation, upgrading, 
periodic and routine maintenance, and control of Road Right of Way. This road is vital to 
the nation's reconstruction, connecting four of the country's five largest cities and 
providing critical cross-border connection. Current surface condition of the road corridor 
varies by section, with the northernmost 70 kilometers in the worst condition.  In that 
segment, 68 km need full reconstruction in the existing right-of-way, and the final 2 km  
from Ganta to the Guinea border will consist of a new two-lane road constructed where 
there is presently a dirt track.  This component will also finance a consultancy service by 
a
firm that will perform as a Monitoring Consultant (MC) for the above OPRC. The MC's 
role is to monitor the Contracting Entity's (CE) performance and provide timely advice to 
them to ensure the quality of the final deliverables. The MC will be responsible for 
verifying the achievement of all of the contractual requirements within stipulated time 
and budget.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance, Training, Institutional Development and Studies.  
 
This component will finance needed technical assistance for and operating costs of the 
implementing entity, the Infrastructure Implementation Unit (IIU).  In particular, it will 
support the IIU throughout the project implementation, strengthening its capacity in 
contract management, performance monitoring, environmental monitoring, and 
comprehensive road asset management.  This component will lay much of the 
groundwork for an eventual transformation of the IIU into a road authority.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is in the rural areas of central-north Liberia, those along the key road corridor 
connecting Monrovia to Ganta and Guinea border.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASNS) 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project consists of rehabilitation within an existing right-of-way for all but the last 
two km of its length, where new road will be constructed.  There are no sensitive features 
in those two km; it is an area completely disturbed by the usual chaotic development that 
springs up at border crossing points in Africa. Consequently, potential adverse impacts, 
are confined to the corridor and its vicinity, not complex, and readily manageable through 
good construction practices and the environmental management plan (EMP) that was 
prepared for this road segment in connection with the Emergency Infrastructure Project 
(EIP). Relocation of market stalls and more substantial structures that have encroached 
on the ROW will be necessary along some segments of the road. The EMP consultant did 
not observe any physical cultural resources during reconnaissance of the corridor. 
However, OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) is triggered for the Project because 
there is always the possibility of an unexpected discovery of PCR during construction. 
The EMP makes protection of chance finds a responsibility of the Contracting Entity. The 
Contracting Entity will be required to present a chance finds procedure in the HSEMP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term beneficial impacts will include:  the socioeconomic benefits of more efficient 
transport of goods and people along the corridor; reduced environmental degradation 
caused by soil erosion and sedimentation where pavement and drainage are substandard; 
and reduced air emissions from vehicles because higher speeds and more efficient 
operation will be possible.  The indirect adverse impact of these improvements will be 
increased accident hazard because of higher vehicle speeds.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Deviations from the existing alignment are likely, primarily to avoid excessive 
resettlement.  The exact alignment will not be finalized until the contractor has been 
engaged, since final design is part of the contractor's responsibilities.  For this reason, a 
Page  4
resettlement policy framework has been prepared; resettlement action plans (RAP), if 
needed, will be prepared in connection with the design.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The government prepared an Environmental Mitigation Plan for road repair and 
rehabilitation in May 2006, and it was disclosed initially for the Emergency Infrastructure 
Project in August 2007.  The plan received approval from Liberia EPA prior to 
disclosure.  It was redisclosed for the Urban and Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation 
Project (URIRP) in September 2008 and supplemented with an addendum in connection 
with URIRP in 2009.  The plan  specifically covers the Monrovia (Red Light)-Ganta-
Guinea border road corridor in which the works supported by the new project will take 
place.  It has been redesignated as the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for this 
project.  It  will be a part of the bidding documents in order to guide each contracting 
entity's activity during detailed design and implementation phases, particularly in 
developing and implementing a Health, Safety and Environmental Management Plan 
(HSEMP) specifically for its contracted works. The government  also prepared and 
disclosed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for URIRP in October 2009 that 
covers the Red Light-Ganta-Guinea Border road corridor.  As the contract arrangements 
require final design to be done by the contractor, full Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) 
cannot be prepared until after effectiveness when contractors have been selected and 
designs have been done, because deviations from the existing alignment are possible. The 
RPF includes the procedures for determining whether a RAP is necessary and the 
guidelines for preparing it and it will be included in the bidding documents. The RAP 
prepared for the Cotton Tree-Yenwein Town segment will serve as a model.  No physical 
cultural resources were identified by the EMP consultant during the survey of the 
corridor.  However, in case any are discovered during the construction, the EMP requires 
the contractor to put in place a chance finds procedure.  This will be a part of the 
HSEMP.  
 
The project-specific HSEMP and the RAP, if one is required, shall be reviewed by the 
Monitoring Consultant and approved by the IIU, following which the Bank will give its 
no-objection. The Monitoring Consultant is responsible for day-to-day monitoring of the 
compliance of the Contractor's works with the HSEMP and RAP and for reporting same 
in its routine progress reports. The HSEMP and RAP will be prepared, reviewed and 
approved prior to the commencement of civil works.  
 
The IIU, with assistance by the WB, has been working to improve its safeguards 
capacity from various fronts: to develop needed staff skills; to carry out prudent and 
frequent field supervision missions to assess and address issues early on, and to devise a 
framework to resolve potential conflicts and non-compliance with agreed safeguards 
policies. The unit includes one full-time safeguards specialist who has been actively and 
effectively involved with the Bank's infrastructure portfolio in Liberia for the past three 
years.  He is thus familiar with Bank safeguards policies and has himself prepared a RAP 
and an addendum to the original Environmental Mitigation Plan.  A position for a second 
safeguards specialist was advertized on December 6, 2010, and recruitment will be 
Page  5
completed before the end of December 2011. Other Bank infrastructure projects are also 
supporting capacity strengthening within the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
which to date has included:  engagement of a legal advisor to assist with development of 
regulations, purchase of office equipment and vehicles for EPA's county offices, a 
validation workshop for eight environmental regulations including air quality, and four 
guidelines that are expected to be issued in the first quarter, and procurement of 
consulting services to audit environmental compliance at 35 industrial facilities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the road users and roadside residents and businesses. The EMP 
and RPF were both made available for public comment at IIU, and their availability was 
advertised in Liberian newspapers.  The EMP requires the contractor to coordinate 
activities with local land users and to coordinate traffic management with local 
authorities.  The contractor's HSEMP will be reviewed to ensure that it provides 
adequately for communications. The RPF specifies the requirements for participation by 
project-affected persons and businesses in resettlement planning.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/29/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/29/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/14/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/31/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/08/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Emmanuel A. James 
02/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/17/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
02/24/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/16/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
02/24/2011 
Comments:   
