Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
Report No.:60102 
Date prepared/updated:  February 28, 2011 
 
I.  Basic Information 
 
1. Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Liberia 
Project ID:  P114580 
Additional Project ID 
(if any)
:
GEF ID: 3837 
Project Name:  
Biodiversity Conservation through Expanding the Protected Area Network in Liberia 
(EXPAN)
 
Task Team Leader:  Oliver Braedt 
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A 
Estimated Board Date: April 22, 2010 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  GEF MSP 
Sector:  Environment 
Theme: Protected Areas; Biodiversity 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.):                 950,000 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Environmental Category: B 
–
Partial Assessment 
Is this a transferred project 
Yes [X] 
    No [ ] 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [ ] 
    Repeater [ ] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises 
and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives: 
The project’s objective is to contribute to the conservation of Liberia’s globally significant 
biodiversity by providing better representation of ecosystems within Liberia’s current protected 
area network and enabling active conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity with local 
communities. 
 
3. Project Description: 
 
Component 1: Strengthening the Capacity of the Forest Development Authority (FDA) 
Conservation Department
 Total US$ 2,439,967 (GEF US$217,300) 
 
Activities: The funds of this project will provide training and equipment to FDA Conservation 
Department contributing to the institutional strengthening and thus, advancing towards 
management effectiveness. Particular focus will be given to the descentralized FDA offices in 
charge of the proposed protected areas. The purpose is to strengthen these offices by training its 
staff (including parkguards and at least three post graduate level traing in PA/Wildlife 
management), renovating offices and obtaining essential equipment. This component will be part 
Page  2
of the ongoing efforts for capacity building of  the institutions involved in the conservation of the 
region’s biodiversity.  
 
GEF Output:
 Strong capacity of the FDA conservation department  for protected areas 
management in collaboration with local communities. At least 10 qualified PA wardens working 
at each decentralised PA and at least three post graduate level training in wildlife /protected area 
management in Monrovia and in the field. Funds from this component will equip each PA site 
with the neccesary park sub-office, vehicles, computers and field equipment. Also an M&E 
system will be integrated into this component. 
 
Component 2: Creation of New Protected Areas and Community mapping 
Total US$2,472,667 (GEF US$500,000)
 
Activities: 
Two new protected areas (GREBO and GRANG KRU)
1
will be established. The 
project will fund consultations at local and central level prior to the legal establishment of the 
two additional proposed protected areas. A special focus will be on piloting the “community 
mapping” approach. The maps will be useful to resolve land conflicts and inform dialogues and 
negotiations between communities, government agencies and conservation organizations. 
Management plans will result from this participatory processes and may involve the 
establishment of co-management schemes with the local communities and pilot the establishment 
of community resources management areas (CREMA) for the exclusive management by fringe 
communities.  
 
GEF Output:
 Two new protected areas will be created in southeast Liberia and gazetted. All 
communities within and fringing each proposed PA will be mapped. The community natural 
resource management committees will be estabished and supported to participate in reserve 
management planning. Two management plans will prepared in collaboration using community 
partipatory approaches and data from biological surveys and community outreach programs. 
 
Component 3: Development of Community Livelihood Programme around Protected 
Areas
Total US$5,145,366 (GEF US$172,700)
 
Activities:
The project will support communities through the identification and promotion of 
sustainable income-generating activities that will reduce dependencies of communities living on 
the fringes on natural resources of the selected two additional PAs. Community enterprise 
development will lead to income generating activities. The component will also support 
development of natural resources including non-timber forest products in response to emerging 
eco-markets, investing in restoration and maintenance of environmental assets and fund some 
studies on products with potential commercial value using relevant materials such as the FAO 
Market Analysis and development approach for community forestry enterprises).  
 
1
These were selected based on their high biodiversity value ranking. They may however be changed if project 
management face challenges (i.e. security, legal challenges etc) with other equally high biodiversity value areas. 
Page  3
The CHYAO funded activities will use innovative approaches to reincorporating war-affected 
youth in productive lives. Implementation will be in concert with the Forestry Development 
Authority (FDA) and through partnership with civil society and other donors. 
 
GEF Output
:
A
number of community enterprises  from the CHYAO program. GEF financing 
will also launch discussions with surrounding village and community authorities to confirm their 
desire to set aside community resources management areas (CREMA) and their agreement for 
the proposed boundaries (revising if necessary); and related matters like action plans for the 
subsequent establishment of each CREMA. 
 
Component 4: Project Management 
Total US$180,000 (GEF US$60,000) 
 
Activities
:
This component would establish a regional project management office and strengthen 
the FDA which would be responsible for supervising and monitoring the implementation of the 
project. It will support capacity building of the regional project management office and that of 
key stakeholders at all levels. This component will also finance recommendations from the 
process framework (PF) and participatory strategy (PS).
 
GEF Output
:
An operational project secretariat with FDA appointed coordinator, functional 
steering committee with specific TORs and agreed calendar for project review. 
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
 
The project will strengthen the Forest Development Authority (FDA) nationwide to better 
conserve Liberia’s forests. Two potential areas where support will be focused – Grand Kru and 
Grebo – are located in two counties in the southeast of Liberia. The selection of these two parks 
was based on a number of criteria including species diversity, threats, data availability, 
community involvement, endangered species, funding, connectivity, population density, 
uniqueness, land use security, management capacity conflict, physical attributes, protection 
education, accessibility, political support, legal framework, geographical, contribution to 
environment, partnership, and size of area. These criteria provided ample information for 
detailing the breadth of potential impacts and necessary actions to identify, mitigate and manage 
these impacts in the project’s Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and 
the Process Framework (PF) and follow up actions. 
 
The proposed GREBO PA covers 97,140 ha (c.240 acres) of wet evergreen forest situated in the 
southeast of the country and is contiguous with the Forêt Classée du Cavally in Côte d’Ivoire. It 
consists of mature secondary forest that is open with isolated huge trees. Aquatic sites within the 
area were medium sandy streams with a few stones and rocks as well as large ponds. The rapid 
biological assessment of the area, published in 2007 Conservation International, established that 
the area contained a wealth of biodiversity and a significant number of species of conservation 
concern, qualifying the forest as an Important Bird Area. From the assessment which resulted in 
the identification, among others, of 70 Species endemic to Upper Guinea, the report 
recommended to raise the status of the National Forest to National Park. It also stated that given 
Page  4
its close proximity to both Taï National Park in Côte d’Ivoire and Sapo National Park its 
protection offers an opportunity to create a biological corridor between the two parks. Finally, 
since Grebo is located along Liberia’s border with Côte d’Ivoire, it has considered as a “peace 
park”, where to achieve conservation goals, improve monitoring along the borders and help 
foster peaceful relations within the region. Threats to the area include logging and hunting. 
 
The proposed Grand KRU PA will cover 135,100 hectares of mixed lowland primary to climax 
secondary forest particularly in the north and savannah/coastal marshes along the coast. It is 
home to several flowering plant species including prime timber species, and several bird and 
mammal species, known reptiles and amphibians and 100s of described insects.  Notable fauna 
include significant populations of the forest elephant (Loxodonta Africana cyclotis) mainly in the 
North West and several viable populations of the pygmy hippopotamus (Hexaprotodon 
Liberiensis), as well as Jentink’s Duiker (Cephalophus jentinki), the Zebra Duiker (C. zebra) and 
the Liberian mongoose (Liberiitis kuhni).  The coastal south of the PA is chiefly a mangrove 
type with mature trees reaching up to 30m. The Red Colobus monkey and a number of bird 
species listed by the Convention on Migratory Species also appear in the area. The site provides 
control against flooding and underground water recharge and is a sediment trap. The very large 
stands of mangroves, fish population and wildlife are valuable resources for inhabitants in the 
area. Logging, farming and hunting are the most important threats to conservation in the 
proposed PA. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Ms Valerie Hickey (LCSDE) 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)  
 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)  
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
Environmental Impacts:
The project is expected to have net positive environmental impacts. 
Nonetheless, because of the potential for some small scale, reversible and manageable impacts to 
Page  5
the biological or physical environment during the demarcation of each park, and the potential for 
other such small scale impacts arising from small-scale infrastructure, the FDA has developed an 
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in anticipation of impacts that are not 
yet known. The ESMF describes the current regulatory environment in Liberia, and outlines the 
process whereby project activities that may have adverse environmental impacts (including on 
natural habitats) will be minimized, mitigat
ed and managed, thereby complying with the Bank’s 
Operational Policy (OP 4.01) on Environmental Assessment. This project will be developed so 
as to develop the enabling infrastructure and human capacity to protect two sites of critical 
natural habitat in Liberia. As such, and in consideration of the process outlined in the ESMF, the 
entire project design satisfies the Bank’s Operational Policy on Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and 
with the focus on community engagement to improve the management of natural forests, the 
Forests Policy (OP 4.36) too. 
 
Social Impacts:
There continues to be low capacity  and lack of understanding in communities in 
and near the identified parks. Liberia is emerging from more than 15 years of brutal civil war and 
most rural communitiesare making efforts to getting back their communities and their lives . The 
project will minimize resettlement and focus on documented voluntary donations of land. There 
will be no land acquisition nor construction of infrastructure dependent upon it prior to the 
development, approval and execution of a Resettlement Action Plan, as outlined in the project’s 
Process Framework. Nonetheless, it is likely that relationships with park communities will be 
problematic and challenging to establish and maintain. In light of this low capacity and sensitive 
relations, the project has developed a participatory strategy (PS) that will ensure that broad 
community support for the project will be nurtured through a participatory process that takes 
extra care to ensure that vulnerable community members are included and derive benefits from 
the project.  
 
In addition, because of the creation of  a new protected area and increased enforcement of 
conservation laws, some people may lose access to resources in the parks. Though the 
community will be consulted throughout using the PS, the project team has developed a Process 
Framework (PF) to outline exactly how loss of access to resources will be mitigated and 
managed. This framework sets out the arrangements to avoid, minimize, or mitigate potentially 
adverse effects of restrictions of access to natural resources.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area: 
 
There are no long term nor indirect adverse impacts associated with the project. Conversely, this 
project will help consolidate protected areas for long term biodiversity and livelihood benefits.  
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts: N/A 
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: 
 
The borrower has prepared a Process Framework and an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF). The framework approach provides for the potential suite of adverse impacts 
that may occur, which is important given that no precise project activities have been identified 
yet.  
 
FDA’s capacity to plan and implement safeguards measures is weak. However, the ESMF 
includes an assessment of gaps in capacity, and actions will be taken under Component 1 to build 
the necessary capacity and link with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) whose 
mandate includes review and supervision of the country’s environmental impact assessment 
process.  
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people: 
 
The key stakeholders include the FDA, EPA, members of communities fringing the protected 
areas, Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA) and Local Government, and local and national (as well 
as international) NGOs working on resource issues in the area. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 YES 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2011 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/24/2011 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2011 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 YES 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2011 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/24/2011 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2011 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
Page  7
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 
finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including 
EMP) report? 
Yes [X]          No [ ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector 
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report? 
YES 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP 
incorporated in the credit/loan? 
YES 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
Yes []          No [X]          N/A [  ] 
If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does 
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the 
Bank? Any information on the instrument since this is 
triggered? 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management 
issues? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager?  Are PMP 
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
 
OP/BP 4.11 
–
Physical Cultural Resources
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to 
cultural property? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate 
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources? 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning 
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in 
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan? 
 
Page  8
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the 
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been 
prepared?  
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the 
plan/policy framework/process framework?  
Yes [X]          No [  ]          N/A [  ] 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional 
issues and constraints been carried out?  
Yes [  ]          No [X ]          N/A [ ] 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if 
so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the 
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been 
prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training? 
 
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the 
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared 
and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the 
international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for 
dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes [  ]          No [  ]          N/A [X] 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer 
referred to in the OP? 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to 
the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes [X]          No []          N/A [  ] 
Page  9
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a 
public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups 
and local NGOs? 
Yes [X]          No []          N/A [  ] 
All Safeguard Policies
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [X ]          No [ ]          N/A [  ] 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been 
included in the project cost? 
Yes [X]          No []          N/A [  ] 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the 
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes [X]          No []          N/A [  ] 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been 
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes [X]          No []          N/A [  ] 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Oliver Braedt 
02/15/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Valerie Hickey 
02/15/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Beatrix Allah- Mensah 
02/15/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
3/1/2011 
Comments:   
