Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/16/2011 
Report No.:  AC6003
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P082337 
Original Project Name: ECSEE APL 3 - 
FYR Macedonia 
Country:  Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID:  P096217 
Project Name:  Energy Infrastructure Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Peter Johansen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 18, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Regional 
integration (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
19.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of ECSEE APL program is the development of a functioning regional 
electricity market in South East Europe and its integration into the internal electricity 
market of the European Union, through the implementation of priority investments 
supporting electricity market and power system operations in electricity generation, 
transmission and distribution and technical assistance for institutional/systems 
development and project preparation and implementation  
 
The objective of the ECSEE APL 3 - FYR Macedonia Project is to support integration 
of FYR Macedonia into the regional power market. Specifically, the project would 
finance investments in power transmission required to support integrated operation, 
together with institutional development that would support market participation.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The additional financing (19 mil USD equivalent) is aiming to (i) address the financing 
gap identified for finalization of one of the sub-components of the parent project, i.e. the 
Skopje 1 - Tetovo 1 Overhead Transmission Line (OHTL), and (ii) scale-up of the parent 
project through the construction of a 400 kV OHTL interconnecting FYR Macedonia to 
the neighboring electric power system of Serbia (Stip - Serbian border), which will 
complement the interconnection to Greece already financed under the Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The reconstruction of the 110 kV OHTL, Skopje 1 - Tetovo 1, will apply different 
practices on two parts of the line: a) the part from the Skopje 1 to Jugohrom (34.4 km) 
will not be rehabilitated as technically more rational solution was found and alternative 
route is proposed with no significant environmental impact; b) the part from Jugohrom to 
Tetovo 1 (20.5 km) will be rehabilitated along the existing corridor.  
 
The corridor of the route for the transmission Stip - Serbian border is in Eastern 
Macedonia, on the territory of five municipalities: Stip, Karbinci, Sveti Nikole,  
Kumanovo and Staro Nagorichane. The route runs from the newly planned portal in the 
existing SS 400/110kV Stip, in the Ramnishte area to the Jelena Glava area at the 
Macedonian-Serbian border. The line will be approximately 70 km long. The 
transmission line will pass through several valleys as well as low mountains.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The AF project will cover financing gap for finalization of the Skopje 1 - Tetovo 1 
OHTL, and fully finance the construction of the 400 kV OHTL Stip - Serbian border.  
Page  3
Both of these subprojects are safeguards category B as they are not passing near or 
through highly populated areas, nor environmentally very sensitive areas. The 
investments will not have large scale, significant or irreversible impacts beside those on 
landscape, i.e. at certain sites, the line will cause visual changes to the existing landscape 
and scenery. For that reason, a routing passing through terrain of lower ecological value 
was chosen where possible. Because of (i) the slim design of the towers and (ii) the 
principle of selection of the route corridor, where possible parallel with already existing 
structures / transmission line, and at significant distances from settlements, the visual 
effect of transmission line is expected to be low. Visible changes will occur only in 
places of intersection of the transmission line with roads and places for bridging deep 
gullies and ravines. For all other impacts mitigation measures are defined.  
 
The Skopje 1 - Tetovo 1 OHTL passes in one segment over the water supply zones of 
spring Rasce (I and II zone of protection) and through the well area Nerezi-Lopenec (II 
and III zone of protection) which supply water to the Skopje area. A potential impact on 
these water zones can be anticipated during the construction phase. For that reason the 
EIA identifies mitigation measures and practices during construction time in that area as 
defined in Decision on the establishment of the boundaries of the protected zones of the 
spring Rasce and determination of the protection measures and Decision for 
determination of the boundaries of the well-area Nerezi-Lepenec, as well as the spatial 
plan of the area. The protection measures include controlled removal of natural 
vegetation for poles, covering of holes with concrete in the ground after investigation 
work has been finalized, minimizing mining activities (if at all needed), hindering the 
erosive process afterwards by planting trees and other form of vegetation, controlled 
disposal of excavated land and construction waste, use of mobile toilets on site, 
preparation of the drainage of the terrain at access roads and construction site, avoidance 
of the usage of equipment and mechanization and its regular service and fuel refilling and 
maintenance near the water objects. Both of the studies envisage the use of botanist 
during the exact positioning of the poles to avoid clusters of important flora species (if 
encountered).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The EIA studies and EMP look into all ranges of impacts and aspects related to 
construction and operation of the transmission line. These are: safety aspects (EMF 
radiation, risk of fire, etc), impacts on biodiversity, soil, air quality, waters, noise, 
vibrations, solid waste management, property aspects, social impacts, visual impacts on 
natural and cultural heritage and cumulative impacts.  For all identified impacts EIA and 
EMPs propose mitigation measures and monitoring.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
For both of the investments many alternatives have been looked at. Both projects have 
several pre-feasibility and feasibility studies looking at alternative routings.  
 
Page  4
For Stip - Serbian border OHTL two major routings were considered. The following 
criteria were taken into account when selecting the routing: impact of electromagnetic 
fields (EMF) on the human health, visual aspects/effects, use of space and corridors, 
ownership aspects and property value, social aspects, particularly in the context of 
rejection by the local community, general and public interest, justification and feasibility 
of the project, administrative procedures and licenses, biological diversity (habitats, flora 
and fauna),  consultations with the local communities and noise and electromagnetic 
interference. The selected corridor passes through low mountain terrain (north - south 
direction), avoiding the direct exposure of the transmission line to strong winds. The 
route avoids the fertile agricultural areas of the region Ovche Pole and does not pass 
through environmentally important areas.  
 
For Skopje 1 - Tetovo 1 OHTL, rehabilitation of the existing route was planned. 
However when the field inspection was performed several reasons were given to consider 
rerouting, i.e. new construction of one part of the line. Social, economic and ecological 
factor were determining the decision: (a) The existing 110 kV line Skopje 1 - Jugohrom 
passes above individual houses in the villages Volkovo, Radusha and Dolno Orasje, (b) 
the access to the line is difficult especially along the river Vardar; (c) the line has a total 
of 7 crossings over the river Vardar raising issues of visual impact and safety; (d) the line 
crosses the 220 kV transmission line Skopje 1 to HPP Vrutok in an unsafe manner. The 
chosen route is shorter, provides better approach which is very important in the 
exploitation and maintenance stage, avoids crossing over houses, reduces the number of 
crossing of river Vardar, and avoids problematic intersection with other power lines.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental Assessment Framework Document from 2005 has been updated to 
reflect changes in Macedonian environmental legislation as well as experiences from the 
team in MEPSO to facilitate sub project preparation and implementation. The updated 
Environmental Framework was disclosed on the website of MEPSO on February 16, 
2011.  
 
The EIA for the Stip - Serbian border OHTL was financed by the European Commission 
Infrastructure Project Facility and CARDS program. The Terms of Reference for the EIA 
were cleared by the World Bank in 2009.  
 
The EIA for Skopje 1 - Tetovo 1 OHTL was financed by MEPSO and prepared by a 
consulting company.  
 
The Land Acquisistion Policy Framework document from 2005 has been updated to 
reflect the present requirements under OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The LAPF 
was disclosed on the website of MEPSO on February 16, 2011.  
 
MEPSO has experience in working on large investment projects, including the World 
Bank financed projects and the MEPSO project team has sufficient experience and 
Page  5
knowledge to carry out environmental tasks. The supervision of the implementation of 
mitigation measures and monitoring has been transferred through contracts to contractor 
and supervising engineers.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EIA and EMPs have been prepared in Macedonian, Albanian and English and have 
subsequently been disclosed and consulted in-country. The EMPs and EIAs were 
disclosed on the website of the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning (MEPP) 
and MEPSO and two public consultations were held per each study: a) For Stip - Serbian 
border a consultation was held in Stip municipality in May 2010 and another in Sveti 
Nikola municipality in July 2010; b) For Skopje 1 - Tetovo 1 a consultation was held in 
Tetovo in April 2010 and another in Skopje in May, 2010. MEPP published the Decision 
on Approval of the EIAs in major daily newspapers in Macedonian and Albanian 
language on Nov 4, 2010 calling for comments to the decision. After a week of disclosure 
MEPP sent their approval of the EIAs to MEPSO.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peter Johansen 
02/10/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
02/10/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bekim Imeri 
02/10/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/09/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
02/16/2011 
Comments:   
