                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

   I. Basic Information
   Date prepared/updated: /2011
                                                 Report No.: 74819
   1. Basic Project Data
   Original Project ID: P 108943               Original Project Name:
   Country: Madagascar                         Project ID: P 108943, P074235
   Project Name: The Ankeniheny-Mantadia-Zahamena Biodiversity Conservation and
     Restoration Corridor Carbon Project, Conservation Component.
   Task Team Leader: Bienvenu Rajaonson
   Estimated Appraisal Date: 2005              Signing ERs Purchase Agreement with
                                                 The Government of Madagascar
                                                 April 2008
   Managing Unit: AFTEN                        Lending     Instrument:      Specific
                                                 Investment Loan
   Sector: Environment (100%)
   Theme: Carbon Offset
   IBRD Amount (US$m.):        0.00
   IDA Amount (US$m.):         0.00
   GEF Amount (US$m.):         0.00
   PCF Amount (US$m.):1,505,000 (ERs)
   Other financing amounts by source:


   Environmental Category: C
   Repeater []
   Is this project processed under OP 10.00 (Emergency) or OP         Yes [
                                                                                  No [X]
     8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)                   ]

   2. Project Objectives

1. Original project development objective:

The project aims to purchase 430,000 t of emission reductions from verified reduced deforestation
within the Corridor Ankeniheny- Zahamena- (CAZ) located in the eastern region of Madagascar.
This carbon offset operation is fully part of the investments under EP3, IDA project P074234 and
its Additional Financing.
   3. Project Description

2. The Corridor Ankeniheny - Zahamena (CAZ) protected area (432,000 ha) is located in the
eastern portion of the country and its management objective is to protect its natural ecosystems
and use the natural resources sustainably such that conservation and use are mutually beneficial.
It aims at reducing forest fragmentation and reconnecting forest fragments, while at the same
time promoting alternative livelihood activities for impoverished communities. More than 30
Communes totaling 315,000 persons are depending on environmental services provided by the
forest area comprised within the Corridor. In addition, research and studies have shown that this
forest corridor holds a number of important endemic species, 70% of which are threatened
according to the IUCN. These endemic species in the corridor include 460 species of flora, 11
lemur species, and 89 bird species. Major pressures to the area consist of slash and burn practices
for tavy farming, as well as the expansion of mining and timber harvesting activities.

3. The CAZ reserve has specifically been designed to be eligible as an “avoided deforestation?
carbon project and has benefited from one of the first contracts (with the BioCarbon Fund) that
will provide carbon revenues long term that will cover the reserve’s core costs. Through the
creation of the new CAZ protected area, the project will result in reduced emissions from
deforestation. Through the Voluntary Carbon Standard (VCS), the project will generate
Voluntary Carbon Units (VCUs) from REDD, featuring as one of the first REDD initiatives in
Africa. Through the marketing and sale of VCUs from the project, the Government of
Madagascar intends to partially finance the management of the protected area and expand
economic opportunities for local communities.

4. The protected area’s category is in line with IUCN VI category and given the local contextual
reality, it was decided to develop a co-management governance structure of CAZ. Co-
management necessarily implies a sharing of decision making among various stakeholders.


   4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
     analysis.

5. The project aims to reduce deforestation of primary Malagasy forests by creating a corridor to
protect remaining native forests between the Zahamena and Mantadia National Parks in east-
central Madagascar. The Ankeniheny-Zahamena Corridor in Madagascar stretches over 425,000
hectares, and includes five protected areas: Mangerivola, Betampona, Analamazaotra-Mantadia,
Zahamena) managed by the Madagascar National Parks (MNP), 60 areas which management has
been transferred to local communities, and four private areas. The corridor encompasses the
majority of what is left of Madagascar’s eastern dense tropical rainforest. The corridor is
included in Toamasina Province and the three Regions concerned by its management are
respectively, Atsinanana, Alaotra Mangoro and Analanjirofo.

6. The project’s site is encompassing a mid range of approximately 700-1000 m and a slope
range of 0–60 degrees. The sites selected for the project activity are within the slope range of 20-
45 degrees. The CAZ Protected Area site makes up a vast watershed that holds the sources of
eight large rivers and a multitude of water systems, the largest of which include Sahatandra,
Ivohitra, Rianila, Ivondro, Ivoloina, Onibe, Ihofika, Namarafana, Sahatavy, Managory,
Simianona, Marimboha, Manatsatrana, Onibe and Fanandrahana. These rivers are largely used
on a daily basis by local populations as important sources of potable water supply.

   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

   1. (AFTCS TBC)
   2.Mr Paul Jean Feno (AFTEN)

            6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                         Yes          No
            Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
            Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                        X
            Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                 X
            Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                            X
            Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                             X
            Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                      X
            Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
            Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                          X
            Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP                           X
              7.50)
            Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                              X

   II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

7.      The draft EA specifically for CAZ within EP3 framework prepared by the GoM pursuant
to OP4.01 and lessons learned from the implementation of the parent project EP3 confirm that
large-scale, significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts are not expected. The GOM is
committed to the principle of associating surrounding communities to the implementation of the
management plan of CAZ and therefore no resettlement is expected to take place. Other
necessary safeguards have been conducted under the parent project and disclosed under the
same.

8.       Activities proposed for BioCF CAZ follow those expected under the parent project EP3,
IDA Project P074234 and its additional financing. Therefore, the BioCF resources will help
promote sustainable forest management around CAZ as it is conceived and designed to have
significant positive environmental and social impacts. Revenues generated from the carbon
purchase will be shared in three parts. One major part is dedicated to communities; the second
one is for the delegated manager of the Park to ensure a better conservation of the Park and use
of carbon revenue and the third one is for the State. So, optimum quantity of carbon available for
sale is only generated in the CAZ if the three entities are closely working together and
coordinating their respective efforts to reduce and/or avoid deforestation in and around the park.
All environmental and social issues related to CAZ are already addressed in the execution of EP3
thanks to the full assessment done on PAPs and corresponding PAPs financing. Overall, the
carbon revenue will be a complement of safeguards mitigation activities planned under EP3. It
will be then shared more inclusively to PAPs as well as to non PAPs.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
  the project area:

9. Long-term impacts are those that may be associated with induced activities related to income
generating activities and management transfer of forest areas that will be promoted to local
communities around CAZ. However, the environmental impact of such an activity has been and
will continue to be among the most critical determinants of the capacity building plan dedicated
to all involved stakeholders. In addition, the GoM is already committed with its decentralized
structures (Forest Department) to put in place enabling corresponding mitigation measures in
case leakage as well as slash and burn are extended any time and in compliance with the national
legislation. Therefore, no negative long-term impacts are anticipated due to project activities.


3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.

10. Not relevant.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

11. The three decentralized forestry directions that cover the Corridor have been mandated to
manage the protected area until the permanent protection status of CAZ is obtained. To this end,
a technical committee composed with governmental and non-governmental partners involved in
the creation of CAZ has been established. The purpose of this technical committee was to orient
the process for officially creating CAZ and monitor implementation progress. The technical
committee meets twice monthly with a technical support of Conservation International which
assures its secretariat.

12. The borrower's capacity to deal with safeguard issues have been improved based on their
combined track record in-country, as well as with the implementation of the parent project.
Indeed, tools and instruments have been developed, disseminated and experienced in other
protected areas through training of trainers and capacity building programme that has been
addressed to beneficiaries. Furthermore, the country has performed a good follow up of
environmental and social dimensions in the project in association with concerned stakeholders,
fact that is very encouraging. However, this performance has to be further continued and
strengthened through the present carbon offset project. To further maximize the chance of
success of proposed project activities, appropriate safeguard training will be provided to CAZ
stakeholders to ensure tangible outcomes and results, and minimize any potential social and
environmental impacts and social conflicts risks that may hinders project activities
sustainability. To this end, a participative follow up system which involves local grassroots
communities has been put in place to better monitor deforestation activities in the CAZ.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
      safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

13. For the proposed carbon purchase financing, key stakeholders include smallholders, local
    communities, local NGOs, ongoing projects, private sector operating around CAZ, local
    representative from the Ministry of Environment and Forest and CI. Local NGOs,
    smallholders and communities in the project area will be involved not only during the
    preparation of any project activities, but throughout the project cycle. To that effect, they
    will benefit from awareness raising and specific training concerning community’s rights
    and obligations and how to seek redress against what they could regard as unfair process.
    The implementation agency (delegate management) will, in particular, consult potential
    project affected groups and local nongovernmental organizations on the project’s
    environmental and social aspects, and will take their views into account.
    Once completed, the ESMF/Plan on CAZ which refers to this EP3 additional financing will
    be shared with concerned sectors, nongovernmental organizations, development partners of
    Madagascar and concerned corporate and communities. It will be disclosed in Madagascar
    in Malagasy and local language by the Ministry of Environment and it will also be made
    available at the World Bank’s Info shop. Relevant activities and specific safeguard
    documents/mitigation plans prepared subsequently will also be disclosed.

   B. Disclosure Requirements Date
   Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
   Date of receipt by the Bank
   Date of "in-country" disclosure
   Date of submission to InfoShop
   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
     Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
   Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
   Date of receipt by the Bank
   Date of "in-country" disclosure
   Date of submission to InfoShop
   Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
   Date of receipt by the Bank
   Date of "in-country" disclosure
   Date of submission to InfoShop
   Pest Management Plan:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
   Date of receipt by the Bank
   Date of "in-country" disclosure
   Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural
  Resources, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the
  Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
  explain why:

8.
9.
10. C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
   ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
  review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          NA
  credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of       No
  critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of        NA
  other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation
  measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  NA
  appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
  Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        NA
  Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been            NA
  reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or
  Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              NA
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        NA
  Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World              NA
  Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       NA
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-
  affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    NA
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the      NA
  project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the     NA
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard
  policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the        NA
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?
11.
12.
13. D. Approvals
14.
 Signed and submitted by:         Name                                      Date
 Task Team Leader:                Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson                  02/23/2012
 Environmental Specialist:        Mr Paul Jean Feno                      03/23/2012
 Social            Development
    Specialist
 Additional       Environmental
    and/or Social Development
    Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional        Safeguards        Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi              07/20/2012
    Coordinator:
 Comments:
 Sector Manager:                   Ms Idah Riddihough                    10/21/2012
 Comments:
15.
