Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/11/2011 
Report No.:  AC6083
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P122616 
Project Name:  Malawi - Financial Sector Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Samuel Munzele Maimbo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTFE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims to improve increase access to finance for the currently unbanked, but 
bankable, population of Malawi.  
 
The project's primary beneficiaries will be the financially excluded population. The 
2008 FinScope Survey revealed that more than half of the adult population of Malawi (55 
percent) manages their lives without using any kind of financial product (formal or 
informal). Of those 45 percent of Malawians that are financially included, an equal 
number are using banks (42 percent) as are using informal mechanisms (42 percent). A 
total of 19 percent of individuals are banked, 7 percent use a financial product from a 
formal financial institution other than a bank (predominantly from microfinance 
institutions) and 19% make use of the informal financial products and/or systems 
available to them. Amongst the adult population there is a slight bias towards men, 21 
percent of men are formally banked versus only 17 percent of women. In total 25 percent 
of the adult population is using the informal sector, and of these people 6 percent are also 
using products from the formal sector.  
 
Page  2
The PDO Level Results Indicators # to be measured bi-annually # will be the percentage 
of the adult population that use formal financial institutions, and proportion of women 
within that population. The primary methodology for measuring PDO level results will be 
the FinScope Demand Side Survey tool developed by the FinMark Trust and first used in 
Malawi 2008, and followed up with a FinScope Supply Side Study (2009); The 
methodology not only enables the assessment of the current landscape of financial access 
in Malawi, but also provides benchmarks for repeat surveys that will enable the impact of 
access related policy interventions to be assessed.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project design takes into account the ongoing and planned activities of other 
development partners active in the financial sector, that is: USAID, the IMF, the 
Financial Services Volunteer Corps (FSVC), the US Treasury Office of Technical 
Assistance (OTA), Norges Bank, FIRST, and DFID. Activities included in this project 
have been designed to build on and complement the activities of other development 
partners and as a consequence. Some activities are not comprehensive on a stand-alone 
basis but form part of a comprehensive whole once other donors' activities are taken into 
account.  Refer to Annex 9 for a complete overview of partner activities which this 
project compliments.  
 
The proposed IDA credit for project implementation will support five components and 
will fund the following main activities: (i) training and workshops, (ii) short term 
consultancy services and (iii) goods, predominantly IT hardware and software systems. 
Activities supported by the project are aggregated in the six following components:  
 
Component 1: Financial Sector Regulation and Supervision (US$5.32 million)  
 
This component will assist the RBM to strengthen the regulation and supervision 
frameworks for banking, capital markets, microfinance, and pensions by financing a 
combination of research, diagnostic, and capacity building technical assistance activities. 
It builds on preparatory work (primarily diagnostics, preparation of new regulations, and 
in some areas also supervision manuals) undertaken with the FIRST support mentioned 
above; an IMF/Norges Bank program which has helped to define the RBM#s strategies in 
key areas; and, also, to complement an expected USAID initiative to finance back-office 
automation (including regulatory reporting) for MFIs. Specific activities include: (i) 
Strengthening the legal and regulatory framework with regards to: bank supervision; 
capital markets supervision; microfinance institutions (MFI) and credit and savings 
cooperatives (SACCO) supervision; insurance supervision; pensions supervision; and 
administrative law; and (ii) Strengthening the supervisory capacity of the RBM. Specific 
activities include the: design of new or amended call reports for banks, MFIs and 
SACCOs, pension administrators, insurance companies, and stock brokers; development 
of off-site analysis tools for banking, insurance, MFIs and SACCOs, pensions, and 
capital markets; development of macro-prudential analytical tools to automate the 
analysis of macroeconomic and financial sector data required to prepare a periodic 
financial sector stability report; and,  building capacity of RBM supervisory and research 
staff.  
Page  3
Component 2: Financial Infrastructure (US$13.22million).  
 
This component aims to assist the RBM to update the basic infrastructure for payment 
services by supporting the strengthening of its RTGS system; the design and development 
of an interoperable central switch for processing payments; leveraging technology to 
improve processing efficiency for small value payments, particularly microfinance 
payments; and, institutional capacity building at the RBM, including the a review of 
current regulations and legislation. Specific activities will include: (i) Strengthening the 
RBM in the area of RTGS systems, with a Central Depository System (CDS) to be 
among the components of the new RTGS; (ii) Design, development and implementation 
of a National Switch; (iii) Support for an MFI transaction processing hub; (iv) support for 
the development of securities settlement and non-bank agency networks; and, (v) support 
for consumer education and promotional campaigns to increase public understanding of 
payment products and services, and to support public awareness of the new Credit 
Reference Bureau, implications the new National Switch on convenience, cost and what 
to do when things go wrong and training workshops for credit and payment service 
providers and RBM staff on credit bureau and shared infrastructure supervision.  
 
Component 3: Financial Consumer Protection & Financial Literacy ($3.02 million).  
 
This component will support the Government#s efforts to increase public trust in using 
the financial sector by supporting the following activities: (i) strengthening the legal and 
regulatory framework for financial consumer protection; (ii) enhancing institutional 
arrangements for consumer protection in all financial services; and, (iii) developing a 
consumer awareness / financial literacy program. This component will take into account 
the results of the work undertaken by the World Bank#s Global program on consumer 
protection and financial literacy in several countries worldwide.  
 
Component 4: Ministry of Finance Financial Sector Policy and Governance Capacity 
and Long-term Finance (US$ 3.40 million).  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of the MoF to: (i) 
coordinate the formulation, implementation, and monitoring of financial sector policies 
and regulations, and (ii) oversee Government interventions in the financial sector. 
Working closely with the Financial Sector Policy Unit (FSPU) and the Public Enterprises 
Reform and Monitoring Unit (PERMU) at the MoF,  the project will finance the 
following activities: (i) provision of technical advisory services for the development of 
financial sector policies (including for long-term finance),  and an ownership policy of 
state-owned financial institutions and programs; (ii) staff capacity building through 
specialized on-the-job training, study tours, secondments, and specialized training; (iii) 
procurement of goods and equipment; (iv) and publication/dissemination of relevant 
policy work.  
 
This component will also support the establishment of a policy framework and a legal 
and institutional infrastructure which facilitate the provision of long-term finance. The 
Page  4
policy framework will address institutional, funding, and private sector involvement 
issues; the role of the public sector; and, sustainability of long-term financing 
infrastructure.  More specifically, the project will support (i) development of an 
infrastructure financing framework and provision of the related technical assistance and 
capacity building to the Ministry of Finance for financial analysis, design, and policy 
development for Public Private Partnerships (PPP), and to related institutions for 
implementation; (ii) preparation of Government#s long-term debt issuance strategy and 
implementation support; (iii)  institutional review of pension funds# operations and 
investment policies;  (iv) assessment of the capacity of the capital markets to support the 
issuance of equities and bonds and examine options for the reform of the Malawi Stock 
Exchange; (v) establishment of a framework for leasing; (vi)  feasibility study for  
establishing a development bank that is efficient, sustainable, and complements the 
private sector lending, and (vii)   diagnostic studies examining the pros and cons and the 
applicability of a long term finance guarantee scheme.  
 
Component 5: Implementation Support (US$3.26 million).  
 
This component will support the implementation of the project by supporting the 
establishment of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at the RBM which is the 
responsible implementing agency of the project with support from an oversight 
committee chaired by the MoF. More specifically this component will fund the following 
activities: (i) provision of a procurement specialist, financial management specialist, 
M&E specialist, a project manager and support staff; (ii) incremental operational costs 
and limited office equipment necessary for project implementation support, and, (iii) 
auditing actions, which will be carried out annually by independent external auditors.  
 
This component will also finance, up to the closure of the project, the consultancy costs 
for administering a five-year multi-donor funded Multi-Donor Financial Sector 
Deepening Trust (MFSDT) in which funds will finance innovative solutions to 
addressing access to finance constraints. The MFSDT will be financed through grants by 
development partners (initially DFID and USAID). The government#s contribution to 
that Trust Fund through this IDA project will be to meet the consultancy costs associated 
with administering the Trust Fund including the costs of procurement specialist, financial 
management specialist, M&E specialist, a project manager and support staff.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Blantyre and  Lilongwe, Malawi.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While this project is a SIL due to activities Component 2, it is largely  a technical 
assistance project. None of the proposed activities will have a negative impact on the 
recipient population. The project would rather yield more positive results as it would help 
enhance the financial capacity of beneficiaries and sustain the financial sector in Malawi. 
The Civil works under Component 2 relate to the creating of a Micro Finance processing 
hub and an interoperable switch. As these works are very minor and localized, national 
and local laws and regulations will be sufficient to manage any environmental impacts. 
Consequently, no safeguard policy is triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  6
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Page  7
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Samuel Munzele Maimbo 
02/10/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amos Abu 
02/11/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
02/11/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michael J. Fuchs 
02/11/2011 
Comments:   
