Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/06/2011 
Report No.:  AC6265
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P099626 
Project Name:  Energy Sector 
Task Team Leader:  Robert Mills 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (40%);Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Small 
and medium enterprise support (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
84.70 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to increase the reliability and quality of electricity 
supply in the major load centers in Malawi.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will be comprised of four components: (1) Electricity Network 
Strengthening and Expansion; (2) Generation & Transmission Feasibility Studies, 
including preliminary Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and an 
estimate of the number of affected people; a full ESIA and Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) will be prepared only for one site (Lower Fufu); (3) Demand Side Management 
and Energy Efficiency Measures, and (4) Capacity building and Technical Assistance. A 
brief description of each component is provided below:  
 
(1) 
Component 1: Electricity Network Strengthening and Expansion. This component 
includes the rehabilitation, upgrade and expansion of priority parts of the existing 
distribution and transmission system, including extension of the network in selected peri-
urban areas, and consist of three sub-components:  
Page  2
#
Component 1a: Distribution and Transmission Uprating and Expansion. Activities 
in this sub-component include: (i) construction of new medium-voltage substations and 
associated 33/11 kV distribution lines at Dwangwa, Katoto, Kauma, and Bangwe; (ii) 
uprating of existing medium-voltage substations at Golomoti, Chinyama, Fundis Cross, 
Nkula, Balaka, and Chingeni; (iii) construction and rehabilitation of 33/11 kV 
distribution lines; (iv) underground cables rehabilitations; (v) extension of low-voltage 
peri-urban networks; and (vi) purchase of spare parts for generation, transmission and 
distribution systems.  
 
#
Component 1b: Low Voltage Reticulation Reinforcement. Activities in this sub-
component include: (i) #technical loss audits# to determine key sources of losses in the 
low-voltage system; (ii) reconfiguration and extension of medium voltage overhead lines 
supplying consumer substations/distribution transformers; (iii) installation of 
approximately 200 new such consumer substations; (iv) construction of new three phase 
low voltage overhead lines and conversion of single phase to three phase low voltage 
overhead lines; (v) a limited intensification of the peri-urban network; (vi) enhancement 
of ESCOM#s Training School in Blantyre; and (vii) purchase and installation of check 
meters at a large sample of step-down transformers in the project areas.  
 
#
Component 1c: Consulting Engineer. Activities in this sub-component include: (i) 
preliminary survey and design work for transmission and distribution lines investments in 
Component 1a and 1b; (ii) support to ESCOM to supervise contractors during 
implementation of Components 1a and 1b; (iii) advise ESCOM on establishing a 
dedicated materials management system; and (iv) design work for installing check meters 
in the project areas.  
 
(2) 
Component 2: Generation & Transmission Feasibility Studies. This component 
will support financing of feasibility studies needed for eventual development of an 
additional 260-400 MW of new hydropower generation capacity, required to meet 
Malawi#s growing energy demand, as well as a transmission line study. Activities in this 
component include: (i) full feasibility study at Lower Fufu on the South Rukuru River 
with a full ESIA and RAP to be prepared by an independent consultant; (ii) feasibility 
study at Mpatamanga on the Shire River including a preliminary ESIA and an estimate of 
the number of affected people; (iii) feasibility study at Chimgonda on the Dwambazi 
River including a preliminary ESIA and an estimate of the number of affected people; 
and (iv) pre-feasibility study for a new #inland# transmission backbone line from 
Lilongwe via Kasungu to Mzuzu, including a preliminary ESIA and an estimate of the 
number of affected people.  
 
(3) 
Component 3: Demand Side Management (DSM) and Energy Efficiency 
Measures. This component will support several demand side management (DSM) and 
energy efficiency activities in industrial and urban residential areas.  Activities supported 
in this component include: (i) derating of Hot Water Geyser (HWG) element ratings; (ii) 
installation of HWG insulation blankets; and (iii) wireless load control to switch off 
water heaters to reduce demand at peak times.  
 
(4) 
Component 4: Capacity Building and Technical Assistance. This component will 
provide institutional strengthening and technical assistance to both MNREE and ESCOM 
Page  3
to support their efforts to further develop the country#s energy sector. Activities under 
this component include: (i) a wind power resource study; (ii) a preliminary assessment of 
geothermal prospects; (iii) a technical assessment of the opportunities to expand bagasse-
fuelled cogeneration capacity from the sugar production operations in Malawi; (iv) 
sectoral studies to underpin the evolving agenda; (v) support for specialist transaction 
advisers to provide financial, legal, and technical advice to GoM and MERA on private 
sector investment in the power sector; and (vi) institutional strengthening of the Project 
Implementation Units at MNREE and ESCOM, including training in World Bank 
procurement and financial management procedures, World Bank environmental and 
social safeguard policies &  procedures and Environmental, Health & Safety Guidelines, 
project management, energy planning, monitoring and evaluation systems, etc.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will primarily be implemented in and around the major load centers of 
Blantyre, Lilongwe, Zomba, and Mzuzu.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTWR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, environmental & social impacts and land acquisition/displacement requirements 
of the proposed projects are assessed as being limited and manageable, provided potential 
impacts and requirements for compensation are minimized by careful consideration 
during the design phase.  The main project activities are at the distribution level (with the 
exception of activities at two transmission/distribution #interface# substations), and no 
lines with a voltage level higher than 33kV will be built or rehabilitated. However, 
because the final location of project activities has not yet been determined, the project has 
prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
Page  4
As the overall environmental and social impacts are assessed as being minimal, and any 
adverse impacts manageable and non-irreversible, the project has been classified as 
Category B.  
 
The nature of the distribution-level electricity project is such that the final location of all 
project activities (such as distribution line routes) is not determined until detailed 
engineering designs are completed as part of project activities.  
 
Two of the substations for rehabilitation in Component 1 are known from previous 
assessments to contain PCBs. Detailed procedures on how to identify, handle, store and 
eliminate PCBs have been elaborated in the ESMF. During project implementation a 
detailed ESIA for Component 1 will be prepared, including the associated costs, to be 
implemented by the contractors.  
 
The cumulative impacts of the project activities will be assessed in the ESIA for 
Component 1 and the individual ESIAs prepared as part of the feasibility studies in 
Component 2. For the latter studies, the consultants will be encouraged to cross-reference 
the Strategic Environmental  & Social Assessments (SESAs) that are being prepared as 
part of other WB-financed projects in Malawi.  
 
Comments on the World Bank Safeguards Policies:  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
 
The project is expected to have site-specific and very limited environment and social 
impacts. Project investments are limited to urban and peri-urban areas. #Greenfield# 
investments are limited to four new medium-voltage substations. In order to provide an 
environmental and social impact screening mechanism, an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared as part of the project preparation process and have been disclosed in-country 
and in the Infoshop by project appraisal.  Given (i) the very limited environment and 
social impacts expected, and (ii) that the final locations of investments (for example, 
positions of wooden poles for distribution lines) will not be known until the detailed 
design stage during project implementation, the project is proceeding using framework 
documents. ESCOM will prepare an ESIA for Component 1, which will provide 
environmental management plans for any identified potential impacts.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)  
 
It is not anticipated that the proposed project will adversely affect sites having 
archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values as defined 
under OP 4.11. #Greenfield# investments are limited to four new medium-voltage 
substations and no physical cultural resources issues are apparent from physical 
inspections. However, it is possible that physical/cultural resources might be revealed 
during installation works. Accordingly, this safeguard policy is triggered on a 
Page  5
precautionary basis only. Detailed site screening will be undertaken via the ESIA. All 
contracts for activities in Component 1 (i.e. those involving physical investments) will 
include a Chance Finds Procedures, as set out in the ESMF.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
Limited compensation for involuntary resettlement is expected, primarily for crop 
damage from installation of new sub-transmission voltage lines (33kV and below) and 
construction of 4 new medium-voltage substations. However, this policy is triggered to 
provide a framework to manage both land acquisition and any possible displacement 
required; an RFP has been prepared for the project, which has been disclosed in-country 
and in the Infoshop by appraisal. If land acquisition and/or displacements are necessary 
during project implementation, then full or abbreviated RAPs will be prepared as 
necessary.  Mitigation instruments and procedures for possible crop damage will be 
assessed during the implementation process.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)  
 
Although the feasibility studies for new hydropower sites financed under Component 2 
of the project will, in least one case (Lower Fufu), encompass detailed engineering design 
for a dam, OP/BP 4.37 is not triggered at this stage since the project is not financing 
construction of any dams. However, the World Bank takes dam safety concerns seriously 
and always promotes best practice in the design of new dams, as well as during any later 
stages of project development. To this end, the project will finance a separate and 
independent expert (or group of experts) to review the quality of the  dam studies and 
designs being undertaken by the main consultant, in order to guarantee that they reflect 
international best practice and standards with respect to dam safety. In addition, an 
Environmental and Social Advisory Panel (ESAP), consisting of one environmental 
expert and one resettlement expert, will be established to review and advise on the ToR, 
full ESIA, RAP and other safeguards aspects for the hydropower sites being studied. 
Furthermore, financing will be provided under Component 4 of the project for technical 
assistance on measures necessary to strengthen the institutional, legislative, regulatory 
and safeguards frameworks for dam safety programs, as part of Government#s forward 
planning for the development and operation of new hydropower plants in Malawi.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  
 
The project supports feasibility studies of new hydroelectric power generation sites 
which , if developed, will involve the use of the Shire river, which forms part of the 
larger Zambezi watershed and is defined as an international waterway, as well as 
tributary rivers that drain into Lake Malawi. Accordingly, this policy is triggered. The 
riparian notification process has been undertaken and the notification period concludes on 
May 1 2011.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no envisaged potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project has been designed to focus on a limited number of small-scale medium-
voltage substations, 33/11kV distribution lines and reinforcement and extension of 
household connections. These activities involve relatively limited land acquisition and 
few displacement issues, which are relatively small-scale and locally-adaptable in nature. 
Usually, several alternative location options are available to reduce scope and extent of 
any impact. To the extent possible, all efforts will be made to avoid the need for 
involuntary displacement and land acquisition.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared and disclosed by appraisal. As noted above, 
during project implementation a detailed ESIA will be prepared. These safeguard 
instruments will be used for screening of environmental & social impacts and potential 
resettlement and land acquisition. Based on the screening work undertaken, it will be 
decided if a full/abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) needs to be prepared.   
Although ESCOM#s capacity to manage and record environmental and social processes 
at project level is relatively limited, the situation is expected to improve as ESCOM 
management puts in place an Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU). The 
project will finance specific activities to build the capacity and expertise of the ESMU. 
Moreover, a Consulting Engineer to be hired by the project will supervise installation 
works during project implementation and report on the contractors# adherence to the 
environmental and social clauses as presented in the ESMF, which will be included in the 
bidding documents and contractor#s contracts.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Initial but limited public consultations with project-affected persons (PAPs) have been 
undertaken by ESCOM in 2010 with headmen around some of the proposed substation 
sites and the proposed new transmission lines associated with the list of projects in the 
feasibility studies. There will be further consultations during the preliminary design 
phase, when the project Consulting Engineer, acting on behalf of ESCOM, will work 
with their internal safeguards staff and representatives of the implementing agency to 
ensure that the need for resettlement is minimized to the extent feasible. The Draft 
Environmental & Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Draft Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) were disclosed at the World Bank#s InfoShop on February 18, 
2011 and were disclosed in-country on April 14, 2011.   
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/18/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/18/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  8
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Mills 
05/06/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
05/06/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
05/06/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
05/06/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
05/06/2011 
Comments:   
