Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5849 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/25/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Malawi 
Project ID: P099626 
Project Name: Energy Sector 
Task Team Leader: Robert Mills 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (40%);Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Small 
and medium enterprise support (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
79.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to increase the reliability and quality of electricity supply 
in the major load centres in Malawi.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project activities will comprise:  
 
(1) Electricity Network Strengthening & Expansion, including rehabilitation, upgrading and 
expansion of priority parts of the existing distribution and transmission system, and the extension 
of the network in selected peri-urban areas. This component includes the rehabilitation, upgrade 
and expansion of priority parts of the existing distribution and transmission system, including 
extension of the network in selected peri-urban areas. This component will draw upon the 
feasibility studies prepared for the MCC Compact which identify the most urgent activities in all 
three regions of Malawi. The component will be divided into two sub-components:  
 
Component 1a: Distribution & Transmission Uprating and Expansion. Activities in this sub-
component include: (i) uprating of existing substations and associated lines, (ii) construction of 
Page  2
new substations and lines, (iii) underground cables rehabilitation, and (iv) construction and 
rehabilitation of 33 and 11kV lines.  
 
Component 1b: Low Voltage Reticulation Reinforcement and Technical Implementation 
Support. Activities in this sub-component include: (i) #technical loss audits# to determine key 
sources of losses in the low-voltage system, (ii) reconfiguration and extension of medium voltage 
overhead lines (11kV and below) supplying #consumer substations#/distribution transformers 
(such as pole-mounted MV/LV step-down transformers), (iii) installation of approximately 200 
new such #consumer substations#, (iv) construction of new three phase low voltage overhead 
lines and conversion of single phase to three phase low voltage overhead lines, and (v) a limited 
intensification of the peri-urban network via approximately 6,500 new household connections, 
benefitting approximately 30,000 Malawians.  
 
(2) Hydroelectric Power Generation Feasibility Studies. This component includes financing for 
full feasibility studies needed for eventual development of an additional 260 # 400 MW of new 
hydropower generation capacity, required to meet Malawi#s growing energy demand. The 
feasibility studies will include investigation of up to two sites with potential capacity of over 
100MW on the major rivers in Malawi, as well as three or more sites with less than 50 MW 
potential capacities on the tributaries. The spread of the feasibility studies by size and geography 
will allow for a diversification of the sources of water for hydropower generation to mitigate 
some of the hydrologic risks of the already-crowded Shire river system. The full feasibility 
studies will include independent environmental and social impact analyses and associated 
mitigation/management plans. There will be no physical investments.  
 
(3) Demand Side Management and Energy Efficiency Measures. Given the severe capacity 
constraints in Malawi#s power system # evidenced by the extensive and year-round load-
shedding program discussed above # it is proposed to finance several demand-side management 
(DSM) and energy efficiency activities in industrial and urban residential areas. These will 
provide, at relatively low cost, critical #quick wins# in Malawi#s efforts to close the demand-
supply gap, pending the installation of new generation capacity in the medium term. They will 
also help Malawi manage its system more reliably and at a lower cost. Investments will focus on 
reducing peak energy use in hot water geysers via insulation blankets, de-rating heater elements 
and wireless load control devices.  
 
(4) Capacity building and Technical Assistance. This component will provide institutional 
strengthening and technical assistance to both MNREE and ESCOM to support their efforts to 
further develop Malawi#s energy sector. Activities will include specialized technical assistance, 
support for sectoral studies, support for specialist transaction advisers and general institutional 
strengthening.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will primarily be implemented in the major load centres of Blantyre, Lilongwe, 
Zomba and Mzuzu.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The Project will be implemented by two implementing agencies: the Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Energy and Environment (MNREE) and the Electricity Supply Corporation of 
Malawi (ESCOM):  
 
#
ESCOM will be the implementing agency for Components 1 (Electricity Network 
Strengthening and Expansion), 3 (DSM and Energy Efficiency Measures) and 4A (Technical 
Assistance and Capacity-Building for ESCOM). Components 1 and 3 contain the physical 
investments in the proposed project. ESCOM has an Environmental and Social Management 
Unit (ESMU), which has some if limited experience of implementing safeguards policies under 
World Bank projects. Training and capacity-building will be provided as part of the project 
preparation process.  
 
#
MNREE will be the implementing agency for Component 2 (Feasibility Studies) and 4B 
(Technical Assistance and Capacity-Building for MNREE). These components do not include 
any physical investments and is limited to technical assistance for the feasibility studies in 
Component 2 and technical assistance and capacity-building in Component 4B. As with 
ESCOM, MNREE has an Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU), which has some 
if limited experience of implementing safeguards policies under World Bank projects. Training 
and capacity-building will be provided as part of the project preparation process.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTWR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is expected to have site-specific and very limited environment and social 
impacts. Project investments are limited to urban and peri-urban areas. #Greenfield# investments 
are limited to four new substations. An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared as part of the project 
preparation process and have been disclosed by project appraisal.  Given (i) the very limited 
environment and social impacts expected, and (ii) that the final locations of some investments 
(for example, positions of wooden poles for distribution lines) will not be known until the 
detailed design stage during project implementation, the project is using framework documents 
only at this stage. As project preparation continues, ESCOM will prepare an ESIA for 
Component 1, which will provide environmental management plans for any identified potential 
impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Almost all substation investments are at existing sites in urban and peri-urban areas, with 
#greenfield# investments limited to four new substations. While no physical cultural resources 
are visible from physical inspections, it is possible that physical/cultural resources might be 
revealed during installation works. This issue will be investigated further in the ESIA. All 
activities in Component 1 (i.e. those involving physical investments) will include chance finds 
procedures, as set out in the ESMF.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Limited compensation for involuntary resettlement is expected, primarily for crop damage 
from installation of new sub-transmission voltage lines (33kV and below) and construction of 4 
new substations. The implementing agency has prepared a RFP for the project, which has 
disclosed by appraisal. If land acquisition and/or displacements are necessary during project 
implementation, then full or abbreviated RAPs will be prepared as necessary.  Mitigation 
instruments and procedures for possible crop damage will be assessed during the implementation 
process.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/31/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. The RPF 
and ESMF were disclosed by appraisal, on 18 February 2011 in the Bank Infoshop and in-
country on April 14 2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Mills 
04/19/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/19/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
04/19/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
