Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6069 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/07/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Malawi 
Project ID: P122616 
Project Name: Malawi - Financial Sector TA Project 
Task Team Leader: Samuel Munzele Maimbo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTFE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (100%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
27.70 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to assist the Government of Malawi: (i) strengthen the 
policy, regulatory and institutional framework and capacity for financial sector supervision, and 
government cash management; (ii) upgrade basic infrastructure for mobile-phone banking, 
payments services and bond market development; (iii) increase access to finance and (iv) 
strengthen the governments oversight of the financial sector and its cash management capacity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. 
The Project will finance four main components, namely: (i)  Strengthening RBM#s 
regulatory and institutional framework and supervision capacity; (ii) Developing financial sector 
infrastructure through upgrading payments systems/instruments and mobile-phone banking 
technologies; (iii) Supporting financial inclusion and consumer protection activities through a 
multi-donor financial sector development trust, and (iv) Building MOF#s institutional capacity 
for financial policy and sector coordination.  
 
2. 
 The project design presented in the PCN takes into account the ongoing and planned 
activities of other developing partners in the sector, that is, the United States Agency for 
Page  2
International Development (USAID), the IMF, the Financial Services Volunteer Corps (FSVC), 
the US Treasury Office of Technical Assistance (OTA), the FIRST Initiative and DFID. 
Activities included in this project have been deliberately designed to build on the activities of 
other development partners. Consequently, individual components do not necessarily look 
comprehensive in their design.  
 
3. 
The proposed IDA grant for project implementation will fund the following activities: (i) 
training and workshops, (ii) consultancy services (short term and residential) and (iii) goods, 
predominantly IT hardware and software systems   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Lilongwe, Malawi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project is a technical assistance operation and will finance consultants, equipment and 
training.  The specific risks will be clearly identified during the due diligence carried out by 
professional transaction advisors & ensure that the appropriate clauses are included in the 
divestiture contracts.  Proper budgeting will be made to ensure that retrenched workers are 
compensated according to the law and proper communication campaign is carried out under the 
Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/02/2011 
 
Page  3
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Samuel Munzele Maimbo 
02/07/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/08/2011 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michael J. Fuchs 
02/07/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
