Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/22/2011 
Report No.:  AC5860
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P120825 
Project Name:  MW: Mining Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader:  Bryan Christopher Land 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SEGOM 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the efficiency, transparency and 
sustainability of mining sector management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components and a fourth component of project management.  
 
A. Managing Mineral Rights and Operations.  
 
The objective of this project component is to support the Government to build an 
efficient, transparent and environmentally and socially sustainable framework for 
managing mineral rights and operations. To achieve this, the project will support the 
following:   
 
#
A-1 Public Communications, Outreach and Stakeholder Dialogue by setting up 
the structure and support arrangements for continuous and formalized dialogue among 
stakeholders on mining policy issues and oversight of policy implementation, as well as 
design of MNREE's communications and outreach functions.  
Page  2
#
A-2 Modernizing Minerals Legislation by finalizing the new mining law and 
developing a body of regulations to give effect to it, covering mineral licensing, 
monitoring and inspection functions, health, safety and environmental standards, and a 
model Mining Development Agreement.  
 
#
A-3 Reforming Minerals Licensing by establishing a modern computer-based 
cadastral system and administrative arrangements for the efficient and transparent 
allocation and management of mineral exploration and mining rights by MNREE.  
 
#
A-4 Strengthening Mineral Operations Supervision by building capacity of 
MNREE for regular monitoring and inspections of exploration, mining and mineral 
processing operations using appropriate equipment.  
 
#
A-5 Strengthening Environmental and Social Management of Mining by 
establishing a comprehensive environmental and social management framework and 
robust monitoring systems at central, district and community levels.  
 
B. Generating and Managing Mineral Revenues.  
 
The objective of this project component is to support the Government to develop 
transparent arrangements for optimal generation and use of mineral revenues. To achieve 
this, the project will support the following:  
 
#
B-1: Reforming the Mineral Royalty and Tax Regime by completing the 
establishment of a coherent, standardized and globally competitive fiscal regime for 
mining through design and implementation of suitable royalty and tax regulations.  
 
#
B-2: Maximizing Mineral Revenue Collection by building capacity in royalty and 
tax administration.  
 
#
B-3: Building Mineral Revenue Transparency so that revenue collection 
arrangements can be subjected to scrutiny and assurances given to the public that 
revenues are being properly accounted for.  
 
#
B-4: Developing Mineral Revenue Forecasting as part of the Government's annual 
budget preparation cycle and medium-term macro-economic planning.  
 
#
B-5: Developing Mineral Revenue Management Policies to deal with potentially 
large and volatile mineral revenue flows and determine allocations made from funds 
collected.  
 
C. Promoting the Mineral Sector.  
 
The objective of this project component is to support the Government to improve the 
enabling environment for mining sector development by acquiring and disseminating 
geo-data, fostering more sustainable artisanal and small scale mining, increasing the 
supply of Malawians trained at tertiary level in minerals and improving the policy 
environment for mining-related infrastructure development. To achieve this, the project 
will support the following:  
 
#
C-1 Program of Geo-data Acquisition, Interpretation and Promotion, including a 
comprehensive country-wide airborne geo-physical survey to acquire new data, 
interpretation studies and resource assessments to identify promising mineral 
opportunities and activities to promote investor interest.  
Page  3
#
C-2 Establishing a Geo-Data Management Center to digitize, store and increase 
on-line access to geo-data.  
 
#
C-3 Program of Training and Awareness Raising for Artisanal Mining to 
gradually improve ASM practices and institutional support to the ASM sub-sector.  
 
#
C-4 Building Capacity for Tertiary Education in Mining to increase the supply of 
Malawians qualified at tertiary level in mining related disciplines in order to help build 
the capacity of government institutions and to alleviate the chronic skills shortage faced 
by a fast growing mineral sector.  
 
#
C-5 PPP Framework for Mining-related Infrastructure to assist the Government to 
roll-out the Public Private Partnership (PPP) framework to the mining sector, through 
support to MNREE in tailoring the framework to mining-related infrastructure 
development and building requisite expertise.  
 
The TA project will not involve financing of any significant civil works[1] , 
infrastructure investments, resettlement, land use planning or zoning. The scope of the 
project is limited to technical assistance.  
 
[1]Aerial surveys and refurbishment of MNREE offices will be procured under works 
contracts, but do not involve any significant physical impacts. Office refurbishment will 
be minor, not involving any new construction or significant reconstruction.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project involves country-wide technical assistance to a specific sector. As such, the 
scale and scope of the project will cover all of Malawi. The airborne geo-physical survey 
will be countrywide. Mineral resource assessments will be a mix of desk-based data 
interpretation and analysis of geo-data and some field-based survey work conducted by 
the Geological Survey Department, a public institution. Mineral resource assessments 
will have regional or sub-regional coverage, and not be site / mineral deposit-specific.  
 
Malawi has one of the highest population densities in southern and eastern Africa and a 
predominantly rural population, resulting in high pressure on arable land, and widespread 
degradation to the natural environment and natural resources. Nevertheless, it is a country 
of considerable natural beauty, with a number of significant biodiversity conservation 
areas and a nationally significant tourism industry based on the country's natural assets. 
Of outstanding international importance is the unique biodiversity of Lake Malawi's fish 
fauna, which also supports the lion's share of the countries fisheries. Almost all of the 
territory of the country fall within either the immediate catchment of Lake Malawi, or the 
catchment of its outflow, the Shire River, which is a vital source of drinking water, power 
generation, irrigation, fisheries, and wildlife habitat. Initiatives are under development to 
strengthen river basin planning and management in the catchments of both Lake Malawi 
and the Shire River. Malawi's terrestrial biodiversity generally exhibits lower endemism 
than its aquatic fauna, being largely representative of wider southeast African 
ecosystems. Nevertheless, there are localized areas of terrestrial endemism sometimes 
overlapping with mineral concentrations, most notably in the case of the Mount Mulanje 
massif.  
Page  4
High population densities have also resulted in disputes over land rights in some areas, 
and efforts are underway to reform the land tenure system to facilitate a clearer 
delineation between customary, state and private land.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr George Campos Ledec (AFTEN) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS) 
Mr Stephen Ling (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As a technical assistance project, most of the activities have virtually no direct 
environmental or social impact, and the project is not anticipated to have any large scale, 
significant adverse or irreversible impacts. Rather, the aim to promote sustainable 
management in the mining sector, including environmental and social management, is 
intended to yield positive environmental and social impacts.  
 
The project will not finance significant civil works, land use planning or zoning. Nor 
will it provide detailed recommendations on any particular  mineral deposit-specific site 
of investment, being limited to developing appropriate legal, regulatory and institutional 
frameworks at the national level, as well as strengthening government's capacity to 
manage mining sector investments and operations in the future in a sustainable manner.  
 
Although the proposed Project is limited to the provision of technical assistance and is 
not expected to result in any direct negative environmental or social impacts, the project 
classified is as a Category B investment, triggering OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental 
Assessment) due to the potential impacts of follow-on mineral investment projects. 
Downstream impacts will be addressed through preparation of a Strategic Environment 
and Social Assessment (SESA) during early implementation, including an action plan for 
strengthening environmental and social management in concert with sector promotion. 
The TOR for the SESA will be disclosed before Appraisal.   
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to strengthen Malawi's capacity to address environmental and 
social impacts of mining through improving the policy/regulatory framework and 
enhancement of institutional and human resource capacity to implement the policies and 
regulations. Nevertheless it would help to create a more favorable enabling environment 
for the expansion of large-scale mining as well as artisanal and small-scale mining 
(ASM) in Malawi, therefore leading to activities that may engender a range of social and 
environmental impacts that are well-studied and understood at the global level. The exact 
location, timing and technical features of follow-on mineral investments by mining 
companies are not known at this time, but the risks posed by such activities could 
include:  
 
(i) 
pollution and sedimentation of waterways, potentially including the Shire River 
and Lake Malawi;  
 
(ii) 
loss or degradation of forests and other natural habitats, potentially including 
protected areas and other sites of high conservation value;  
 
(iii) 
land tenure conflicts;  
 
(iv) 
loss of livelihoods and involuntary resettlement to make way for mining facilities;  
 
(v) 
in- migration and mining "boom towns" that strain local public services; and  
 
(vi) 
the spread of HIV-AIDS and other communicable diseases.  
 
The project will draw on the extensive body of international experience and best 
practice to identify ways to manage and mitigate such downstream risks, so that they can 
be incorporated in the national environmental and social management frameworks. These 
potentially include:  
 
(i) 
providing benchmarks and tools for evaluating specific areas of high 
environmental sensitivity (including protected areas, other natural habitat and 
biodiversity areas, culturally sensitive areas, and areas prone to natural hazards) where 
mining concessions and permits are not allowed, or where only certain low-impact 
mining techniques can be used;  
 
(ii) 
establishing and enforcing specific environmental standards for different types of 
mineral extraction and processing;  
 
(iii) 
environmental performance bonds and other legal tools to promote good practices 
by mining firms;  
 
(iv) 
promoting investment in conservation offsets to compensate for mining-related 
damage to natural habitats, through helping to improve the management of particular 
protected areas or payment into a dedicated conservation fund (such as the proposed 
National Forests Fund);  
 
(v) 
clarifying the "rules of the game" for mining companies to obtain access to rural 
lands under customary use and other tenure regimes, in terms of negotiating procedures, 
decision authority, minimum required payments to the community, recommended or 
allowable types of social investments, etc.;  
 
(vi) 
criteria and procedures for physical resettlement (when required), livelihoods 
restoration, and land tenure regularization;  
Page  6
(vii) 
providing guidance on methods of influx-management by the mining companies 
and local authorities, including identifying means by which potential conflicts can be 
identified and resolved.  
 
(viii)  strengthening the system of public health monitoring, preventive measures to 
control the spread of HIV-AIDS and other diseases, and clinical treatment in mining 
settlements and adjacent communities; and  
 
(ix) 
improved registration, licensing, regulation, and monitoring of ASM.  
 
Key to the management of potential downstream impacts will be appropriate sequencing 
of project activities, such that the identification of risks and establishment of mitigation 
systems (as described below) do not lag behind the promotion of additional investments 
in the sector. This sequencing will be laid out very clearly in the environmental and social 
action plan to be developed under the SESA, and will be closely monitored by the Bank 
team during implementation. The project will include the legal remedy of suspension if 
the Government does not apply standards and measures consistent with international 
good practice to ensure the environmentally and socially sustainable use of any 
information [data] produced under the Project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
number activities which would have involved additional environmental and/or social 
impacts were considered, but not included in the project design, including pilot on-the-
ground investments (e.g. in lower impact ASM systems), civil works with significant 
physical impact, and identification and preparation (e.g. feasibility studies) for specific 
mining or mining-related infrastructure investments. The current design was selected as 
the best alternative to avoid and minimize adverse impacts in the near and long term.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As no direct adverse environmental or social impacts will result from this project's 
interventions, the project will not develop an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). 
Given the potential for the project to facilitate downstream investments which would 
involve impacts, however, a form of environmental assessment is still needed, and for 
such sector reforms the appropriate instrument is a Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment (SESA). SESA is a consultative and iterative process, which itself provides 
considerable opportunity for capacity building, and is best completed as part of project 
implementation. In 2009, a rapid strategic environmental analysis was carried out as part 
of the preparation of the Mineral Sector Review . During preparation of the project, the 
Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Environment (MNREE) prepared 
comprehensive Terms of Reference for the SESA, satisfactory to IDA, which was 
disclosed in country and via the Bank#s InfoShop prior to Appraisal.  
 
The primary objective of the SESA is to identify the priority actions that Government 
can take to foster the environmentally sustainable and socially equitable development of 
Malawi#s mining sector. The specific objectives are to:  
Page  7
a. 
Diagnose the key environmental and social problems and opportunities associated 
with the anticipated growth of Malawi's mining sector.  
 
b.
Identify the policy, legal, regulatory, and institutional adjustments and capacity-
building actions needed to minimize the adverse environmental and social impacts of 
mining operations and associated infrastructure development, while enhancing the 
positive impacts.  
 
c. 
Propose specific measures that Government can implement in the near future to 
improve the environmental and social sustainability of mining in Malawi, particularly 
through the MGGS Project.  
 
The SESA will consider both large-scale investments and ASM, ancillary infrastructure 
linked to mining developments, the environmental implications of broad sector 
development policies, as well as the requirements for policies specifically addressing 
environmental and social sustainability, and the capacity development needed for 
effective implementation of those policies. The SESA will be prepared during the first 
year of project implementation, while the remaining years of the project would be 
devoted to implementation of its main recommendations. The timeframe for completion 
of the SESA, including development and adoption of the action plan, will be 12 months.  
 
MNREE already has guidelines for EIA and environmental management specifically in 
the mining sector, but implementation capacity for general environmental management is 
weak in the country, and mining faces the additional challenge of being a relatively 
under-developed sector. The only large mining operation to date in Malawi is owned and 
operated by an Australian company subject to considerable international scrutiny and 
used to following international environmental management standards. Broader 
development of the sector will bring the possibility of investments by less experienced or 
proactive companies, increasing the oversight burden on government. Given the relative 
inexperience in major mining investments, national capacity to conduct studies is weak, 
and the project will need to engage international consultants to assist in the preparation of 
the SESA, as well as detailed technical exchange with the Bank team during 
implementation.  
 
The SESA will assess the needs for strengthening the capacity, financial, technical, and 
human resources-of relevant Malawian agencies (at the national and local level) 
including the Environmental Affairs Department and Department of Mines within 
MNREE. This assessment should ideally also cover the capacity of non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs)including civil society organizations (CSOs) and local community 
groups--that are constructively engaged with the mining sector as local service providers, 
facilitators, stakeholder representatives, or watchdogs. Some capacity-building activities 
are expected to be initiated in parallel with the development of the SESA, including (i) 
development of a set of environmental standards specific to mineral exploration, mining 
and minerals processing which will be used to guide operations planning and compliance 
monitoring, (ii) building capacity for monitoring and inspecting environmental 
compliance of exploration and mining operations and (iii) providing equipment needed 
for sampling and laboratory testing. The SESA will evaluate the merit and modalities for 
other potential activities mentioned in the Mineral Sector Review, including (i) 
Page  8
development of a resettlement policy and guidelines for mining-impacted communities, 
including improved consultation procedures, (ii) creation of an environmental and social 
management database, and improving public access to data, (iii) creation of grievance 
and dispute resolution mechanisms in mining-impacted areas, (iv) arrangements for 
engagement of citizens and communities in monitoring of mining and ancillary 
operations, (v) systems for improving funding of environmental inspection and 
compliance monitoring, and (vi) strengthening local capacity for planning and absorption 
of mining revenues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As the project is national in scope, it will involve a broad range of stakeholders, including 
several government agencies, NGOs and private sector organizations linked to current 
and potential mining activities. From an environmental and social perspective, key 
stakeholders include local communities in area currently or potentially impacted by 
mining, local and downstream natural resource users, Forestry Department, Department 
of Parks & Wildlife, and NGOs representing impacted social groups and environmental 
concerns.  
 
A
public consultation event was conducted on 20th January 2011, which involved a 
detailed presentation and discussion on the content of the SESA TOR with key 
government, private sector and NGO representatives. Participants recommended that the 
Terms of Reference should include documentation of regional best practices and case 
studies, assessment and strengthening the role of the civil society and cover all key areas 
and minerals for baseline information. A description of the consultation event was 
annexed to the SESA TOR and disclosed (made publicly available through MNREE) and 
via the Bank's Infoshop. In addition, the disclosure notice published via newspapers in 
Malawi provides contact details where further comments on the SESA TOR can be sent 
up until the start of the procurement process (beyond which, stakeholder feedback will be 
provided through the SESA consultation processes themselves, including:  
 
a. Stakeholder analysis to identify and describe all key stakeholder groups that have an 
environmental or social interest in the development of the mining sector, and provide a 
mapping of interests. It should identify vulnerable stakeholders such as women, youth, 
and the poor whose voices are sometimes not heard in the policy process, and indicate 
how SESA preparation will engage them in a manner that is culturally and politically 
appropriate.  
 
b.
Stakeholder input to SESA to ensure that the full range of interested stakeholders 
have ample opportunity to provide information and opinions to the SESA process, 
including the identification of priority environmental and social problems, the range of 
possible solutions, and the specific measures recommended for implementation under the 
project.  
 
c. Documentation of stakeholder consultations, including an annex which should specify 
(i) which stakeholder organizations or informal groups were consulted during which parts 
of the SESA process; (ii) the forms of consultation and discussion carried out (meetings, 
interviews, surveys, e-mails, web page comments, etc.), when and where; and (iii) the 
main concerns and recommendations of the different stakeholder groups.   
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bryan Christopher Land 
02/08/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Stephen Ling 
02/08/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
02/08/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
02/08/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/08/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
02/14/2011 
Comments:   
