Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/28/2011 
Report No.:  61651
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Maldives 
Project ID:  P104743 
Project Name:  Pension and Social Protection Administration 
Task Team Leader:  Oleksiy A. Sluchynskyy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 4, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASSP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Public administration- Other social services (51%);Central government 
administration (49%) 
Theme:  Social risk mitigation (51%);Administrative and civil service reform (49%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective would be to support the implementation of the 
National Pension Act, to strengthen institutional capacity of key involved agencies: 
Maldives Pensions Administration Office (MPAO), Ministry of Health and Family 
(MOHF), Capital Market Development Authority (CMDA) and Ministry of Finance and 
Treasury (MOFT), and to develop the processes and platforms required for the delivery 
of social protection programs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Additional Financing would provide additional support to the original 
project Components A and B and would support three additional project components (C, 
D
and E of which C is originally sub-component A3), as follows:  
 
Component A. 
Technical Assistance and Capacity Building for implementation of 
the new pension program  
 
Component B. 
Public Awareness Campaign  
 
Component C. 
Implementation of the Public Accounting System  
Page  2
Component D. 
Systems of Administration of Health Insurance, Disability, and 
Targeted Assistance  
 
Component E. 
Redemption of Recognition Bonds  
 
Component A: Technical Assistance and Capacity building for implementation of the 
new pension program. This component is renamed (from Strengthening Capacity) to 
denote more precisely the nature of capacity building and the agencies being 
strengthened.  The experience over the first two years of the project has revealed the need 
for additional technical assistance in several areas that would further contribute to the 
original development objectives. The proposed AF would support additional technical 
assistance activities in two areas.  
 
(i) 
Strengthening the Capital Market Development Authority (CMDA), the entity 
entrusted with developing and implementing regulations for pension fund investment and 
reporting.  This will range from having a legal assistance in drafting rules and regulations 
pertaining to supervision of the pension sector to formulating a strategy for developing 
new and longer term instruments in the country that would better match objectives of 
diversification and the time horizon of pension fund investments.  
 
(ii) 
Defining and implementing the process of annuitization of the pension balances 
of the MPAO. The objective would be to explore the practical feasibility (especially in 
terms of cost and administrative complexity) of contracting out the payout period for the 
Maldives Retirement Pension Scheme (MRPS) to an insurer and provide support to 
building the regulatory framework for licensing and supervision of annuity provisions.  
Assistance would also be required to support development of options of disability 
insurance under the MRPS.  
 
Component B: Public Awareness Campaign.  Additional funds would be provided to 
supplement the existing funding for the component.  
 
Component C: Public Accounting System. The proposal is to convert the original sub-
component of Component A to this separate component.  This is considered useful due to 
the fact that it is administered exclusively by the MOFT and because it requires renewed 
focus given lagging performance during the first two years of the project.  No additional 
financing is allocated under this component.  
 
Component D: Administration of Health Insurance, Disability, and Targeted Assistance. 
This would be a new component of the project and would address three areas that have 
taken on importance in the last few years and involve system design, capacity building 
and IT infrastructure.  
 
(i) 
An important development during the last two years is the Government's initiative 
to develop a targeting system that could be used by various government-sponsored 
programs (e.g., cash transfers to the poor) to focus limited resources on the poor.  This 
sub-component of the Project would support the initial piloting of a new targeting method 
and help develop database management specifications, set-up for data collection, standard 
operation procedures, manuals, training plans for the scale up of the program, associated 
outreach campaign and appeals, etc. It would also include training and capacity building 
as well as program evaluation.  
Page  3
(ii) 
Additional Technical Assistance (TA) would be provided in the area of disability 
coding and benefit administration. This includes disability coding, standard operating 
procedures, design of registry of disability, administration of cash benefits, etc. The 
output would support the implementation of the new Disability Bill.  
 
(iii) 
 The development of systems to deliver health insurance.  This program did not 
exist during the preparation of the project and during the first 18 months only covered 
public sector employees. Recently, the Government has requested support for the 
development of more efficient systems to deliver health insurance.  The proposed support 
would facilitate claims processing, transaction monitoring, fraud control and general 
information systems along with capacity building at the Ministry of Health and Family 
(MOHF).  It would also finance surveys of health insurance beneficiaries.  One advantage 
of doing this in the context of the project would be to harmonize MIS across the pension, 
social assistance and health insurance sectors and allow for a more holistic view of how 
social spending affects the population.  This should also help minimize duplication of 
costs.  
 
Component E: Redemption of Recognition Bonds.  This component would finance the 
payment of transfers into individual retirement savings accounts in order to redeem the 
'recognition bonds' that are to be paid to retiring cohorts under the new pension scheme 
during a two and a half year project period (FY11-FY14).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Male, Maldives.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n.a.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n.a.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n.a.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  5
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
It does not.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert J. Palacios 
04/28/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mansoora Rashid 
04/28/2011 
Comments:  Cleared 
