Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/25/2011 
Report No.:  AC6204
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mali 
Project ID:  P116602 
Project Name:  Urban Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Zie Ibrahima Coulibaly 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 22, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (20%);Water supply (20%);Sewerage (20%);Sanitation 
(20%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (33%);Municipal governance and 
institution building (33%);Decentralization (17%);Municipal finance (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to support strengthened institutional performance of 
targeted urban local governments in key areas related to service delivery   
 
3. Project Description 
Four project components are proposed:  
 
Component 1: Performance-Based and Capacity Building Grants for Secondary Cities 
(US$28.0 million - 100% IDA)  
 
This component, which comprises two sub-components, will be implemented 
interdependently with the capacity building support elements under component 3 and is 
intended to operationalize an Urban Grant for the four secondary cities of Kayes, Sikasso, 
Ségou and Mopti.  
 
Sub-component 1-A: Performance-based investment grant (US$27.0 million - 100% 
IDA). The sub-component finances annual performance-based grants to the four ULGs 
Page  2
for infrastructure-related expenditures spread over a period of four years, after a one-year 
start-up period. Potential investments, decided by the ULG councils in consultation with 
their communities, will be in accordance with the ULGs' functional responsibilities as 
defined in law, circumscribed by a negative list of ineligible investments. The size of the 
allocation for each city is determined by the total four-year funding envelope, 
representing an annual per capita allocation of about US$11.0. The annual allocation 
comprises two parts. The core allocation, representing 50 percent of the annual 
entitlement, will be subject only to the ULG meeting a set of Mandatory Minimum 
Criteria (MMCs) in the areas of: (a) planning and budgeting, (b) administration and 
municipal finances,(c) project implementation and service provision, (d) accounting and 
audits, and (e) participation, transparency and accountability. Failure to meet any of the 
criteria will disqualify the ULG from receiving any part of the grant for the forthcoming 
year. The second part of the annual allocation (the remaining 50 percent of the grant), 
will comprise the performance dimension of the grant and will be subject to the 
Performance Assessment (PA) process, which will be undertaken annually. The 
performance criteria will comprise a set of more comprehensive performance 
requirements in the same areas of management as the MMCs.  
 
Sub-component 1-B: Capacity support grant: The sub-component will provide a 
capacity support grant of up to $50,000 per annum per ULG to assist them in enhancing 
their performance.  
 
Component 2: Priority Infrastructure Investment, Performance-Based Institutional 
Restructuring and Capacity Support Grants for Bamako (US$31.0 million - 100% IDA)  
 
This component is intended to finance urgently needed investments in flood 
management works in the Bamako District together with related support for the 
maintenance of existing assets through technical capacity assistance, as well as to 
providing the incentives required to establish a new metropolitan authority that is 
institutionally more effective for addressing the needs of the Bamako urban area.  
 
Sub-component 2-A:  Priority infrastructure investments (US$19.0 million - 100% IDA) 
provides grants for the funding of urgently required, high priority flood management 
works in the District of Bamako. The works would take the form of drainage and related 
road rehabilitation and would be built in three phases, with release of funds for each 
phase subject to Bamako District achieving agreed operational and maintenance targets.  
 
Sub-component 2-B: Performance-based institutional restructuring grant (US$10.0 
million - 100% IDA) provides a performance grant of US$10.0 million to be allocated 
according to progress in the design and implementation of an institutional restructuring 
plan for the Bamako metropolitan area. The funds under the grant would be entirely 
discretionary, to be managed and used by the newly created authority against its priority 
investments. The application of funds under this component would be for the same uses 
deemed eligible expenditures under component 1, and their release would be subject to a 
limited number of performance criteria to be agreed at the time the authority is formally 
constituted, and which would be the responsibility of the new authority.  
Page  3
Sub-component 2-C: Capacity support grant (US$2.0 million - 100% IDA) comprises 
two parts. One part (US$1.0 million) will provide support to the newly established 
Bamako Metropolitan Authority to undertake the requisite actions necessary to satisfy the 
performance criteria that will be formulated at the time the Authority formally becomes 
operational. The other part of these funds (US$1.0 million) will be available in amounts 
of up to $200,000 per annum to the Bamako District (in its current configuration) to assist 
it in supervising the implementation of the drainage works and satisfying related O&M 
obligations.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Capacity Strengthening (US$9.0 million - 100% IDA)  
 
This component, operating interdependently with components 1 and 2, finances capacity 
building support to strengthen the ULGs to develop sound strategic management, 
administrative, financial and technical management systems and capabilities to 
effectively deliver local services.  
 
Sub-component 3-A: Capacity building for project municipalities (US$3.0 million - 
100% IDA) will finance capacity building activities for the four targeted secondary cities 
and Bamako to enable them to more effectively carry out their mandate as follows, 
including through: (i) access to demand-driven assistance to be provided by an Urban 
Capacity Building Mobile Team (UMCBT) comprising expertise covering the five 
themes addressed in the annual performance assessments; (ii) establishment of a 
curriculum of training courses for elected officials and key municipal staff to be offered 
by the Training Institute under the Ministry of Local Government (CFCT); (iii) targeted 
support to all five ULGs for creation of asset registries, asset condition analyses, 
establishment of an asset data management system; (iv) preparation of asset management 
plans by each ULG, and (v) peer-to-peer learning and exchanges.  
 
Sub-component 3-B: Support to central government agencies (US$3.0 million - 100% 
IDA) supports: (i) central and deconcentrated departments to carry out their mandate of 
support to LGs, (ii) recruitment of an independent performance assessment team, and 
setting up and operating the annual performance evaluation system of the four secondary 
ULGs, (iii) establishment and use of an urban local government performance database, 
and (iv) development of tools and processes for enhancing and integrating the three-year 
capital investment plans of the ULGs with their strategic development plans.  
 
Sub-component 3-C: Support for selected studies (US$3.0 million - 100% IDA) 
supports the following studies: (i) complementary support to the restructuring of Bamako, 
(ii) preparation of a development strategy for the Bamako metropolitan area, (iii) an 
assessment of alternative revenue generation options for urban local governments, (iv) 
annual external financial audits of the five ULGs, (v) mid-term and end of project (EOP) 
reviews of: (a) the performance of the mobile teams, (b) audits of the PA system, (c) the 
effectiveness and quality of the use of the funds under the capital grant, and (d) the 
effectiveness of the consultative and accountability performance requirements under the 
project, and (vi) an assessment of the fiscal transfer system to LG as experienced under 
Page  4
the project, and the options for developing a standard system to be mainstreamed to all 
ULGS. This analysis will also be coordinated with the Bank-financed Governance and 
Budget Decentralization Technical Assistance Project, which includes studies on the 
financial framework for LGs and resource allocation criteria.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2.0 million - 100% 
IDA)  
 
The component will finance management of the project and reporting on overall project 
progress, including operating expenses of the PCU, project evaluations, citizen score card 
surveys, project financial and technical audits, including two independent audits of the 
PA process, and IEC activities in support of the project objective.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Four secondary cities across the country are eligible to receive the performance-based 
grants for infrastructure-related expenditures spread over a period of four years. Subject 
to the restructuring of Bamako being in place, Bamako will be eligible to receive grants 
under sub-component 2-B. Potential investments, decided by the ULG councils in 
consultation with their communities, will be in accordance with the ULGs' functional 
responsibilities as defined in law, circumscribed by a negative list of ineligible 
investments. The size of the allocation for each city is determined by the total funding 
envelope for project component 1, apportioned across the ULGs according to an agreed 
allocation formula (population size), and component 2-B for Bamako. Therefore, the 
specific geographical locations of sub-projects are not known in advance, meaning that 
the specific use of the grant funds is not known a priori. Specific arrangements are put in 
place for the District of Bamako, the capital, where the investments (under component 2-
A) are known in advance, consisting in priority roads and drainage rehabilitation works in 
three communes out of six within the District area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN) 
Mr Taoufiq Bennouna (AFTEN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Under component 1 the size of the grant received by each secondary city will be limited 
to about US$2 million per year. Sub-component 2-B for Bamako will entail transfers of 
about US$5 million per year, following the restructuring of the Bamako Metropolitan 
Authority. The project will entail block grant transfers to local governments subject to 
them achieving agreed performance criteria in key areas of city management, including: 
(a) planning and budgeting,(b) administration and municipal finances, (c) project 
implementation and service provision, (d) accounting and audits, and (e) participation, 
transparency and accountability. The grant funds will be provided as discretionary funds 
that can be used by local governments for infrastructure and services that they have a 
mandate to deliver (with a simple negative list). These could be small scale civil works, 
whose potential impacts have been found to be minor by the ESMF confirming their 
classification as category B projects. Although small pieces of land may be required 
during their implementation, those small scale civil works will not induce population 
resettlement as of the RPF report. The overall impact of this component is positive since 
it will bring improvement in sanitation conditions, healthcare, safe water supplying, 
employments and likely quality of life.  
 
In regard to project component 2-A, the environmental and social safeguards issues are 
associated with the roads and drainage system rehabilitation works. These works could 
result in involuntary resettlement of various subgroups (legal owners, informal occupants, 
street-salesmen, etc.) and temporary increase of noise, pollution and traffic disturbance. 
The ESIA draft report confirms this.  
 
Based on the findings of as well the ESMF and RPF for the entire project as the ESIA 
draft report available for the Bamako roads and drainage investments the overall project 
shows no large scale or irreversible impacts.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No major long term impacts are foreseen, but drainage network are likely to become a 
source of sanitation concerns if appropriate maintenance activities are not planned and 
carried out accordingly by the municipalities on a systematic way. The project design 
integrates measures for building a culture of maintenance in project municipalities and 
appropriate recommendations will be included in the specific ESIAs to mitigate any 
potential impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
All project design is based on assessment of alternative solutions for avoiding or 
minimizing project activities adverse impacts. Hence, the definitive solutions to result 
from studies undertaken for sub-projects design are confirmed based on their potential of 
enhancing project positive impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an ESMF and a RPF to address any potential adverse effects 
of the project interventions under project component 1-A (Performance-Based 
Investment Grants for Secondary Cities), component 2-A (Phased funding of roads and 
drainage rehabilitation for the District of Bamako), and component 2-B (Performance-
based institutional restructuring grant), including adverse environmental effects, 
resettlement. The ESMF and RPF have been completed and disclosed in country and in 
the Bank's Infoshop.  
 
A
review of the institutional capacities of the implementing institutions revealed that 
there is adequate institutional and regulatory framework for environmental management 
at national level. However, institutional capacities remain weak for Safeguard Policies 
implementation and supervision. The national legal framework for environmental 
management in Mali spells out the roles and responsibilities of different government 
ministries, departments and agencies as well as other stakeholders. Substantial progress 
in planning and implementation of safeguard measures has also been made over the years 
through a number of Bank-funded operations. Notwithstanding this progress, significant 
institutional and technical capacity for environmental management still needs to be 
strengthened at all levels. For this project, the PCU will be responsible for the 
implementation of the ESMF and RPF. The PCU will empower the Infrastructure 
Specialist who has already a environment background to be responsible for following up 
safeguards issues as and when they arise during project implementation. Consultants will 
be hired to prepare Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Environmental and Social 
Management Plans (ESMPs) or Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) 
as and when necessary.  
 
Concrete measures are planned in the ESMP for (i) mitigating the moderate impacts 
during the implementation phase and preventing indirect impacts of the exploitation of 
Page  7
infrastructure, (ii) capacity building of the main concerned institutions (PCU, MEA, local 
governments) in environmental aspects implementation,  monitoring and reporting, (iii) 
screening subprojects and preparing specific ESIAs and/or RAPs prior to their 
implementation.  The estimated cost of the ESMP, about US$1,650,000, will be budgeted 
in the overall project cost as part of the annual allocations and earmarked accordingly.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for processing the ESMF and RPF will be MEA (DNACPN, 
AEDD) and MLAFU who will work in collaboration with municipalities and MATCL 
(CPS/EEUDE). The RPF and ESMF have been developed through a consultative process 
with stakeholders including Chefs de Quartiers, representative of potential affected 
groups and local NGOs were consulted. Summary information was provided to 
stakeholder in local languages, and recommendations raised during these consultations 
were incorporated into the design of the Project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/19/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/26/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/25/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/19/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/26/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/25/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  8
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
These report were disclosed in local newspaper on April 11, 2011 and is expected to be 
published on April 26, 2011 to include last comments made by Social Specialist.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Zie Ibrahima Coulibaly 
04/25/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Taoufiq Bennouna 
04/25/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
04/25/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Maman-Sani Issa 
04/25/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
04/25/2011 
Comments:   
