Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/24/2011 
Report No.:  AC5711
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mali 
Project ID:  P112821 
Project Name:  ML- Governance and Budget Decentralization Technical Assistance 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Clara Ana Coutinho De Sousa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 25, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 28, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTP3 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (30%);Public administration- Education 
(25%);Public administration- Health (20%);Central government administration 
(15%);General public administration sector (10%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(30%);Decentralization (30%);Tax policy and administration (20%);Other 
accountability/anti-corruption (10%);Other public sector governance (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project is in line with the Bank CAS objective of strengthening public sector 
performance for service delivery. Specifically, the project contributes to the CAS 
objectives of strengthening public financial management, supporting effective 
decentralization and building local administrative capacity. The development objective of 
the Governance and Budget Decentralization TA Project (TA) is to strengthen capacity 
for public financial management at decentralized level for improved budgetary decision-
making and enhanced transparency and oversight.   
 
3. Project Description 
The TA would consist of four components: (1) strengthening capacity for PFM at 
decentralized level; (2) piloting new PFM tools in the basic education and health sectors; 
Page  2
(3) strengthening oversight and community participation; and (4) project implementation 
and coordination.  
 
Component 1- Strengthening capacity for PFM at decentralized level, has four sub-
components: (1) resource mobilization and allocation criteria; (2) budget preparation and 
monitoring; (3) procurement; and (4) accounting and internal controls.  
 
Component 2 - Piloting new PFM tools in the basic education and health sectors is 
organized in two sub-components: (1) education pilot; and (2) health pilot.  
 
Component 3 - External Oversight and Community Participation supports the building 
capacity for fiduciary oversight and participation. It has two sub-components: (1) external 
audit; and (2) participation.  
 
Component 4 covers activities related with project implementation and coordination.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project focus on capacity building activities that would be undertaken in Bamako and 
in selected CT of four (4) regions: Koulikoro, Sikasso, Segou and Kayes. No construction 
is involved. The project would finance the development of new procedures, 
dissemination of key procedures and guidelines and training. The project would also 
provide IT equipment and software.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not Applicable   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not Applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not Applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not Applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  4
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not Applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Clara Ana Coutinho De Sousa 
12/27/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jan Walliser 
03/07/2011 
Comments:   
