Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6054 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/08/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mali 
Project ID: P124054 
Project Name: ML-Strengthening Reproductive Health 
Task Team Leader: Aissatou Diack 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: November 22, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Population and reproductive health (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve access to and use of quality reproductive health 
services by women 15 to 49 years old, in selected regions of Mali. Geographical areas will be in 
priority urban, peri-urban areas and rural regions with the worst reproductive health indicators. 
Key project results are in line with the World Bank Reproductive Health Action Plan and IDA 16 
indicators. The project aims at achieving the following results:  
 
#
Increased modern contraceptive use among women aged 15 to 49 years;  
 
#
Increased number of pregnant women receiving antenatal care during a visit to a health care 
provider;  
 
#
Increased percentage of pregnant women attending at least 3 antenatal care (ANC) visits;  
 
#
Increased percentage of births (deliveries) attended by skilled health personnel;  
 
#
Increased number of pregnant women with complications during delivery who are referred 
for emergency treatment, including cesarean section;  
 
#
Increased number of post partum women using family planning services;  
 
#
Increased number of children under one year of age who are fully immunized.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The objective would be reached through the following high impact reproductive health 
interventions: (i) improved access to reproductive health services through community-based 
distribution, an effective referral system from rural and peri-urban areas to district and regional 
hospitals, promotion of deliveries by skilled health personnel and referral of obstetrical 
emergencies, and increased access to community schemes that eliminate financial barriers to 
obstetric care; (ii) improved quality of family planning, obstetrical and neonatal services 
measured by better availability of skilled health personnel, equipment, drugs and commodities in 
health facilities; and (iii) increased demand for modern family planning methods through 
advocacy and behavior change interventions. The project would have three components as 
follows.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Supply and Quality of Reproductive Health Service (US$ 14.0 
million). This component will help strengthen the capacity of the MOH in areas that are 
experiencing bottlenecks. The first sub-component will scale up RBF mechanism in the Region 
of Koulikoro where a pilot has. A total population of about 250,000 women 15 to 49 years old 
people will be covered in a phased manner with a package of reproductive health services that 
include modern family planning, prenatal care (with nutrition and anemia control), safe delivery 
and postnatal care.  
 
The second sub-component will intensify family planning activities by reinforcing their 
decentralization at four levels: referral health centers (CSREF), community health centers 
(CSCOM), private providers, and home-and community-based services. It will help build 
capacity of service providers (through training and supervision), strengthen the supply chain for 
contraceptives and related products, build capacity for drug management, and extend outreach 
family planning services provided by NGOs.  
 
The third sub-component will build the capacity for the delivery of obstetric care services by 
community health centers, referral health centers, private health clinics, and NGOs. It will 
support training of midwives, nurses and community health workers and finance equipment, 
drugs, and supplies for delivery rooms, including delivery kits.  
 
Component 2. Behavior Change and Demand for Reproductive Health Services (US$ 10.0 
million). This component will reinforce communication strategies for RH behavior change at the 
local level. Based on a constraint assessment aimed at identifying the roadblocks to use of family 
planning, social marketing strategies will be implemented by experienced NGOs to promote the 
use of contraceptives and RH commodities. Target groups will be traditional, political and 
religious leaders, husbands and mothers in law who typically oppose family planning. In 
addition, support will be provided to champions that are currently promoting RH rights of 
women. The component will also promote and strengthen innovative mechanisms to improve the 
financial accessibility of RH services. Vouchers will be distributed to pregnant women and 
newborns to access selected services, using a scheme that will be defined during project 
preparation. Finally, this component will help improve education and nutrition for girls, through 
contracting with the Ministry of Education (MOE) as an implementer.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and Policy Dialogue 
(US$ 6.0 million). This component will finance project management, studies and coordination 
Page  3
between the MOH, the Ministry of Finance's Directorate of Population, civil society and 
partners. The existing National Coalition for Population Control will be strengthened to promote 
a
policy environment conducive to family planning. Project management will be the 
responsibility of the MOH. The MOH will appoint a Project Coordinator reporting to the 
Secretary General and will contract a Fiduciary Agency that will provide procurement and 
financial management services. It will also develop contracting arrangements with NGOs, local 
governments and community health organizations as implementers. Sufficient resources will be 
allocated to the regular measurement of indicators described in the project results framework. 
Health facility assessments and a Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) will be financed 
through this component.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National project   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
MOH's capacity has been built through several years of partnership with Bank, UNDP and the 
Nordic Fund. It will be assessed in context of review of safeguard policies as indicated in the 
table below. While the MOH has dedicated a team to coordinate the implementation of this plan, 
its activities are currently funded by The Nordic Development Fund, UNDP and IDA.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will involve the handling and disposal of medical and health waste such as 
syringes and material used for delivery of pregnant women. To address the potential negative 
environmental impacts associated with this, the Ministry of Health will update the Medical 
Waste Management Plan that was designed, implemented and regularly reviewed by the Bank 
for the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control project (MAP).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/10/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The key stakeholders are Ministry of Health, NGOs, private clinics, regional and district 
health facilities, local government councils and community health workers/associations. 
Consultation will be conducted from March to April 2011 using several methodologies, such 
as focus group discussions, public hearings, stakeholder workshops, observations in health 
facilities and meetings with managers of implementing agencies.  Disclosure of safeguards 
and documents will be ensured through posting websites of the Ministry of Health. Key 
results and related education messages will also be published in local papers and local radios. 
The MWMP will be disclosed in-country and at the Info-shop prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Aissatou Diack 
02/09/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/28/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduard R. Bos 
02/08/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
