Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/24/2011 
Report No.:  60603
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P090075 
Original Project Name: Second Transport 
Sector Project 
Country:  Mali 
Project ID:  P121693 
Project Name:  Mali - Second Transport Sector Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Fabio Galli 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (90%);Other urban development (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
23.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.00
4.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The updated Appraisal Stage Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (ISDS) is in support of a 
proposed Additional Financing (AF) to the Mali Second Transport Sector II (MTSP-II).  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the MTSP-II, which remains the same for 
the proposed AF, is to provide better access and better transport services to the 
Recipient's rural and urban communities through improvement of essential rural 
infrastructure and important Bamako transport infrastructure. Its specific objectives by 
component are: (i) improve rural access in order to promote growth-supporting rural and 
agro-industrial business activities in cotton growing areas, in particular by financing 
maintenance and improvement of rural roads and rehabilitation of wharves along the 
Niger River; (ii) improve key urban transport infrastructure in Bamako, in particular 
facilitate minibus traffic by creating a bus-only lane on Bamako's Boulevard du Peuple 
(People's Boulevard) and reconstructing a dedicated circular road in downtown Bamako 
(Anneau SOTRAMA); and (iii) strengthen the capacity of ministries and entities involved 
Page  2
in the sector, in terms of environmental and social management, project implementation, 
evaluation, and monitoring.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed AF is expected to cover an unanticipated financing gap that has arisen 
during the implementation of the MTSP-II and to scale up the implementation of the 
already successfully implemented rural road periodic maintenance/spot improvement 
sub-components.  
 
Proposed AF activities:  
 
The proposed AF is expected to fund the following activities.  
 
-
Rehabilitation of the Bandiagara - Douentza rural road section (estimated cost about 
US$19 million inclusive of taxes): The rehabilitation of the Bandiagara - Douentza rural 
road was already included under the MTSP-II but so far could not be funded due to 
higher than expected bid prices. Since the Bandiagara - Douentza road works were 
already included in the project; all of the relevant studies have already been completed 
and have been recently updated.  
 
-
Periodic maintenance of about 300 km of rural roads (estimated cost about US$5 
million inclusive of taxes): The MTSP-II has already funded the maintenance of about 
1,000 km of rural roads primarily in cotton growing areas. The proposed AF is expected 
to fund the periodic maintenance of up to an additional 300 km of rural roads. The rural 
roads to be included in the proposed AF will be selected using the same social and 
economic criteria that were used for the MTSP-II.  
 
-
Provision of community driven social services (estimated cost about US$1 million 
inclusive of taxes): The implementation of this sub-component was put on hold to 
conserve funding for the urban transport infrastructure component. The implementation 
of this sub-component has recently re-started, and its overall estimated cost is about 
US$4 million of which US$3 million will be funded under the MTSP-II while the balance 
(US$1 million) is expected to be funded under the proposed AF.  
 
-
Technical Assistance (TA), consultant services and supervision of road works 
(estimated cost about US$2 million inclusive of taxes): Estimated cost of all the 
supporting consultant services activities is about US$2 million to be funded under the 
proposed AF.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed AF is expected to fund the following road rehabilitation and maintenance 
works throughout Mali: (a) rehabilitation of Bandiagara - Douentza road; (b) periodic 
maintenance of about 300 km of existing rural roads; and (c) community driven social 
services. As was the case for the MTSP-II, all of the planned road works to be funded 
under the proposed AF will be on existing, low traffic unpaved rural roads in low 
population density areas.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The nature of the activities to be funded under the proposed AF is the same as for the 
MTSP-II.  Therefore, the same safeguard arrangements that were developed and used for 
the MTSP-II will be used for the proposed AF activities. More specifically, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared, cleared and 
disclosed in-country, on December 21, 2006, and at the Bank InfoShop, on January 17, 
2007, for the MTSP-II. Works specifics Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMPs) were prepared and disclosed for each rural road rehabilitation and maintenance 
works contract funded under the MTSP-II. The same approach will be followed for the 
proposed AF activities.  
 
In terms of potential significant and/or irreversible long term impacts, none are 
envisaged for the proposed activities to be funded under the proposed AF. That's because 
the planned road rehabilitation and maintenance works are planned on already existing 
unpaved low traffic rural roads going through low population density areas. However, 
during the construction phase, there will be some minor social and environmental impacts 
on soil, water, air quality, flora and fauna in the Project Impact Area (PIA). There may be 
some minor impacts resulting from civil works on the cultural and historical heritage 
along the Bandiagara - Douentza road. A physical cultural resources management plan 
has been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed to mitigate any potential cultural and 
historical heritage impacts along the Bandiagara - Douentza road. Finally, OP/BP 4.36 
(Forestry) was triggered for the MTSP-II due to reforestation along the roads to 
compensate for loss of vegetation as a result of the road rehabilitation works.  
 
Page  4
The MTSP-II was a Category B project, and the activities to be financed under the 
proposed AF are expected to have the same environmental category.  
 
The environmental mitigation actions carried out under the MTSP-II were essentially 
related to: (a) compensatory reforestation and maintaining trees along the rural roads 
rehabilitated; (b) restoring the borrow pits and quarries used for the road rehabilitation 
works; and (c) sensitization campaign towards communities on the importance of 
preserving the environment and maintaining tree cover. The proposed AF will primarily 
focus on: (a) the rehabilitation of the Bandiagara - Douentza road; and (b) the periodic 
maintenance of about 300 km of existing rural roads. The potential environmental and 
social impacts of these activities are expected to be minimal, site-specific and 
manageable, therefore fall in a category B type of project impacts.  
 
The social impact mitigation measures focused on HIV/AIDS sensitization of 
contractor's staff, rural populations living along the rehabilitated existing rural roads and 
transport sector stakeholders. Other social mitigation measures that have been 
implemented focused on contractor safety through the provision of protective gear to 
workers and enforcement of workers safety standards. The proposed AF project will give 
due consideration to this safety aspect in view of the promotion of labor intensive 
construction methods. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared for the 
MTSP-II, and if required for any of the road rehabilitation works that may ultimately be 
selected for funding under the proposed AF, site specific Resettlement Actions Plans 
(RAPs) or Abbreviated RAPs will be prepared and disclosed, consistent with the already 
disclosed RPF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential indirect impacts can be described as below:  
 
-
Increased agriculture production in Project Impact Area due to improved rural road 
conditions.  
 
-
Increased risk of road accidents along maintained rural roads.  
 
-
Increased mobility and access to basic social services due to improved rural road 
conditions.  
 
-
Increased tourism development in the Bandiagara - Douentza area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Taking into account that this is a proposed AF to an existing project, no assessment of 
project alternatives was conducted, as it was done for the original project. Back then, it 
was concluded that without the project, all benefits cited above would be foregone.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower is not only familiar with and has reasonable capacity implementing Bank-
funded projects, but is building up on lessons learned from implementation of several 
generations of transport projects. Based on this long experience of executing transport 
projects, we have reasons to believe that this AF will be implemented smoothly. In 
addition, the ESMF for the MTSP-II formulated standards, methods and procedures 
specifying how to systematically address environmental and social issues.  
 
The procedures and various steps - from subprojects screening, preparing Terms of 
References (TORs) and Environment and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)/ 
(Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and/or RAPs to implementation and 
monitoring of subprojects-specific instruments - have all been followed rigorously, as 
required by the framework approach. The different ESIAs outlined specific 
environmental mitigation measures commensurate to identified impacts and the 
institutional arrangements to implement and monitor those measures.  
 
The RPF will guide for compensation and land acquisition during implementation if 
any.  
 
Moreover, the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) possess an experienced Social and 
Environmental Specialist to oversee the implementation of environmental and social 
impact mitigation measures and ensure that the project is in compliance with national and 
Bank safeguard policies. Furthermore, both AGEROUTE (Agence de Gestion des 
Routes) and AGETIER (Agence d'Ex
écution des Travaux d'Infrastructures et 
d'Equipement Ruraux) will be monitoring the implementation of all agreed social and 
environmental mitigations measures for the proposed AF. Finally, all civil works will be 
contingent on consultation with local communities alongside the road to be rehabilitated / 
maintained.  
 
For the Bandiagara - Douentza road rehabilitation works, mitigation measures to protect 
critical cultural heritage sites in along the road, together with other environmental impact 
mitigation clauses will be included in the bidding documents, implemented by contractors 
and supervised by the supervision consultants/PCU/AGEROUTE. This should ensure 
their full implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The MTSP-II is a multi-sectoral transport sector project involving both the funding of 
civil works on rural and urban transport infrastructure. The proposed AF will only focus 
on the rehabilitation and periodic maintenance of existing rural roads. It will not include 
the funding for the improvement of any of the urban transport infrastructure civil works.  
Therefore, when compared to the MTSP-II, the proposed AF will have a narrower range 
of stakeholders.  
 
Page  6
More specifically, the project stakeholders and beneficiaries for the proposed AF funded 
activities will include the following: (a) rural communities along the rural roads to be 
rehabilitated and maintained and PIA; (b) cotton growers in the Compagnie Malienne de 
Développement des Textiles (CMDT) and Office de la Haute Vallée du Niger (OHVN) 
cotton producing areas; and (c) Government of Mali (GOM)'s national road department.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/24/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/24/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  7
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fabio Galli 
03/17/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
03/17/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Salamata Bal 
03/17/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/17/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
03/17/2011 
Comments:   
