Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2011 
Report No.:  AC6152
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P078383 
Original Project Name: SECOND 
MINING SECTOR CAPACITY 
BUILDING PROJECT 
Country:  Mauritania 
Project ID:  P124859 
Project Name:  Second Additional Financing to the Second Mining Sector Capacity 
Building Project 
Task Team Leader:  Morten Larsen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SEGOM 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme:  Other public sector governance (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.10 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to strengthen the Borrower#s capacity to manage national 
mineral sector activities in an environmentally, socially and economically sustainable 
manner   
 
3. Project Description 
The second additional financing will scale up activities that have been successfully 
implemented during the initial stages of the project: (i) build local and regional capacity 
to benefit from and establish economic linkages with mine operations, (ii) strengthen 
national capacity to regulate and supervise mine operations, and (iii) expand the 
geological knowledge-base. Finally, (iv) a new activity of education and vocational 
training support will be added to help form a new generation of mining specialists.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The bulk of the technical assistance will be provided to the Ministry of Petroleum, 
Energy and Mines, located in Nouakchott. Proposed extension of micro-project activities 
will target communities in areas affected by mine operations in the three regions of 
Inchiri, Dakhlet-Nouadhibou and Tiris-Zemmour. The School of Mines will be 
constructed within the perimeter of the designated university campus in the outskirts of 
Nouakchott. The Technical School will be constructed in or near Akjoujt in Inchiri 
province (250 km from Nouakchott). Exact location will be determined when detailed 
scoping study has been completed. The project will not finance construction but will 
support capacity building of teachers and personnel and curriculum development.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been categorized as "B" to reflect its technical assistance nature. The 
project will not finance any direct investment in exploration, feasibility study or 
development of mineral operations. Consequently, the project has no direct 
environmental impacts with regard to mineral development. On the other hand, the 
project will provide technical support to the formation of a School of Mines (SOM) 
which will be constructed in the outskirts of Nouakchott within the designated university 
campus perimeter and a provincial Technical School branch in Akjoujt, Inchiri Province. 
Issues that may arise from construction and operation of the SOM in Nouakchott have 
been studied in the Environmental Evaluation of the Future Nouakchott Campus which 
was completed in 2004 preparation of the Bank-financed Higher Education Project, the 
ESIA has been updated to address more specifically impacts of the construction of the 
School of Mines.  
 
Page  3
The Technical School branch in Akjoujt, 250 km from Nouakchott, for which the AF 
will also provide technical support; will be assessed, once the exact location is known, by 
means of the Environmental Management Framework - Management Plan and 
Resettlement Policy Framework, which have been prepared for the current additional 
financing.  
 
Minor impacts may also arise from execution of community-based micro projects in 
areas around mine sites. The Environmental Management Framework will be used to 
assess impacts of the micro projects.  
 
There are no land acquisition/involuntary resettlement issues on the Nouakchott 
Campus, as the land is owned by the Government and is free of any tenants and claims.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will not create any environmental or social impacts through mine 
development. Potential impacts from the construction of the School of Mines in 
Nouakchott have been assessed in the updated Environmental Assessment of the campus 
in terms of disturbance during construction at site and in borrow areas. Similar 
considerations will be assessed for the proposed Technical School in Akjoujt once 
detailed design becomes available towards the end of 2011. The Environmental 
Management Framework will guide this assessment. After school opening key issues 
pertain to water usage and waste treatment. No population is located in the immediate 
vicinity. Micro-projects will be screened (through the Environmental Management 
Framework) for direct and indirect long- term impacts, and the feasibility of the proposed 
management plan will determine the micro project's eligibility.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The location of the School of Mines within the designated campus perimeter was selected 
on the basis of minimizing impacts as compared to construction as a stand-alone 
structure.  
 
No living quarters are envisaged on the school site as the projected 150 students will be 
housed in facilities inside the existing Akjoujt mine site.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
reference framework regarding safeguard policies applicable to the mining sector 
development has been developed as an integral part of the Sectoral Environmental 
Assessment (SEA) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), both dated 2003. The 
SEA considers OP/BP 4.01 "Environmental Assessment" as well as OP/BP 4.04 "Natural 
Habitats" in light of potential impacts which future, yet unknown, mine operations may 
have on protected areas. The RPF considers potential future issues pertaining to OP/BP 
4.12 "Involuntary Resettlement". Updates of these studies have been prepared prior to 
appraisal in order to determine their adequacy compared to the current sector context. 
Page  4
The updates include an assessment of progress against proposed action plans. The update 
of the RPF includes any potential land acquisition/involuntary resettlement and/or 
restrictions of access to livelihoods and resources that may occur as a result of the 
construction of the technical school in Akjoujt.  
 
Additionally, an Environmental Management Framework and Environmental 
Management Plan has been prepared to address the potential impacts of the micro 
projects and the planned Technical School in Akjoujt. It will be integrated with existing 
procedure s for review and implementation.  
 
Borrower capacity to plan, implement and monitor safeguard measures has greatly 
improved during initial project execution with the establishment of dedicated offices for 
mine inspection (Police des mines) and environmental planning and assessment (Service 
des Affaires Environnementales) under the Department of Mines and Geology. Under the 
additional financing, training and capacity building on safeguard policies and their 
application will be continued at central and regional level. Emphasis will be placed on 
integration and coordination of inspection and oversight of mine operations. 
Environmental audits of the major mine sites are currently in progress. Findings of these 
audits will provide detailed directions for the future work.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are project-affected around mine sites and civil society at large in terms 
governance issues surrounding the exploitation of natural resources. Involvement of 
stakeholders is part of several activities, including participatory regional planning, 
definition and monitoring of local economic development activities. The borrower will 
also continue public consultations through stand-alone events and the EITI process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/26/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/27/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/28/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/26/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/27/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/28/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  6
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Morten Larsen 
03/30/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Salamata Bal 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/30/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
03/30/2011 
Comments:   
