Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/09/2011 
Report No.:  AC5755
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mauritania 
Project ID:  P118974 
Project Name:  Skills Development Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Cherif Diallo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 8, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (70%);Central government administration (30%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (34%);Gender (33%);Social analysis and 
monitoring (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.60
1.60 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objective of the proposed operation is to improve the quality and 
efficiency of training institutions and create an enabling environment for a more market-
driven TVET system.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project's total investment cost is estimated at US$17.6 million of which US$16 
million will be financed by IDA, and is comprised of the following two components:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening and diversifying Technical and Vocational Education 
Training (TVET).  
 
a)Improving the quality, effectiveness and relevance of the training provided in pre-
selected TVET institutions; and 
 
b)Increasing apprenticeship and short-term training programs.  
 
Component 2: Improving the institutional environment of Technical and Vocational 
Education Training.  
Page  2
a)Enhancing the capacity of the Ministry of Employment Vocational Training and New 
Technologies (MEFPNT) to create a more demand-driven TVET system; and  
 
b)Strengthening the capacity of the National Institute for the Promotion of Vocational 
and Technical training (INAP-FTP) to manage the TVET system.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This nationwide project is a Category C and therefore does not include any civil works or 
rehabilitation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Salamata Bal (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
Page  3
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
Page  4
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Cherif Diallo 
03/09/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
12/20/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Salamata Bal 
12/20/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter Nicolas Materu 
03/09/2011 
Comments:  Acting Sector Manager 
