Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5802 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/10/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P123367 
Project Name: Rural Savings and Credit Sector Consolidation 
Task Team Leader: Harideep Singh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 24, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit: LCSAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Banking (45%);Micro- and SME finance (45%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (25%);Rural markets (25%);Regulation 
and competition policy (24%);Rural non-farm income generation (13%);Indigenous 
peoples (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
45.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
5.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main development objective (DO) of the project is to have a strengthened savings and credit 
sector with expanded financial services outreach in Mexico, with an emphasis on the rural and 
urban areas with low income population.  
 
The key indicators of performance reflecting the achievement of the PDO would be:  
 
Strengthened savings and credit sector -  
 
(a) 300 of the 450 sector entities certified by the regulatory authority (where required by law), 
and the remaining entities (where these seek voluntary support) show improved performance 
(financial/managerial/membership indicators);  
 
(b) Supervision system for the sector under the two parallel laws (one for non-cooperatives, and 
the other for cooperative entities) fully operational;  
Page  2
(c) 30 BANSEFI branches operating as Centers of Service offering selected financial services 
on behalf of other sector entities;  
 
Expanded financial services -  
 
(d) 
Correspondent banking service operational in about 10,000 DICONSA, PEMEX and 
other points of service; a fully operational mobile phone banking pilot covering 1.5 million 
clients using SMS-based service (first two years), and thereafter a full-range banking services 
package (years 3-5);  
 
(e) 
L@red de la Gente network of entities offering a range of financial services expanded to 
cover an additional 100 entities, and possibly 2 new financial products;  expanding the reach of 
L@red to at least one regional country; and  
 
Deepened outreach and access to financial services -  
 
(f) 
Mainstreaming 750,000 new members into the formal rural financial sector, using formal 
financial services; about 40% women, and about 20% Indigenous Peoples.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed operation builds on the assistance provided to the rural financial sector by the two 
Bank-assisted projects under implementation.  It addresses the need for: (a) introducing the next 
generation of initiatives required by the new Cooperative Law; (b) scaling up the success 
achieved in deepening access to financial services in rural and marginal areas; (c) broadening 
outreach of the sector institutions by adopting the less costly branchless banking approach, and 
introducing new financial services; and (d) supporting BANSEFI in evolving in its new role.  
 
The proposed operation, estimated to cost about US$250 million, with Bank assistance of 
US$200 million, would therefore:  
 
(a)  
consolidate the sector by providing technical assistance to those entities preparing for 
certification under the new Cooperative Law, and for the overall strengthening of other entities 
not required to be certified by law;  
 
(b)  
support the establishment and strengthening of the supervision system under the new 
Cooperative Law ((a) and (b) above to cost about US$32 million);  
 
(c)  
support sector entities through technical assistance to deepen access to financial services 
by bringing new membership in rural and marginal areas in Mexico into the formal rural 
financial sector (to cost about US$83 million);  
 
(d)  
take L@red to the next level by expanding its entity membership within Mexico, and 
possibly commence offering its services (such as international remittances) to a Central 
American country (about US$5 million);  
 
(e)  
deepen outreach in a #branchless banking# mode through the correspondent banking and 
mobile phone banking initiatives (about US$20 million);  
 
(f)  
strengthen BANSEFI, and also support the process of transformation of select BANSEFI 
branches into centers of service offering financial products of other sector entities (about US$8 
million); and  
 
(g)  
build on the financial education initiatives already introduced under one of the on-going 
projects (about US$2 million).  
 
Page  3
The correspondent banking, mobile phone banking, remittances, distribution of governmental 
transfer programs, etc. will require supporting the next generation initiatives relating to the 
technology platform (which is already fully operational) to handle the expected huge transaction 
volumes (expected cost: about US$70 million).  There will also be an umbrella component 
relating to information dissemination which will work with the implementing departments to 
ascertain and address their client communication and awareness generation needs (expected cost: 
about US$30 million).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project has a national coverage, but the actual area of operation would depend on the 
location of the entities supported by the project.  This is not known at this stage and will be an 
outcome of the criteria that the project team agrees with the project agency relating to the 
selection of project locations (based on the size of the habitation and marginality).  Within these 
selected locations, participation will be limited only to eligible entities (those which are either 
certified under the law or are classified as B/B+ entities indicating readiness for certification).  
Of these eligible entities, about 200 entities are expected to be supported under the proposed 
project, and based on the on-going project model, the eligible entities and the technical assistance 
service providers will consult with each other and agree to receive/provide assistance.  There will 
probably be about 4-5 service providers, each contracting with a mutually agreed group of about 
50-60 entities.  
 
Thus, the location of the entities which receive technical assistance under the project and their 
area of operation will determine the physical areas relating to which the IP Safeguard Policy gets 
triggered.  The actual determination of the areas will be done during project implementation, and 
only after the award of technical assistance contracts can participating entities be identified and 
the location/area of operation of these entities, where the IP Safeguard Policy becomes 
applicable, be known.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project component which deepens outreach of select rural financial sector entities is a 
scaling up of the component already being implemented under the on-going project since 2003.  
The project, with a parent loan and an additional financing loan, closes on February 28, 2011.  
The team which has been implementing the component has been involved with the project since 
2003 and is fully aware of the Bank IP Policy and its requirements, and is now housed within the 
nodal implementing agency, BANSEFI.  The international consulting firms that have provided 
technical assistance to some 120 entities under the on-going project have done a remarkable job 
in preparing IP strategy for the assisted entities.  There is a wealth of information on IP-related 
aspects which has been generated from the implementation experiences since 2003, and this will 
constitute a strong background against which the proposed operation will be prepared.  These 
same international firms, due to the highly specialized nature of the services that they offer, will 
most likely end up providing their services under the proposed operation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria E. Castro-Munoz (LCSSO) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Because the project only aims to strengthen the savings and credit sector, it will not directly 
support any activities that have an adverse environmental impact.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will not directly support any activities that have a direct or induced impact on 
natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not directly support any activities that have a direct or induced impact on 
forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not support activities that result in the procurement, storage, handling or use 
of pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not directly support any activities that have a direct adverse impact on 
physical cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Because the project will take place across Mexico, but exact project locations have not yet 
been identified, the project will adopt a framework approach to comply with this policy.  
 
The project will develop an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) based on (a) 
the experience of the first and additional financing stages of this operation; (b) the social 
assessment already developed for the project; and (c) the multiple and frequent consultations 
with Indigenous Peoples (IPs). The IPPF will be used by BANSEFI to evaluate the content of the 
various Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) that each consultant will prepare for its suite of entities, 
as well as the subsequent action plans that it agrees to with each individual entity.  
 
Experience to date: The on-going project (first phase project including the additional 
financing operation # 2003-2011) developed a social strategy to promote participation of 
vulnerable communities, women and indigenous populations. This strategy has evolved in the 
last seven years to better address indigenous peoples (IP) issues and to comply with OP 4.10 as 
follows:  
 
(a)  
under the first phase operation (2003-2008), social assessments were carried out 
in each one of the seven regions under the project. Because these regions cover about 72% of the 
Mexican IP population, Indigenous People#s Plans (IPPs) were prepared for each region, based 
on extensive consultations.  Each technical service provider was required to incorporate the 
outcomes of the social assessments, and the recommendations from the consultations process to 
define an Action Plan consisting of concrete interventions to target indigenous populations, 
women, and the generally poorer groups in the project areas.  
 
(b)  
under the additional financing operation (2008-2011), the strategy moved a step 
further by requiring technical service providers to use social assessments and prior project 
experience relating to indigenous populations to develop plans specifically designed to engage 
IPs in the assisted entities# area of operation.  This was included as a part of the consultant 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Terms of Reference, and the plans were reviewed and endorsed by the project implementing 
agency team.  
 
The results of the above model have been very encouraging.  Of the 600,000 new 
membership mainstreamed into the formal rural financial sector, 50% have been women and 
close to 30% have been from IP populations.  
 
An independent evaluation of the outreach component and the performance of the IP 
participation model is being carried out as part of preparation for this project. Four regional 
consultations have been carried out with the service providers and indigenous beneficiaries as 
well as indigenous representatives to review the implementation performance and elicit their 
recommendations for improving the IP model.  A summary of lessons-learned and best-practice 
experiences indentified during consultations will be presented to key stakeholders at a national 
consultation workshop planned to take place in January 2011. Consultation outcomes and 
recommendations will be discussed to propose an improved participation model for the proposed 
project.  
 
The IPPF approach: The framework approach will provide guidance to consultants on 
developing IPPs, and will be based on: (a) evaluation of the outreach component and the 
outcome of the IP inclusion strategy under the first phase project, including the additional 
financing operation; (b) support to regional and national level consultations to refine the strategy 
to develop an improved IP inclusion model; (c) inclusion, in consultant terms of reference, of the 
requirement of developing IPPs for the bundle of entities included in their assignment, including 
having social specialists in their team with relevant IP experience; (d) review and endorsement 
by BANSEFI, as the project implementing agency, of the IPPs based on the accumulated 
experience of their outreach component team as captured in the IPPF; and (e) periodic reporting 
by the consultants  to BANSEFI on the performance and target achievement under the agreed 
approach.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will not support any activities that lead to involuntary resettlement or land 
acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not support any activities associated with existing or planned dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will not support any activities that affect international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project will not support any activities in disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/24/2011 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/01/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The regional consultations for IP strategy have been completed.  The national consultation is 
planned in January 2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Harideep Singh 
01/05/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
01/05/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Ethel Sennhauser 
01/06/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
