Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2011 
Report No.:  AC6241
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P121231 
Project Name:  Governance eTransformation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Oleg V. Petrov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2011 
Managing Unit:  TWICT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Public administration- Information and communications (80%);Information 
technology (10%);Telecommunications (10%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (50%);Other public sector governance 
(20%);Export development and competitiveness (10%);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (10%);Technology diffusion (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00
3.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to transform delivery of selected public services 
using ICT.  This objective will be achieved by: (i) improving leadership capacity, 
enabling environment and management of ICTs in the public sector; (ii) using a modern 
service delivery platform, and (iii) increasing transparency in the public sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project (in the form of SIL or APL IDA credit of about US$23 million) will 
have two components:  
 
Component 1: e-Leadership Capacity and Enabling Environment (US$ 8.0 million)  
 
The main objective of this component is to carry out the changes in processes needed to 
transform the way Government delivers its services to citizens and businesses. Because 
civil servants in ministries and agencies are in charge of these processes, a large training 
Page  2
program is included to catalyze mindset changes and process re-engineering in the 
ministries involved in delivering the services electronically.  
 
Component 2: Shared Infrastructure and E-Services (US$ 15.0 million)  
 
The main objective of this component is to create a common infrastructure and 
mechanism for rapid deployment of ICT-enabled public services.  It will finance the 
acquisition of a shared computing infrastructure and development of the systems needed 
to deliver Government services electronically.  The component will also finance the 
development of specific e-services which will transform the way the Government 
provides public services to population, will increase quality, reduce costs and improve 
ministries effectiveness.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will work inside existing government offices in the cities country wide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (WBIVP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
n/a   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n/a   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  4
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Oleg V. Petrov 
04/11/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
04/11/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Deepak Bhatia 
04/14/2011 
Comments:   
