Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2011 
Report No.:  61407
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P120913 
Project Name:  Strengthen the effectiveness of the social safety net RBF SIL 
Task Team Leader:  Katerina Petrina 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (95%);Gender (5%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
37.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to improve the efficiency and 
equity of Moldova's social safety net through a fiscally sustainable expansion and 
strengthening of the Ajutor Social Program.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would be implemented over five years, through a Specific 
Investment Loan (IDA credit) in the amount of US$37 million equivalent plus 
government counterpart funds of approximately US$245 million.  
 
The proposed project would consist of two inter-related components. The first 
component would co-finance a share of the Ajutor Social and the targeted Heating 
Allowance benefits, as these programs scale up and as other categorical programs are 
consolidated and downsized.  In this component, disbursements would be triggered by 
achievement of specific results. The second component would finance investments in the 
basic architecture of the social safety net, with a focus on strengthening the Ajutor Social 
Program, following standard World Bank procedures for investment lending. The two 
components are inherently linked through definition of the results framework.  
Specifically, technical and systems improvements supported by Component 2 contribute 
Page  2
to the achievement of results that would trigger disbursements under Component 1.  With 
this approach, value-added would be generated from the interaction of the co-financing, 
the results framework, implementation support, direct technical investments in social 
safety net administration, and the deeper, longer-term partnership and engagement on 
safety nets reforms.  
 
Component 1.  Sustainable Expansion of Ajutor Social Benefits and targeted Heating 
Allowances (US$245 million in project costs; US$31 million equivalent in IDA credit).  
The objectives of this component are to support the sustainable expansion of targeted 
social benefits, while supporting the reform transition in the consolidation of categorical 
benefits.  This component would co-finance the Ajutor Social Program, as well as 
targeted seasonal Heating Allowances (which take into account cost-of-living increases 
during the five winter months).   The co-financing of the Ajutor Social program would 
allow its further expansion before the reform measures to reduce categorical benefits take 
effect and generate additional savings.  This component is designed so that IDA 
disbursements to co-finance the expansion of targeted benefits would also be triggered by 
the achievement of specific results, measuring and marking improvements and 
rationalization of the overall social safety net in Moldova.  
 
Component 2.  Institutional Strengthening for Benefits Administration (US$6 million). 
The objective of Component 2 is to support the strengthening of the 'basic architecture' 
for the Ajutor Social Program and its linkages with other social safety net programs in 
Moldova. This support comes at a crucial moment for the Ajutor Social Program, since 
ownership and management of the program is shifting from a donor-funded consultant-
based implementation model for the pilot to a mainstreamed Government program that is 
fully implemented within the MLSPF institutional structure.  As such, this component 
would help develop institutional capacities needed to measure and monitor program 
performance to inform its everyday management and more strategic policy decisions. 
Since project results are aligned with the performance of the Ajutor Social, the 
improvements in the system of monitoring and evaluation of this program would also 
help measure the results of the proposed project. By supporting improvements in the 
'basic architecture' of the program, this component would contribute to achievement of 
the DLIs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Moldova   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no known environmental issues relating to this project and none of the 
environmental safeguards have been triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The activities supported by the proposed Project are not likely to have significant effects 
on Moldova's environment or natural resources.  The measures contemplated under the 
loan relate to improving the Government's Social Assistance System and are not expected 
to have any significant links to the environment, nor trigger any of the World Bank's 
environmental safeguards.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N.A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The proposed project is focused on delivering strong social outcomes, and does not 
trigger any of the World Bank's social safeguard policies. The social impact of the project 
is expected to be positive for low-income households. Key stakeholders include the 
Ministries currently managing social assistance transfers and staff in local welfare offices 
nationwide.  Stakeholders also include all those who have been receiving benefits that 
will now be augmented (the poor) or reduced (the middle- and upper-classes).  Other 
important actors include opinion-formers, such as opposition politicians and 
Page  4
Parliamentarians, union leaders etc. A public information program will be launched to 
inform the public about the rationale for the proposed reforms.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  5
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Katerina Petrina 
03/04/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Kathy A. Lindert 
03/18/2011 
Comments:   
