Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2011 
Report No.:  AC6271
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P096439 
Original Project Name: MN-Sustainable 
Livelihoods II 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P125504 
Project Name:  Second Sustainable Livelihoods Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Andrew D. Goodland 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Other social services 
(30%);Public administration- Finance (20%);Sub-national government administration 
(20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Other social protection and risk 
management (20%);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(20%);Participation and civic engagement (20%);Decentralization (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
11.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Within the overall Sustainable Livelihoods Program, the Additional Financing would 
provide further funding for the Second Sustainable Livelihoods Project (SLPII # the 
second phase of a three-phase adaptable loan). The objective of the Additional Financing 
is unchanged as for SLPII: to enhance livelihood security and sustainability by scaling up 
institutional mechanisms that reduce the vulnerability of communities throughout 
Mongolia. The Additional Financing will continue to scale up nationwide the effective 
mechanisms and processes piloted under the first phase in the local communities and 
governments. A wide range of environmentally sustainable, socially inclusive and 
economically viable project activities, including pastoral risk management, community 
empowerment and microfinance development have been conducted under SLPII to 
preserve the ecological conditions and improve people#s livelihood in a sustainable 
manner.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
SLPII includes a wide menu of activities that would enhance livelihood security and 
sustainability by scaling-up institutional mechanisms that reduce the vulnerability of rural 
communities throughout Mongolia. The activities are categorized into four components:  
 
Component 1: Pastoral Risk Management (PRM) which aims to scale-up and replicate 
effective strategies to prepare for and respond to pastoral risk.  
 
Component 2: Communities Initiative (CI) which aims at establishing, on a nationwide 
basis, effective, transparent and socially inclusive mechanisms that empower 
communities to identify and implement small public facility improvement projects.  
 
Component 3: Microfinance Development (MD) which aims to deepen and widen 
access to sustainable financial services to rural citizens.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (PM) which aims to ensure quality implementation 
and management of all activities under components 1, 2, and 3 and compliance with all 
World Bank policies and procedures.  
 
The activities to be supported by Additional Financing are as follows:  
 
Community Initiatives Component. Additional funds would be added to the Community 
Initiatives Fund (CIF) to enable it to operate for one additional year nationwide. No 
major change in the operation of the Fund is expected. However, in light of the expected 
approval of the Integrated Budget Law, which would establish government policy for 
fiscal transfers and local expenditure prioritization, the CIF processes would be modified 
as required to be consistent with the new policy. This would provide for a transition to 
the new policy.  
 
Pastoral Risk Management (PRM) Component.  Funds would be used for two activities: 
i) to provide one additional year of financing for the Pastoral Risk Management Fund; 
and, ii) to provide one additional year of financing for demonstration soums. The latter 
will continue to provide funds to pilot technology and policy innovations, including 
testing the concept of pasture user fees as a means for improved pasture management.  
 
Project Management Component: Funds would be used to support the consultancy and 
operating costs of the Sustainable Livelihoods Program Office.  
 
The project would be extended by 12 months, the new closing date of both the original 
IDA financing and Additional Financing would be June 30, 2013.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As for the parent project, the additional financing would support activities across the 
country in many locations covering a number of ecological regions (desert-steppe, steppe, 
mountain-steppe), but all will be characterized by being predominantly grassland areas 
where there is active nomadic herding of livestock.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS) 
Ms Gayane Minasyan (EASER) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
SLPII has not had any large scale, significant and/or irreversible social or environmental 
impacts. The activities to be supported under the Additional Financing are unchanged 
from SLPII, so no additional major social or environmental impacts are expected. 
Overall, the project is expected to generate significant environmental benefits, but owing 
to the geographical scope of SLPII and its significance in relation to policies and 
institutional development, SLPII carries higher risks of impacts on environmentally-
sensitive areas, water resources, and vulnerable groups of people. Therefore the project 
has been carefully designed and monitoring and supervision of implementation will give 
attention to the potential adverse impacts.  
 
The same design considerations apply to the Additional Financing. The additional 
financing project will be specifically used to continue existing activities. There would be 
no expansion to the existing geographic coverage of the project (which is already 
nationwide) nor would there be any added activities. As with the parent project, the 
activities, other than consultancy services and operational costs, would be small scale 
investment projects under the CIF and PRM (typically costing less than $10,000).  
 
The activities included in the Additional Financing are the same as those included in 
SLPII and are unlikely to generate significant adverse social impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During the preparation and implementation of SLPII, the project has addressed safeguard 
policy issues as follows:  
 
Environmental and Social Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01): A combined Environmental 
and Social Assessment was conducted for the parent project which concluded that the 
majority of the project impacts would be positive, but some measures are required to 
enhance benefits and to avoid the possibility of localized negative impacts. An 
environmental management plan is integrated into the project monitoring plan, especially 
the Project Implementation Plan for the PRM Component. This requires screening of sub-
project proposals for the CIF and PRM Fund. A review of the compliance with the 
environmental management plan was conducted in 2010 prior to the Mid Term Review. 
Overall, the assessment, analysis, monitoring and reporting requirements to protect the 
environment and to go through a mandatory environmental impacts assessment (EIA) are 
met on regular basis, and the sub-projects are implemented in compliance with criteria 
developed under the project, especially those on pastoral risk management. At the same 
time, the environmental review revealed some shortcomings in implementation of the 
ESA/EMP. The task team will follow-up with the SLPO to make sure that findings of the 
review are discussed with the Ministry of Nature, Environment and Tourism, and 
recommendations to improve the implementation of the ESA/EMP areagreed upon, 
These recommendations are mainly related to the screening process and capacity building 
measures at the local level.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): During preparation of the parent project, it was 
concluded that the project could have adverse impacts on natural habitats and that the 
project would map these environmentally sensitive areas in order to avoid, monitor and 
manage potentially adverse impacts. Under the PRM Component, the mapping of all rural 
areas has been completed. These maps are primarily for pastureland management and use 
planning. To date no sub-project has triggered the policy on OP 4.04.  
 
Indigenous people (OP4.10). An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was prepared as the 
parent project is active in areas populated by Tsaatan reindeer herders, and in Kazakh 
areas of western Mongolia. A review of the implementation of the IPP, carried out at the 
Mid Term Review in June 2010, determined that the IPP provisions are being followed. 
As reported, the specifically established safeguard measures in the IPP for both Kazakh 
groups and Tsaatan communities have been carried out in a timely manner acceptable to 
these ethnic minority groups (in their languages, in their communication styles, at their 
demands, with their participation, etc.), and all the Kazakhs and Tsaatans have equitable 
opportunities to participate in the project activities at their will.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the preparation of the ESA for SLPII, there was an intensive schedule of 
interviews with key stakeholders (concerned government ministries (Ministry of Nature 
and Environment (now Ministry of Nature, Environment and Tourism), Ministry of Food 
and Agriculture (now Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry) and Ministry of 
Finance), international organizations, academia (universities and research institutes), 
Page  5
environmental NGOs, local authorities and inspectors as well as beneficiaries and 
herders) as well as joint meetings/workshops with groups of stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/28/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Note that during the preparation of SLPII all relevant documents were disclosed as per 
the existing disclosure requirements. No additional disclosure is required for the 
Additional Financing   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  6
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew D. Goodland 
04/20/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gayane Minasyan 
04/20/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin 
04/21/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paul Kriss 
04/22/2011 
Comments:  acting SM (for Ede Ijjasz) 
