Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/06/2011 
Report No.:  AC5493
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P118109 
Project Name:  MN-Mining Infrastructure Investment Supp 
Task Team Leader:  James A. Reichert 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 20, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASCS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (45%);General energy sector (45%);Water supply 
(10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (90%);Regulation and 
competition policy (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the proposed Mining Infrastructure Investment Support 
Project (MINIS) are to facilitate investments in infrastructure to support mining and 
downstream processing activities, regardless of funding source, and to build local 
capacity to prepare and transact infrastructure projects.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed MINIS is a US$25.00 million project that does not focus on mining 
activities, but rather on general infrastructure that would support the mining sector and 
local communities within an investment#s area of influence.  While many of the projects 
are expected to be in the Southern Mongolia Region, projects in other locations 
throughout the country would also be eligible for financing under the MINIS.  The 
project has four main components:  
 
Component 1: Support for Infrastructure Investments (US$19.69 mil.);  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building and Knowledge Transfer (US$1.45 mil.);  
Page  2
Component 3: Strengthening Groundwater Management (US$3.23 mil.);  
 
Component 4: Project Management (US$0.63 mil.).  
 
To support investments in needed infrastructure, the project would provide financing to 
conduct feasibility studies to assess technical options and determine economic and 
financial implications of proposed projects, and address emerging priority issues as a 
result of the country#s nascent enabling environment governing private investment in 
infrastructure.  To develop local skills to prepare infrastructure projects, including 
transactions involving investors, both formal and on-the-job training will be carried out.  
An emphasis will be placed on learning by doing.  Funds would be extended to hire 
advisors, carry out regular programs of training on topics germane to the preparation of 
mining-related infrastructure projects, including cost-benefit analyses, and bring in 
specialists to train officials in contract administration, as needed.  In addition, annual 
conferences to promote and provide guidance on preparing infrastructure transactions 
would be held for Government officials.  Support will also be extended to strengthen the 
management of groundwater by piloting a new institutional structure at two locations in 
Southern Mongolia.  Funding will also be provided to establish a Project Management 
Unit, which will have overall responsibility for managing the MINIS.  
 
During preparation, a consultancy assignment was carried out to develop a framework 
to manage groundwater in Southern Mongolia. The activity resulted in a framework that 
defines an appropriate mandate and institutional structure, and identified certain activities 
to be carried out during the initial years of operation under the new framework.  Under 
the MINIS, the capacity of local authorities to manage groundwater resources in Southern 
Mongolia will be strengthened.  The principal stakeholder and beneficiary will be the 
Water Authority, which is responsible for assessing and planning for water resources, 
monitoring and protecting it use, and carrying out related research.  A new institutional 
structure will be piloted at two locations in the region.  Under the new framework, two 
Groundwater Management Councils (GMC) and two Groundwater Management 
Administrations (GMAs) would be established. The GMCs will act as the coordinating 
body in which all relevant stakeholders and actors will be represented to voice and 
protect their interest in groundwater management in their respective basins, while the 
GMAs will consist of a small core team of professional staff to carry out the daily 
management tasks and function as the knowledge and information center on water issues 
in their respective basins.  
 
The International Finance Corporation (IFC) is providing transaction advice to the 
Government to identify, develop, market and competitively select private 
developers/investors for up to three pilot projects.  This support is expected to 
complement some of the activities of the MINIS.  It has been agreed with the IFC that the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that was prepared for the 
MINIS will be considered to apply to both World Bank and IFC in line with the 
Environmental and Social Policy and Procedural Guidelines for Projects in IDA 
Countries that are financed jointly by the World Bank, IFC and Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA).   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will provide upstream technical support to prepare infrastructure to support 
mining activities, regardless of source of funding.  The majority of the projects are 
expected to involve infrastructure that will be located in the three principal Aimags 
(provinces) of the Southern Gobi Region (SGR), which consist of Umnogovi, Dornogovi 
and Dundgovi Aimags.  It is possible that proceeds from the MINIS would be used to 
help prepare investments outside of these Aimags.  
 
The SGR is characterized as having low precipitation that is seasonal, an absence of 
perennial surface water bodies, and high evaporation rates.  Soils are thin and not readily 
arable.  While pasturelands are plentiful, they are low in plant productivity. The primary 
vegetation in SGR is desert steppe and desert, which is extremely sparsely populated.  
The combination of scarce water resources and poor soil make it necessary to regularly 
rotate herds from one location to another.  
 
The presence of animal species in SGR is important in the regional ecosystem.  They 
also have immediate economic value for Mongolia, and wildlife is a primary attraction 
for tourism in the SGR.  There are seven Special Protected Areas and about 242 locally 
protected areas in the SGR, representing a large area of critical and non-critical natural 
habitats.  
 
Initial baseline information also indicates presence of a number of physical cultural 
resources, including archeological, paleontological and sacred sites.  
 
The types of feasibility studies that are eligible for financing under the MINIS include 
technical assessments, such as engineering designs, geotechnical surveys, economic and 
financial analyses, environmental and social impact evaluations, and reviews of specific 
aspects of the country#s legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks.  Funds could be 
used to prepare mining-related infrastructure projects whether financed from the 
government budget or the private sector.  
 
Projects in the energy (power plants, transmission and distribution networks), transport 
(railways and roads), IT and communications, water (water supply and waste water 
systems), housing and social sectors (schools, hospitals and clinics) would be eligible, as 
would logistics and border crossing facilities.  In addition, the evaluation and structuring 
(for private investment) of downstream, value-added activities, such as copper smelters, 
coal processing facilities and iron pellets plants, would also be eligible for funding.  If 
funding is used to prepare a power plant, then the March 2010 Operation Guidelines on 
Criteria for Screening Coal Projects under the Strategic Framework for Development and 
Climate Change would be followed.  
 
It is possible that one or two (at most) infrastructure projects will be prepared as PPPs 
with some support from the MINIS. Potential project(s) include transport systems (road, 
railway, airport) water supply systems, wastewater systems, border crossing facilities, or 
housing.  
Page  4
While most of the projects to be financed under the MINIS are expected to be in the 
Southern Mongolia Region, projects in other locations throughout the country would also 
be eligible for financing under the MINIS.  Based on the Bank#s understanding of 
safeguards issues in Southern Mongolia, there is potential for four World Bank policies to 
be triggered.  However, since specific feasibility studies and projects to be prepared 
under the MINIS have not been identified, screening for Bank safeguard policies will be 
undertaken and determined for each project activity with potential safeguards 
requirements during project implementation and the ISDS will be updated accordingly.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.  
 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
The project will finance feasibility studies for potential infrastructure projects, capacity 
building activities, and a pilot institutional structure to strengthen groundwater 
management in Southern Mongolia.  The project will not finance any physical activities 
or works that pose direct environmental and social impacts.  However, should the MINIS 
support the development of projects involving investors that are subsequently transacted, 
there is a potential for moderate to significant environmental and social impacts.  
 
Potential adverse impacts resulting from projects that could be prepared under the 
MINIS include impacts on critical/non-critical natural habitats wildlife and biodiversity, 
fragmentation of natural habitats, blocking of wildlife migratory routes, loss of surface 
vegetation, land degradation, groundwater pollution and depletion, noise and air 
pollution, ,changes in land use and access to resources,  loss or damage of physical 
cultural resources, public health and safety, and social and cultural disturbance on local 
Page  5
communities or herders and other social issues from both planned and unplanned 
developments,  
 
Projects that could have moderate to significant impacts include, power plants, 
transmission networks, railways, roads, waste water treatment plants and other 
downstream value-added activities.  To help manage these potential impacts, and since 
specific projects to be prepared under the MINIS have yet to be identified, an ESMF has 
been prepared.  During preparation, feasibility studies would identify potential 
environmental and social impacts and mitigating measures, which would be incorporated 
in project documents during implementation.  The ESMF will apply to each sub-project 
and activities with potential safeguards requirements during preparation and 
implementation.  
 
Given its potential for environmental and social impacts during implementation, the 
project triggers the World Bank safeguards policies, and is classified as a Category A 
project as per World Bank Operational Policy 4.01 Environmental Assessment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Government of Mongolia is poised to develop several major mineral deposits in 
Southern Mongolia. It is widely recognized that the countrys wealth of mineral resources 
offers perhaps the greatest potential for economic growth and development in the long-
term.  Based on the Regional Environmental Assessment for South Gobi (prepared by the 
World Bank in January 2010) , the future development of mining resources in the region 
presents potentially significant environmental and social impacts resulting from traffic 
and transport, mining operation, water resources consumption, power generation and 
transmission, as well as planned and unplanned urban development.  
 
During project preparation, a summary of previous safeguard-related studies that were 
carried out in the project area was prepared. Priority recommendations include the need 
to: (i) improve the capacity of government agencies at the local and national levels to 
manage the environmental review process and ensure environmental assessments are 
properly carried out; and (ii) strengthen abilities to better manage and monitor the use of 
groundwater in Southern Mongolia.  Appropriate capacity building activities, including 
separate components to strengthen safeguards and groundwater management, have been 
incorporated into the project#s design and ESMF.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Mongolias mining sector is the major contributor to the economy.  It accounts for about 
one-third of the country#s economic activity, some 70 percent of exports, and generates 
nearly 40 percent of government revenue.  Foreign direct investment (FDI) in the sector 
currently accounts for nearly 80 percent of total FDI, and this is expected to climb in the 
coming years.  The development of the sector, which offers the greatest potential for 
economic development, is the government#s top priority.  A number of mines in 
Southern Mongolia are currently being developed, or are planned for development.  
Page  6
Within this larger context during feasibility studies sub-projects will be take into 
account when relevant alternative analysis of options, assess various scenarios and 
possible site locations, etc, that will include financial, technical, environmental and social 
considerations.  
 
Tourism is a fast growing industry in Mongolia, accounting for about five percent of 
GDP countrywide.  While there are no accurate estimates of visitor numbers to Southern 
Mongolia, most clientele go to Southern Mongolia for the open spaces and living 
nomadic culture.  They tend to prefer the existing small hotels and ger camps, which are 
located in and around provincial centers, and engage in activities that have limited 
environmental impact.  Although current industry requirements for infrastructure are 
minimal, tourism in the region would benefit from infrastructure development for other 
industries.  
 
During implementation, once projects have been identified, funding would be made 
available to carry out any needed environmental and social assessment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address potential environmental and social issues resulting from the future 
implementation of projects, an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) was prepared as an iintrumentto ensure the proper management of environmental 
and social safeguards throughout the preparation and implementation of projects 
supported under the MINIS.  
 
The ESMF is designed to operationalize the Mongolian national environmental and 
social safeguards policies and procedures, and the requirements of the World Bank#s 
safeguards policies.  It identifies the legal framework, specifies the responsibilities of 
project stakeholders, and details the procedures and requirements for environmental and 
social safeguards screening, reviewing and approval, monitoring and reporting.  The 
screening process and other procedures specified in the ESMF will apply to all activities 
under the project that have potential safeguards requirements.  The following procedures 
are established as a framework to ensure compliance with safeguards throughout project 
identification, preparation and implementation:  
 
Step 1: Initial Screening for Potential Environmental and Social Safeguards Issues.  To 
be carried out by the Ministry of Nature, Environment and Tourism (MNET), which will 
conduct the initial screenings for potential environmental and social safeguards issues 
using the ESMF#s screening tool.  The six-step screening tool will categorize projects 
according to their expected environmental and social impacts and identify the types of 
reviews and assessments required to prepare them for implementation.  All projects that 
were prepared using MINIS funding and which are subsequently implemented under 
separate financing arrangements will be subject to the screening tool.  
 
Page  7
Step 2: Review and Approval of Initial Screening by the World Bank Task Team.  After 
the initial screening, the environmental and social specialists on the World Bank task 
team will review, comment and finally confirm the conclusion of project categorization 
and necessary safeguards instruments.  
 
Step 3: Incorporation of Detailed Safeguards Requirements into Specific Projects.  With 
Bank approval, project specific terms of reference for EIAs and other Bank policy 
instruments will be developed for each project as part of the EIA screening process.  
 
Step 4: Incorporating ESMF into Contractual Documents.   The Project Management 
Unit (PMU) under the Ministry of Finance will be responsible for ensuring that the full 
ESMF, including project-specific TORs for EIAs, are incorporated into the relevant 
contractual documents, which will contractually obligate the entities involved in a 
transaction to prepare safeguards documents and implement them according to the 
ESMF. It should be noted that Steps 4, 5 and 6 will apply only to those projects that are 
subsequently implemented, regardless of funding source.  
 
Step 5: Review and Approval of Safeguards Documents.  This will be the primary 
responsibility of the MNET (for EIAs and/or EMPs), and Land Departments of local 
government (for RAPs).  The Bank will provide input and guidance in the approval of 
safeguards documents.  
 
Step 6: Implementation, Supervision and Reporting.  During implementation, the PMU, 
with support from the Bank, will be responsible for ensuring that the safeguards 
requirements are properly implemented as approved by MNET, and annual reports are 
provided to MNET.  Local branches of the Environmental Protection Unit of the State 
Professional Inspection Agency (SPIA) will carry out periodic supervision, and provide 
reports to MNET.  
 
The capacity of the PMU, MNET, EIA experts panel (for projects requiring EIAs) and 
local branch staff of MNET and SPIA, as well as the Ministry of Road, Transportation, 
Construction and Urban Development, Government Agency of Land Affairs, Geodesy 
and Cartography, Aimag and UB city land departments, will be critical to effectively 
implement environmental and social safeguards requirement under Mongolian legislation 
and World Bank policies.  Capacity building activities are designed in the MINIS to 
provide adequate training to strengthen the technical capacity of these agencies to 
manage the project, which will be responsible for ensuring that safeguards requirements 
are enforced after the MINIS has closed.  
 
A
component to build capacity and transfer knowledge (US$1.60 million) is included 
under the project.  As part of this component, environmental and social safeguards 
training will be conducted for the environmental staff of the MNET, local branch staff, 
environmental officers from line ministries, and land departments at the aimag level.  
Potential training would focus on environmental and social safeguards policies and 
practices of the World Bank and international best practice in safeguards screening, 
environmental assessment techniques (including cumulative impacts, REA, SEA) and 
Page  8
good practices (infrastructure and mining sectors), social assessments, and 
implementation supervision and monitoring.  
 
Training would be delivered by World Bank environmental and social specialists and 
international consultants.  Key staff will be invited to World Bank safeguards training 
activities, and overseas study tours could be organized to expose counterparts to good 
environmental and social safeguards practices in other countries.  A detailed training plan 
will be developed at the start of the project in consultation with relevant agencies.  The 
expected overall cost of training activities for safeguards is expected to be in the range of 
$150,000 to $200,000 over five years.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Finance (MOF), MNET, the Water Authority, 
relevant line ministries, National Development and Innovation Committee (NDIC), State 
Property Committee, local governments, and local communities and herders that will be 
affected during project implementation.  The MOF, MNET, Water Authority, NDIC and 
SPC were consulted on the draft ESMF during project preparation.  The ESMF states that 
feasibility studies financed under the MINIS will comply with environmental and social 
safeguards requirements of the Mongolian national legislations, as well as the World 
Bank safeguards policies.  As such, public consultations and disclosure of information as 
required when preparing EIAs and RAPs (if necessary) have been built into the ESMF. 
Furthermore, in December 2010 the ESMF was put on the MOF#s website (in the 
Mongolian language) for public consultation.  EIAs and RAPs will be incorporated into 
contractual documents for investments to be developed by the private sector.  
 
To reflect the concerns of the local communities regarding the use of water resources 
and the potential impacts on local economics, the Government of Mongolia and the 
World Bank co-hosted two workshops in Dalanzadgad and Ulaanbaatar on April 26 and 
28, respectively, and in October 2010 at Dalanzadgad, Sainshand and Ulaanbaatar.  All of 
these events stressed the critical importance of managing groundwater in Southern 
Mongolia so that long-term development of mining activities can occur without 
endangering the supply to local communities and herders.  
 
The draft ESMF developed under the project was locally disclosed in the Mongolian 
language at (MOF/MNET, internet, or public places) on December 20, 2010, as per 
OP4.01, and is available on the World Bank#s website.  It was also disclosed at the 
World Bank#s InfoShop on November 17, 2010.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/01/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/20/2010 
 
Page  9
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/17/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/17/2010  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  10
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr James A. Reichert 
12/17/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yiren Feng 
12/17/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jun Zeng 
12/17/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter Leonard 
02/01/2011 
Comments:  As a delegated project to the World Bank Beijing Office Safeguards Focal Point 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
01/28/2011 
Comments:   
