Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5649 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/07/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Morocco 
Project ID: P121271 
Project Name: Integrated Coastal Zone Management - Mediterranean Coast 
Task Team Leader: Kanta K. Rigaud 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2012 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (50%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (50%);Environmental policies and institutions (30%);Climate 
change (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.18 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
18.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
2.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to improve the conservation and management of coastal 
resources through piloting the integrated coastal zones management (ICZM) approach on the 
Moroccan Mediterranean coast. The project will contribute to strengthening the coastal 
communities' resilience to the changing climate and also to regional efforts to address declining 
biodiversity and fisheries in the Transboundary Action Plan and the Strategic Action Programs 
within the Sustainable MED program. The Project will focus on the Mediterranean coast partly 
because the Project is part of the Sustainable MED program which aims to "enhance and 
accelerate the implementation of transboundary pollution reduction, improved water resources 
management, and biodiversity conservation measures in priority hotspots and sensitive areas of 
selected countries of the Mediterranean basin".  
 
The application of the ICZM approach in a comprehensive manner or as a whole package is a 
very challenging and complex process for Morocco, as it is for most developing countries. 
Page  2
Therefore, the Project is designed to pilot strategic and priority activities at the local level within 
the framework of the draft ICZM law. The ICZM approach and climate change adaptation in the 
Mediterranean coastal areas hold significant potential to be replicable for future investments in 
Morocco after the ICZM law has been passed. The proposed Project activities are selected based   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project's activities will geographically encompass the eastern Mediterranean coastal areas of 
Morocco in the provinces of Nador, Driouech, and Berkane. Focused activities would be piloted 
at four initially identified sites: The coast of the Grand Nador, including the Ramsar site - Nador 
Lagoon; Coast of Saidia-Ras El ma including the Ramsar site - Moulouya River mouth; Rural 
Commune of Beni Chiker, including the Ramsar site - Cap des Trois Fourches; and Rural 
Commune of Boudinar.  
 
Rationale and linkages for project components: Component 1 focuses on strengthening the 
strategic planning and governance arrangements under the policy framework of the draft ICZM 
law. This also provides an ideal cross-cutting framework to reduce coastal vulnerability to 
climate change impacts. Component 2 pilots co-management for conservation fragile ecosystems 
and tests win-win approaches to improve the quality of life of coastal communities, based on 
services and goods offered by better preserved ecosystems. The activities are also expected to 
contribute to reducing local vulnerability to climate variability.  
 
Component 1: Incorporating ICZM and climate change adaptation in provincial development 
planning  
 
The component will support institutional capacity building for the provincial administrations 
and local partners in the selected sites to enhance coordination in the planning and management 
of coastal resources, while addressing the challenges of the changing climate. This component 
will support related activities:  
 
i) 
Institutional strengthening to implement an ICZM approach at provincial level. Activities 
could include strengthening the existing non-institutional structure - Cellule du Littoral for 
Nador, Driouech, and Berkane, and the Steering Committee;  
 
ii) 
Incorporating the ICZM approach and climate change adaptation in provincial 
development plans. The financed activities would support capacity building and consultation to 
facilitate the integration; and  
 
iii) 
Improving knowledge on the ICZM approach and climate change adaptation.  
 
Component 2: Improving coastal resources conservation and local livelihoods through co-
management  
 
Effective conservation of ecological resources has been identified as the major gap among the 
development projects and programs (i.e. Les Plans d'Action Cap Nador, Projet SMAP III Plan 
d'Action pour la Cote de Nador, financed by EuropeAid).  One major cause is the lack of 
connection between resources conservation, management, and use. The Project proposed 
Page  3
approach is co-management based on linking local communities with conservation and 
ownership (stewardship), thus ending the de facto "open access" and reducing overexploitation. 
This component will help to create partnership mechanisms to manage targeted resources and to 
increase job opportunities for local people, including women and youth. The co-management 
could be realized through cooperatives, professional associations, and the private sector. Major 
specific activities include:  
 
(i) 
Improved conservation and management of sensitive coastal areas. The Project will 
support conservation and restoration of key coastal ecosystems/areas (dunes, Ramsar sites). This 
will also help local communities take advantage of better-conserved biodiversity (developing 
ecotourism business models, training people as nature guides; promotion of hand crafts);  
 
(ii) 
Improving fisheries management. The Project will help pilot different types of win-win 
models for management of the protected fishery area for conservation and economic revenues 
(creation of fishery cooperatives, training for improved artisanal fishing, and diversified fish 
products);  
 
(iii) 
Diversifying revenue activities. The Project will support those activities which use less 
valuable water while generating revenues, and/or making local people less vulnerable to natural 
disasters (dry gardening, planting of fruit trees/cactus, honey production).  
 
Component 3: Project management and M&E  
 
This component will finance the following activities:  
 
(i) 
operation of the project management unit (PMU);  
 
(ii) 
monitoring and evaluation; and  
 
(iii) 
coordinating and promoting learning, and good practice sharing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would focus on the eastern Mediterranean coastal areas of Morocco under the 
provinces of Nador, Driouech, and Berkane. Focused activities would be piloted at four initially 
identified sites:  
 
-
The coast of the Grand Nador, including the Ramsar site - Lagoon of Nador,  
 
-
Coast of Saidia-Ras El ma including the Ramsar site - river mouth of Moulouya,  
 
-
Rural Commune of Beni Chiker, including the Ramsar site - Cap des Trois Fourches, and  
 
-
Rural Commune of Boudinar.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Morocco has an established system of environmental laws and regulations including 
requirements for environmental assessment that provides solid environmental protection.  The 
project will also be subject to an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment under OP 4.01 
and Natural Habitats OP 4.04.  
Page  4
The Secretary of State in charge of Water and Environment/Department of Environment (DE) 
is designated as the Executing Agency for the project preparation.  
 
It is our understanding that this is the first World-Bank operation with the current identified 
agency and possibly the agency that will be in charge of implementation. The Recipient may not 
have familiarity with the Bank safeguard policies hence the institutional capacity for 
implementing and monitoring Safeguard Policies in particular, social safeguards, will need to be 
assessed during project preparation and appropriate strengthening measures (i.e. training) will be 
taken into account and budgeted accordingly.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Fatou Fall (MNSSO) 
Mr Andrew Michael Losos (YPP) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An ESIA will be completed by June 2011.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
This policy will apply because Ramsar Convention protected wetlands are among the areas 
affected by project activities.  Other environmentally sensitive areas may also be affected.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The type of economic and agricultural diversification planned by the project may affect 
forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Agricultural diversification encouraged by the project may involve pest management 
measures.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Physical cultural resources are not present in project areas.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Any impact of the project on Morocco's indigenous communities will be determined prior to 
appraisal.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Any issues of land tenure or resettlement of project-affected people will be determined prior 
to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not affect dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project does not involve international waters.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project does not involve disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  5
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
09/15/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An environmental and social impact assessment is planned and should be completed prior to 
appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud 
04/07/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/07/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
04/07/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
