Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/09/2011 
Report No.:  AC5934
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Morocco 
Project ID:  P117081 
Project Name:  Integrating Climate Change in the Implementation of the Plan Maroc Vert 
Task Team Leader:  Gabriella Izzi 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Crops (30%);Irrigation and 
drainage (30%);Agricultural extension and research (10%) 
Theme:  Climate change (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.35 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
26.95
26.95 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Objective is to promote the adoption of climate change adaptations in 
agriculture in five target Regions of Morocco.   
 
3. Project Description 
-
Component 1: Development of the capacities of public and private institutions on 
climate change adaptation in agriculture in five target regions. This Component aims to 
develop the capacities of relevant staff of public and private institutions involved in the 
planning and implementation of Pillar II projects on climate change adaptation in 
agriculture. Budget will be used to: (i) organize training sessions, workshops, and field 
visits; (ii) produce dissemination material; (iii) launch awareness campaigns; (iv) address 
training needs of the staff of the implementing entities; and (v) cover the project 
coordination and management costs.  
 
-
Component 2: Dissemination of climate change adaptations among selected farmers of 
selected Pillar II projects in five target regions. This Component aims to disseminate 
climate change adaptations among farmers in the area of intervention of selected Pillar II 
projects in the five target regions. Budget will be shared among about ten sub-projects 
Page  2
and will be used to: (i) implement climate change adaptations; (ii) organize training 
sessions, workshops, field visits, and awareness activities; and (iii) carry out the 
Monitoring and Evaluation (including relevant environmental and social indicators).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be carried out in five target Regions of Morocco: Chaouia-Ouardigha; 
Rabat-
Salé-Zemmour-Zaër; Tadla-Azilal; Doukkala-Abda; and Gharb-Chrarda-Beni 
Hssen. These five target Regions are characterised by high vulnerability to climate 
change and high agricultural potential. Some of them are largely devoted to cereal 
productions (Chaouia-Ouardigha, Doukkala-Abda), while in others tree crops prevail 
(olive trees in Tadla-Azilal). In some cases, the switch from cereals to tree crops is 
expected over the years to come (Doukkala-Abda, Gharb-Chrarda-Beni Hssen, and 
Chaouia-Ouardigha). Meat and milk production can importantly contribute to agricultural 
value added (Chaouia-Ouardigha), even more than crops (Tadla-Azilal). Some of the 
target Regions are characterized by large irrigated areas (Tadla-Azilal, 35 percent) while 
others remain mostly rainfed (Chaouia-Ouardigha, only 3 percent).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Andrea Liverani (MNSSO) 
Mr Andrew Michael Losos (YPP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has the potential to bring substantial environmental benefits, by helping to 
make agriculture more resilient to climate change. The project is expected to have 
significant positive social impacts too. By focusing on marginal areas, it will address 
small farmers, traditionally characterized by high poverty rates, a low level of education, 
and low agricultural productivity.  
 
The project involves environmental interventions and therefore triggers the World Bank 
Environmental Assessment Policy OP 4.01. In addition, OP 4.09 on Pest Management is 
Page  3
triggered in the sub-project in which pest management is included as a climate change 
adaptation. All other environmental and social safeguards are not expected to be 
triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The implementing entities are paying due attention to the potential environmental and 
social impacts of the project. Considering the programmatic nature of the project, 
characterized by about ten sub-projects, a framework study of the environmental and 
social impacts (Etude Cadre des Impacts Environnementaux et Sociaux, ECIES) has been 
developed. The ECIES establishes a framework for individual environmental and social 
impacts assessment for each sub-project (Etude des Impacts Environnementaux et 
Sociaux, EIES). The ECIES provides indications on which data should be recorded, the 
consultation process to be carried out, and the definition of potential mitigation measures. 
It also details the institutional arrangements as well as the capacity- strengthening 
measures needed to ensure proper follow-up. Each EIES will be carried out prior to the 
implementation of each sub-project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ECIES has been reviewed by the World Bank for disclosure prior to appraisal. The 
EIES of each sub-project will be finalized, reviewed by the World Bank, and disclosed 
prior to the beginning of the implementation of the sub-project. For each sub-project, 
consultations will be held with relevant stakeholders, such as farmers and representatives 
of local organizations.  
 
In order to facilitate the local ownership of the results of the impacts assessments, 
documents will be disclosed in French.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/25/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  4
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/15/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2011 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Pest Management Plan is to be included in the EIES of sub-projects in which the OP 
is triggered.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
N/A 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  5
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Gabriella Izzi 
03/01/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
03/03/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lene Natasha Lind 
03/02/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
03/03/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti 
03/04/2011 
Comments:   
