                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6132


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Morocco                           Project ID: P125799
Project Name: Morocco Justice Sector Reform
Task Team Leader: Philippe De Meneval
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 27, 2011    Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2011
Managing Unit: MNSED                       Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                           Loan
Sector: Law and justice (100%)
Theme: Access to law and justice (60%);Other rule of law (40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           8.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                     0.00
                                                                     0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The objective of this project is to improve public trust and confidence in the judicial system
through (a) implementing new approaches in legal aid, management of cases, use of human
capacities, court functioning, and (b) strengthening the institutional capacity of the Ministry of
Justice in the areas of financial/human resources management and project management. The
primary target group of the project will be the Ministry of Justice, the Legal Training Institute
(Institut Supérieur de la Magistrature), and judges, administrative staff (greffiers) and users of
the selected courts. The project is intended to benefit all users more generally as it will provide
the Ministry of Justice with the methodology and operational tools needed to scale up the tested
approach at other courts.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project's overall approach is to familiarize the target groups with innovative solutions and
international best practices to improve access to justice and quality of service delivery. Lessons
learned at the level of 15 to 20 courts would then support the development of broader reform
efforts to be implemented by the Ministry of Justice and allow for replication throughout the
system. Other components of the project will address cross cutting issues such as the training
program of the Institut de Formation des Magistrats (ISM), and project, financial and HR
management by the Ministry of Justice. The project will not address all issues affecting the
judicial sector. For instance, the project will not address specific issues relating to criminal
justice, prison administration, and the overarching issue of the independence of the judiciary.
The project will not finance creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of infrastructure as it has
already been largely addressed under the European Union#s MEDA program, and since the
Ministry of Justice continues its efforts to improve court infrastructure.

  Component I: Improving Access to the Judicial System and Quality of Service Delivery: Under
this component, the project will develop a range of different approaches for improving access to
justice and quality of service delivery based on an in-depth assessment and technical assistance
at the level of around 15 courts selected with the Ministry of Justice. The assessment of court
performance will follow from an institutional analysis of each tribunal combined with public and
users surveys. The analysis will focus on organizational structure and functioning of the selected
courts and assess the role of various stakeholders with respect to the most common types of cases
(family matters, land disputes, small debt repayments). The pilot program will provide an
opportunity to experiment with new tools and approaches to improve access to justice and
quality of service delivery: upgraded case management system, service standards, quality labels,
measurement of performance in access and service delivery, devolution of decision-making
powers at court level, quality and publication of court decisions, etc. The project will notably
take into account the possibility of modifying the division of roles and responsibilities of judicial
stakeholders through expanding the functions and accountability of clerks. A system of
partnerships between model jurisdictions and other jurisdictions will be established to ensure the
replication of the developed methodology at a later stage.

  Component II: Strengthening the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Justice and ISM: This
component will focus on modernizing the central level functions relating to training, and
financial and human resources management. Morocco has engaged in a broad reform to
modernize its budget planning, presentation and management, notably through the adoption of
performance based budgeting. The Ministry of Justice was part of the pilot ministries selected
with the Ministry of Finance to develop a Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). In
this context, the project will support the modernization of the financial and HR management
tools of the Ministry of Justice, in particular the ongoing process of introducing multi-year
program budgeting and performance indicators, performance contracting, and performance
monitoring. Another sub-component will focus on the system of legal and judicial education and
training, in particular the program of the Institut Supérieur de la Magistrature (ISM). The project
will assess training needs, capacities, and assist in designing a curriculum that fits the needs and
take stock of international experiences. Finally, the project will support the implementation of
the ethics policy, notably through reinforcing the monitoring and evaluating tools of the Ministry
of Justice and its General Inspectorate.

 Component III: Strengthening Project Management capacity: This component will focus on
strengthening project management and change management capacity. Under this component, a
dedicated Project Technical Unit (PTU) at the Ministry of Justice will be trained to be in charge
of project implementation, including procurement and financial management. It will coordinate
with the Ministry of Justice's auditing, accounting and procurement divisions, providing them
with specialized expertise regarding Bank project implementation processes. It will also be in
charge of day to day project monitoring and in that capacity will report to a steering committee
gathering stakeholders from the public and private sector. The PTU will prepare progress reports
and monitor performance indicators. Finally, the project will focus on strengthening the
Ministry’s capacity to communicate with key stakeholders and reach out to the broader public on
the reform process.

D. Project location (if known)
The proposed project would be located at the Ministry of Justice in Rabat, the Legal Training
Institute (Institut Supérieur de la Magistrature) in Rabat, and approximately 20 selected courts
throughout the country.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The proposed project will have no adverse social or environmental impacts as it consist only of
consultant services and training programs. The project does not involve any physical works (in
particular, no creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of buildings is envisaged) or procurement
of goods and does not involve any land acquisition or resettlement. The project has thus been
categorized as a Category C project. OP 4.12 is not triggered and no project environmental
impact assessment or environmental management plan is required.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Gael A. Gregoire (MNSEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                     X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                         X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   06/27/2011
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   n/a

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Philippe De Meneval                                         05/03/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Hocine Chalal                                               05/16/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Guenter Heidenhof                                           05/13/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
