Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/17/2011 
Report No.:  59822
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P107598 
Project Name:  MZ PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation Development 
Task Team Leader:  Patrick Verissimo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (50%);Crops (30%);Agro-industry (20%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (33%);Rural services and infrastructure (33%);Rural policies and 
institutions (17%);Trade facilitation and market access (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the PROIRRI project is to increase agricultural production 
marketed and raise farm productivity in new or improved irrigation schemes in the 
provinces of Sofala, Manica and Zambezia. The primary target group of PROIRRI are 
smallholder farmers (groups and associations) and individual emerging farmers who will 
benefit from the adoption of: (i) improved production technologies and know-how related 
to irrigation; (ii) complementary technical skills required to harness the full potential of 
water for agriculture; (iii) improved post-harvest techniques; (iv) access to better 
performing extension and financial services; and (iv) closer linkages with potential 
market opportunities.  
 
PROIRRI will support primary beneficiaries towards the following three main 
objectives: (1) to use water for agriculture efficiently, whereby minimizing producer 
dependency on rainfall patterns; (2) to improve and diversify their farming system to 
mitigate their production risks; and (3) to increase their yields and produce a surplus that 
can be marketed to generate income (e.g. rice), or take market-led production planning 
decisions and dedicate part of their production for a secured market outlet (e.g. 
Page  2
outgrowers scheme). PROIRRI will also enable targeted producer groups to evolve 
towards formal #bankable# farmers associations with stronger links to the market.   
 
3. Project Description 
Irrigation development is at the core of the GoM#s agricultural growth strategy. To 
achieve this strategic goal, the PROIRRI follows a holistic, systems-based approach to 
take irrigation development beyond the simple infrastructure construction model and 
unlock the full potential of water for agriculture. To ensure the social, environmental and 
financial sustainability of project investments in irrigation infrastructure, PROIRRI 
design embraces the combination of (i) investing in the social and technical capital of 
beneficiaries and actors on the ground, (ii) investing in institutional capacity development 
at all administrative levels, and (iii) the adoption of a market-led, value-chain based 
approach. This innovative approach for Mozambique applied in PROIRRI is referred to 
in this document as the PROIRRI Irrigation Site Development Path.  
 
This Development Path will be adapted to the specificities of the three PROIRRI 
business lines: (i) revitalizing medium-size rice-based irrigation schemes, (ii) enhancing 
horticulture-based small-scale irrigation systems, and (iii) promoting smallholder-based 
outgrowers schemes.  
 
PROIRRI activities are structured around three operational project components and one 
for project management and coordination: (i) Institutional capacity development and 
participatory irrigation management; (ii) Investing in irrigation systems and support 
infrastructure; (iii) Financial support to production and value chain development; and (iv) 
Project coordination. The project is expected to be implemented over a six-year period, 
with a closing date of June 30, 2017.  
 
Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Participatory Irrigation 
Management  
 
The objective of this component is to improve the enabling environment, strengthen 
institutions at various levels, and enhance through their participation beneficiaries# 
capacity to manage water for agriculture. The component contributes to the PDO by 
enhancing capacities for the design of irrigated agriculture policies, and for planning 
irrigation programs and implementing related activities at central, provincial, and district 
levels. The component will focus on institutional strengthening and technical skills 
development, and many activities will be developed in response to the capacity 
enhancement needs assessment carried out in the preparation phase.  
 
Sub-component 1.a: Enhancing the enabling environment and building irrigation 
capacity. The project will strengthen the capacity of MINAG/DNSA to deliver on its core 
function of policy, planning and development of the regulatory framework in support to 
the irrigation sub-sector along the priorities defined in the National Irrigation Strategy 
(ENI). This includes providing support to: (i) the development and implementation of the 
National Irrigation Program (PNI); (ii) the establishment of a dedicated national irrigation 
agency, (iii) the elaboration of a legislation and regulatory framework for water user 
associations and for the management of irrigation sites; (iv) the development of a 
portfolio of follow-up investment operations in the irrigation subsector; (v) the 
Page  3
strengthening public and private extension services; and to (vi) the implementation of the 
national Fruit Fly Surveillance Plan (FFSP).  
 
Sub-component 1.b: Participatory planning, development and management of irrigation 
schemes. PROIRRI will support comprehensive capacity development and facilitate a 
participatory scheme-level process for planning irrigation interventions, developing and 
managing infrastructure and irrigated agriculture. This process is referred to as PROIRRI 
Irrigation Site Development Path. To this end, the project will work with water users to: 
(i) create and/or strengthen Irrigation Organizations (IOs); and (ii) establish and support 
Producer Associations (PAs) by promoting a variety of improved production and post-
harvest technologies, the development of savings and loans, and building PAs and IOs 
capacity in financial literacy and business management in view of developing #bankable# 
beneficiaries attractive for financial institutions.  
 
Component 2: Investments in Irrigation Systems and Support Infrastructure  
 
The objective of this component is to finance the irrigation infrastructure required to 
increase the productivity and profitability of irrigated smallholder agriculture while 
taking into account the environmental and social safeguards associated with the civil 
works. The component contributes to the PDO by increasing the irrigated area.  
 
On the basis of participatory designs developed under Component 1.b, PROIRRI will 
finance the costs of the eligible scheme rehabilitation/construction, and the immovable 
irrigation and drainage infrastructure (weir construction, main and secondary canal 
construction, scheme buildings, etc.). The Beneficiaries (i.e. IO members) will 
participate, mainly in the form of labor and materials, to the works for site development. 
The project will also cover, where relevant, the enabling infrastructure (e.g. electricity, 
flood protection dykes, earth embankments and road connectors).  
 
Under this component, PROIRRI will also finance most of the costs associated with the 
implementation of the safeguards instruments applicable to the irrigation site 
construction/rehabilitation works.  
 
The project will cover some 3,000 ha of medium scale rice irrigation schemes, some 
1,300 ha of small scale horticulture irrigation schemes (flatland and upland irrigation 
systems) and around 1,200 ha of value chains specific out-grower irrigation schemes (e.g. 
sugar, bananas, other fruits, high-value vegetables). Irrigation infrastructure development 
will be demand-driven within the identified eligible areas. PROIRRI will endorse a mix 
of construction methods, including both plant-based and labor intensive construction 
methods.  
 
Component 3: Cost-sharing grant for market-led production and value chain 
development  
 
Access to financial services for smallholders and micro and small entrepreneurs in value 
chains supported by the project is key for the sustainability of the public investment 
through PROIRRI in irrigation infrastructure. The objective of this component is to 
support production, innovations and marketing through a cost-sharing grant scheme. The 
component supports the PDO by creating the enabling environment for sustainable 
production and marketing of produce.  
 
Page  4
To facilitate agricultural production and marketing investment, PROIRRI will provide 
demand-driven support under this component in the form of a cost-sharing grant scheme 
for farmers and value chain actors (micro and small enterprises), conditional on meeting 
clearly defined eligibility criteria. The grant scheme will consist of two windows: (1) 
Production support (seeds and fertilizer start-up kit); and (2) Equipment (e.g. farm 
machinery, greenhouse) and Value chain development (e.g. product processing, storage, 
marketing, transportation).  
 
Component 4: Project management and coordination  
 
The objective of this component is to manage and use resources in accordance with the 
project#s objectives and procedures. A semi integrated Project Coordination Team (PCT) 
will be established in MINAG/DNSA and composed of recruited individual consultants 
(including for project management, procurement and financial management) as well as 
technical specialists from the relevant central and provincial level directorates. The PCT 
will be responsible for the following types of activities: (i) project coordination and 
management; (ii) overall project planning, quality oversight, procurement, and financial 
management; (iii) outsourcing of quality oversight through independent financial and 
technical audits, and evaluation of project activities; and (iv) project monitoring and 
impact evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will develop irrigation schemes in Central Mozambique, namely in the 
provinces of Sofala, Manica and Zambezia. For social and environmental safeguards 
purposes, PROIRRI is a category as B project and has triggered seven safeguard policies 
(see section 6 below). The project will be implemented around three business lines: (i) 
the revitalization of rice-based irrigation systems; (ii) the development of small scale 
horticulture-based irrigation clusters in the hilly areas of Manica and western Sofala 
provinces; and (iii) the set up of outgrowers schemes. The project will support the 
development of irrigated rice in the lower basins of the Buzi, Pungoe, and Zambezi rivers 
in the two provinces of Sofala and Zambezia. Project activities in small scale horticulture 
will be implemented in the planalto areas (hills and plateaus) of Manica and western 
Sofala.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project potential environmental and social impacts are expected to be minor to 
moderate and site specific/localized. These include, but are not limited to the possible 
impacts of: construction/rehabilitation of small water reservoirs and irrigation schemes 
(could affect human health, natural environment, soil fertility), construction and/or 
maintenance of rural roads (soil erosion), agricultural commodity processing (through 
poor solid waste and wastewater management), physical structures and buildings (soil 
erosion, soil/air/water pollution, solid waste accumulation), and increased pesticides use 
(human health, soil/water pollution, etc.). Overall, the simplicity in the design of this 
project is expected to yield positive impacts on beneficiary communities as the proposed 
activities would help generate financial revenues that would enhance the livelihood 
conditions of the targets. Three comprehensive and easily implementable safeguard 
instruments (ESMF, PMP and RPF) and an additional sectoral guideline called Strategic 
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) have been carefully prepared to guide the 
project. No other large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect and/or unsolvable long term impacts are not expected in the project area. Where 
relevant (e.g. Lower Buzi River Basin), inappropriate irrigation infrastructures and poor 
management of water for agriculture can lead to increased salt levels in the soil, affecting 
productivity as well as incremental waterborne diseases outbreak, particularly among 
women, children and vulnerable groups, which altogether will result in more damages on 
the wealth of poor beneficiary communities, hence affecting their productivity abilities. 
The project will pay particular attention to this issue and finance the 
construction/rehabilitation of both drainage infrastructures and/or flood protection 
structures, in addition to building beneficiaries technical capacity on the sustainable use 
of water and maintenance of irrigation infrastructures for agriculture development.  
 
Page  6
As a sectoral program (PROIRRI) and in order to better embed the environmental and 
social considerations into the early planning and implementation phases of the project, 
the Borrower has prepared a comprehensive Strategic Environment and Social 
Assessment (SESA) to guide on that front. The SESA has been reviewed and cleared by 
the project safeguards team, and will be disclosed in-country at specific public locations 
and through official communication channels prior to Negotiations.  Overall, the SESA 
does provide a comprehensive review of potential long-term cumulative and regional 
impacts of interventions in the development of irrigation schemes in the project 
intervention areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Initial project implementation was envisaged to cover Sofala and Manica provinces only. 
Various studies carried out by the Borrower during the preparation phase revealed that to 
avoid adverse impacts (salinity in the Lower Buzi, low water availability in the dry and 
cooler season in the Lower Buzi, low water quality in areas of the Pungoe river basin due 
to illegal gold panning, 80% of the Marromeu District declared RAMSAR site for 
protected wetlands), the planned area of expansion in irrigated agriculture would need to 
be severely cut. As an alternative, PROIRRI identified potentially zero-impact sites in 
Zambezia province that meet PROIRRI criteria and have a good potential for rice 
development.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the scope, scale, physical location and number of specific PROIRRI activities 
cannot be specified at Appraisal (given the natural cycle of the PROIRRI Irrigation Site 
Development Path), the Borrower has prepared three core safeguard instruments to 
address any potential adverse environmental and social impacts that may arise. In 
addition to the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) which is not a 
safeguard document per se but rather a planning tool that addresses issues related to 
policy and planning as well as the legal and institutional framework, the Borrower has 
prepared three safeguard tools, namely, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) with a Pest Management Plan (PMP), and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF).  
 
#
Both the ESMF/PMP and the RPF are mandatory documents required for project 
appraisal and presentation to the Board (i.e. Pelosi Amendment, disclosure to occur 120 
days prior to Board date). These two standalone documents were first reviewed and 
approved by the project safeguards team and disclosed in-country as drafts, during a 
national workshop held at MINAG/DNSA on May 28, 2010. Final reports that include 
the safeguard team#s latest comments and recommendations have also been reviewed, 
cleared and publicly disclosed, both in-country (at MINAG/DNSA, MICOA and at the 
provincial and district levels) on November 15, 2010 and at the InfoShop on November 
15, 2010 as well.  
 
Page  7
#
The SESA has also been prepared by the Borrower, and reviewed and cleared by 
the safeguards team. Though not required before appraisal, the document will be publicly 
disclosed in Mozambique (in the national newspapers, at MINAG/DNSA and MICOA, 
and at the provincial and district levels) and at the InfoShop and Intranet of the World 
Bank before Board date.  
 
Subsequently, and as per the policies guidelines, it is expected that once the physical 
locations of the project#s specific investments are known; irrigation schemes specific 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)  and Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs) will be prepared, reviewed and disclosed accordingly.  
 
Since OP7.50 (International Waterways) is also triggered, a Riparian Notification was 
sent to all co-riparian countries (with copy to the Bank) prior to Appraisal and at least 
120 days before the Board date. Based on information provided by the Borrower at 
Appraisal, no co-riparian country had objected.  
 
To address the existing institutional capacity gap to efficiently implement the project#s 
safeguard tools, the ESMF and RPF have outlined the capacity building activities 
required to ensure that the project remains in compliance with both national legislations 
and Bank safeguard policies throughout the implementation cycle. Moreover, these 
instruments also highlight both the capacity gap and technical skills needed for the 
implementing agency and its sector partners with the implementation of PROIRRI in the 
area of environment and social safeguards.  
 
To that effect, the Borrower will identify a qualified environment/social specialist to be 
the PROIRRI focal point in MICOA (Ministry for Environmental Coordination) at the 
central level (one staff) and at the provincial level (one staff per province). These four 
social and environmental focal points will be officially designated by MICOA who will 
then confirm the names to the Bank via the DNSA. They will provide on-demand 
technical support to the Project Coordination Team (PCT) and work closely with 
extension staff and the project Irrigation Service Providers in implementing social and 
environmental aspects of the project as spelled out in the three safeguard tools, the Dam 
safety guidelines and the SESA. These specialists, as well as the PCT, will participate in 
a
World Bank organized Safeguards training in Maputo, tentatively scheduled for early 
2011. Additional targeted follow-up safeguard trainings will be provided to them and all 
other key players at community level to ensure both a good appreciation and good 
implementation of social and environmental aspects of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF/PMP and RPF included extensive and participatory public consultations 
which ensured that all stakeholders# views and concerns, in particular of women, were 
considered in project design and implementation modalities. Key stakeholders in the rural 
communities are: smallholder farming households (including women-led), emerging 
farmers with larger market-led production, micro and small entrepreneurs (local artisans), 
extension staff, traders, agriculture training and financial institutions.  
Page  8
All safeguards-related documents have been/will be disclosed publicly by the Borrower 
and the Bank in an access-friendly manner for all stakeholders at the local level, 
specifically the provincial level (DPA, DPCA) as well as at the District level (SDAE, 
SDPI).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/15/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/15/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/15/2010 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  9
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
N/A 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  10
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Patrick Verissimo 
02/16/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
02/16/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
02/16/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
02/17/2011 
Comments:   
