Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5943 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/28/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P125127 
Project Name: MZ-Education Sector Support Program 
Task Team Leader: Sophie Naudeau 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 28, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTED 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
71.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project is a direct continuation of the first FTI-CF for the Mozambique Education 
Sector Support Program, with the same development objective.  The proposed project 
Development Objective is to improve the access to and, quality and equity of education.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is a direct continuation of the first FTI-CF for the Mozambique Education 
Sector Support Program and will continue the existing program of activities. It will be guided by 
the same development objective to improve the access to, and quality and equity of education. 
The project will continue to channel resources through the common fund (FASE).  Funds will 
continue to be allocated based on an agreed annual program of activities which are designed to 
implement the Ministry of Education strategic plan for education and culture.  Each year the 
ministry presents an annual program of activities with the proposed budget and financing plan.  
The annual plans are approved by the Bank and CPs and the activities are carried in accordance 
with the planned activities and financing plan.  
 
The details of the FASE program will differ from year to year based on the particular needs and 
gaps of the year which will be discussed and agreed upon during the discussions over the annual 
Page  2
program that is approved by the Bank and the CPs. In practice, the project will continue support 
for the implementation of Government program in support of, but not limited to: construction, 
direct support to schools; the provision of school books; subsidies of literacy workers; pre-
service and in-service teacher training; curriculum reform; HIV/AIDS prevention and mitigation; 
decentralized management, supervision and monitoring (provincial and district level); and 
institutional development.  It is expected that the project will continue programs that ensure 
continuity of existing strategies that have proven to be effective, and that it will implement the 
necessary adjustments to address major challenges in order to enhance the overall sector 
performance towards meeting its strategic objectives. The activities and components are 
representative of the minimal number of activities the Government will continue to support in 
light of the expected shortfall in resources for the education sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
This is a country-wide program that will focus on the national, provincial, district and school 
level educational system.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The original project prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which are still applicable to the direct continuation 
project as there will be no new activities that will result in impacts not identified in the current 
ESMF. The ESMF and RPF were prepared during project preparation to provide guidance on 
potential environmental and social impacts and mitigation of these impacts. The documents were 
reviewed by the Bank and disclosed both in Mozambique and at the World Bank's InfoShop in 
May 2008.  The ESMF and RPF were both revised in November 2010 and the Government will 
soon disclose them in the country and then they will be disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop.  
 
These instruments (ESMF and RPF) set forth both the principles and guidelines to be followed 
to adequately handle any potential social and environmental concerns. One specific sites and 
works have been identified, Environmental Management Plans will be prepared as necessary to 
address any environmental impacts during implementation of the civil works. Under previous 
projects, the Borrower has gained sufficient exposure and experience in dealing with WB social 
and environmental safeguard policies. The Borrower has developed a comprehensive leaflet on 
social and environmental clauses that each constructor must follow for school/classrooms 
construction.  
 
This leaflet is systematically attached to all contractors' contracts to ensure clarity and 
transparence in terms of abiding by the WB safeguard policies. In addition, the Government has 
a
special agency (MICOA) that is responsible to ensure social and environmental aspects are 
dealt with appropriately on all government projects portfolio. The PIU had worked very closely 
with MICOA, and the same collaboration will be pursued throughout the lifespan of this direct 
continuation project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 for Environmental Assessment (EA) due to anticipated 
impacts from construction and rehabilitation activities because additional land might need to be 
acquired for expanding existing schools.  All new classroom construction and rehabilitation will 
take place on existing school premises. The ESMF and RPF that were prepared for the original 
project (as mentioned above, this proposed project will be a direct continuation of the first FTI-
CF for the Mozambique Education Sector Support Program) provided environmental 
management plans (EMPs) for managing all identified potential impacts as well and a framework 
for managing compensation should land acquisition be necessary, respectively.  For the original 
project there were no Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) prepared to follow up on RPF, and there 
is no plan to develop RAPs for this project either.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The reason that the project triggers OP/BP 4.12 is the same as OP/BP 4.01.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/07/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The original project prepared an ESMF and RPF which are still applicable to the direct 
continuation project as there will be no new activities that will result in impacts not identified 
in the current ESMF. The documents were reviewed by the Bank and disclosed both in 
Mozambique and at the World Bank's InfoShop in May 2008.  The ESMF and RPF were 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
both revised in November 2010 and the Government will disclose them in the country prior 
to project appraisal and then they will be disclosed at the WB Infoshop.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sophie Naudeau 
12/06/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
12/22/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter Nicolas Materu 
12/16/2010 
Comments:   
