Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/14/2011 
Report No.:  AC5941
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P083325 
Original Project Name: Roads and Bridges 
Management  and Maintenance Program - 
Phase II 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P114880 
Project Name:  Roads and Bridges Management  and Maintenance Program - Phase II 
Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Graftieaux 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 7, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Rural services and 
infrastructure (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
41.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) of RBMMP2 is to improve access of the 
population to all-season roads through maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading of the 
classified road network and the achievement of the PDO is measured through: (a) 
percentage of classified roads in good and fair condition; and (b) the percentage of the 
rural population within two kilometers of an all-season road.   
 
3. Project Description 
The amount allocated under category 3 of the credit (consultant services, with US$3.12 
million earmarked) is insufficient to finance both the supervision of three contracts on N1 
and the preparation of designs and bidding documents for works that would be financed 
under the follow-on RBMMP3 project as originally intended and reflected in the PAD 
and FA of RBMMP2. The amount was curtailed due to the limited IDA envelope that 
Page  2
was available at the time of project preparation (US$100 million as against the originally 
planned US$135 million of the APL2). Furthermore, following the visit of the World 
Bank's President to Mozambique in early 2008, the GOM specifically requested to 
commence engineering design early for roads to be financed under RBMMP3. It is 
therefore proposed to allocate an additional amount of US$5 million to this category to 
cover the respective funding gap.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The road sections which will benefit from this additional financing are Jardim-Benfica (in 
Maputo urban area) and Xai Xai # Chissibuca, both parts of N1.  
 
Regarding the Jardim-Benfica section, changes to initial project design consist of 
construction of two pedestrian footbridges:  the first at Choupal (25th June Junction) and 
the second at the Jardim junction. The proposed pedestrian footbridge at Choupal is 
proposed to be located near the junction, with a school situated on one side of the road, 
and small shops (mostly auto parts and mechanics shops) on the other side. Clearance 
will extend beyond that initially planned for the roadworks to an additional depth of 5 
meters, and will span 25 meters of the road on each side.  Both the school boundary wall 
and the small shops have encroached onto the official Road Reserve. The proposed 
pedestrian walkway at Jardim is also located near a busy junction.  Again, clearance will 
extend beyond that initially planned for the roadworks to an additional depth of 5 meters, 
and will span 25 meters of the road on each side.  On one side of the road is an 
abandoned shop/storage facility (PEP), in front of which several mobile and semi-mobile 
vendors have established their carts and kiosks.  On the other side of the road there are 
about ten small shops, ranging from groceries to take-away cafes.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN) 
Ms Cary Anne Cadman (AFTOS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project does not have significant, environmental or social safeguard issues, 
and additional impact will be minor and limited in scope. However, the construction of 
footbridges in Lot 1 requires an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), which was 
disclosed in the InfoShop and in country on February 4, 2011.  The existing 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the Jardim-Benfica section on National 
Highway 1 can be used to implement environmental management measures for the new 
construction works (the pedestrian bridges), and these measures will be reflected in the 
Progress Reports submitted by the Consultant. The project will continue following all 
EMPs already prepared, which are fully applicable to the investments planned, updating 
them as necessary, and will continue to undertake other cross-cutting activities such as 
HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention for all stakeholders, including workers employed 
on the road project sites, village residents on project road routes, and the staff of the 
implementing agencies.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no negative environmental or social long term impacts as a result of the project. 
Rather road safety and traffic management will be improved.  The project area is in an 
already densely located thoroughfare.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The current sites chosen for the footbridges provide the greatest return to pedestrians and 
motorized/non-motorized traffic, due to the location of major junctions with access to 
commercial zones and public transit centers.  The proposed footbridge at Choupal is 
located immediately outside a large school, providing additional safety to schoolchildren 
at an extremely busy road junction.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
ANE (the borrower) has proven internal capacity in the preparation of RAPs, as 
demonstrated in the planning and implementation of the existing RAP for the Jardim-
Benfica road. The Project has also provided satisfactory progress reports on 
environmental management, prepared by an environmental specialist retained by the 
consultants working on the Jardim-Benfica Road.  
 
The school boundary abuts a moderately large playground and the existing EMP covers 
the work needed to demolish the wall and re-construct it outside the official Road 
Reserve.  A temporary fence restricting access from the adjacent playground will be set 
up while demolition works are ongoing. The construction of the footbridge will lead to 
greatly enhanced safety for students and faculty, as they are now obliged to cross the 
busy road to reach public transportation.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders adversely affected by the footbridge are the small shops, cafes, and 
service providers located on either side of the proposed footbridge.  Consultations about 
an alternate siting for their businesses (which lie within the ROW) and information about 
the proposed footbridges were conducted prior to the preparation of the RAP, and the 
draft RAP was discussed with stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/18/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/04/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/04/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
There is no need to re-disclose the EMP as regular progress reports are provided and filed 
in IRIS. Given that in the first instance, the installation of street lighting will be 
undertaken on already planned sidewalks/shoulders, and in the second instance the 
pedestrian footbridges will improve safety, no additional environmental measures are 
needed beyond those called for in the existing EMP for Jardim-Benfica.   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Graftieaux 
02/10/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Noreen Beg 
02/10/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Noreen Beg 
02/10/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/10/2011 
Comments:   
