Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2011 
Report No.:  AC6139
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P125127 
Project Name:  MZ-Education Sector Support Program 
Task Team Leader:  Sophie Naudeau 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 25, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 28, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
71.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative 
90.00
90.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Development Objective is to improve the access to and, quality and equity 
of education.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is a direct continuation of the first FTI-CF for the Mozambique 
Education Sector Support Program and will continue the existing program of activities. It 
will be guided by the same development objective to improve the access to and, quality 
and equity of education. The project will continue to channel resources through the 
common fund (FASE).  Funds will continue to be allocated based on an agreed annual 
program of activities which are designed to implement the Ministry of Education 
strategic plan for education and culture.  Each year the ministry presents an annual 
program of activities with the proposed budget and financing plan.  The annual plans are 
approved by the Bank and CPs and the activities are carried in accordance with the 
planned activities and financing plan.  
 
Page  2
The specific activities funded by the common fund (FASE) will differ from year to year 
based on the particular needs and gaps of the year which will be discussed and agreed 
upon by the MOE, the Bank, and the other CPs. In practice the project, through FASE, 
will continue support for the implementation of the Government program in support of, 
but not limited to: construction, direct support to schools; the provision of school books; 
subsidies of literacy workers; pre-service and in-service teacher training; curriculum 
reform; HIV/AIDS prevention and mitigation; decentralized management, supervision 
and monitoring; and institutional development.  It is expected that the project will 
continue programs that ensure continuity of existing strategies that have proven to be 
effective, and that it will implement the necessary adjustments to address major 
challenges in order to enhance the overall sector performance toward meeting its strategic 
objectives. The activities and components are representative of the minimal number of 
activities the Government will continue to support in light of the expected shortfall in 
resources for the education sector.  
 
The expected FASE budget for the coming four years is estimated at US$ 512 million 
(or annually US$ 128 million) of which FTI and IDA will provide US$ 161 million (i.e. 
31 percent of the FASE budget).  
 
Component 1: Improving Access to Education (US$ 166.72 million, of which US$ 
29.31 million financed by FTI and US$ 23.12 million financed by IDA)  
 
In 2005, the Government accelerated classroom construction through the 
decentralization of the competencies for classroom construction to the provinces.  This 
was part of the overall strategy to expand access to primary education for all school aged 
children and improve teaching conditions. This accelerated classroom construction 
program is based on strong community involvement through local construction. The 
program also includes the provision of furniture and housing for teachers.  The current 
program contributed to a 12 percent increase in the number of classrooms from 44,747 in 
2007 to 50,354 in 2009, as well as an increase of around 50 percent of concrete or brick 
classrooms. In 2008, the program was expanded to include secondary schools in rural 
areas.  
 
The proposed project, through FASE, will continue to support this activity aimed at 
building approximately 800 new primary education classrooms and 200 rural secondary 
classrooms annually, and to provide the required furniture. Over the four year period of 
the project, through FASE, it is anticipated that approximately 3,200 new classrooms will 
be built in existing primary schools on the government owned land, and 800 new 
secondary school classrooms will be built on the government owned land. The 
construction will involve large national or international suppliers, benefiting from 
economies of scale alongside the use and continued development of local capacity.  
 
To maintain the level of access to education in basic and secondary education the 
education sector will have to continue to recruit and deploy annually in the upcoming 5 
years about 10,000 teachers and education officials. However, due to the recent economic 
crisis the sector budget has been reduced permitting only the recruitment of 8,500 
Page  3
teachers. In order to ensure sufficient teachers for post primary education and to 
minimize the constraints on access to basic education, FASE will contribute to the 
salaries of new contracted teachers in 2011. The FASE donors and the Bank will continue 
to work with the government to ensure that in 2012 at least 75 percent of these newly 
recruited teachers can be absorbed by the Government budget.  
 
To ensure a better start for all children and improve their performance in school, the 
ministry also recognizes the need for a robust pre-primary education program.  Currently, 
the coverage of early childhood education services is only 4 percent, and mainly provided 
by the Ministry of Women and Social Services, the private sector, and local community 
organizations. FASE will support the development of an integrated framework that 
considers the development of the child as a whole. The ministry recognizes the 
importance of early childhood education and will progressively support increased access 
to pre-primary education in the coming years.  
 
Component 2: Improving the Quality of Education (US$ 283.1 million, of which US$ 
49.8 million financed by FTI and US$ 39.3 million financed by IDA)  
 
This component will continue to support the Government plans to improve the quality 
of education through: (i) the continued implementation of the reform in teacher training 
which is aimed at providing intense and quality pre-service and in-service training and 
increasing the number of teachers; (ii) the provision of free primary school books; (iii) 
direct support to schools; and (iv) subsidies for literacy workers.  
 
Subcomponent 2.1: Teacher Training for Primary Education  
 
In 2006, the pupil:teacher ratio was 75:1 due to the rapid expansion in the number of 
students attending primary and secondary schools. At the same time, 35 percent of the 
teachers did not have any pre-service teacher training. This had a detrimental impact on 
the quality and efficiency in the system. The MOE's reform aimed at, among others, 
providing intense quality pre-service training without losing sight of the need to ensure 
the long-term sustainability of an increasing number of teachers in the system. This led 
to: (i) reforms in pre-service teacher training by adjusting the teacher training curriculum, 
improving quality of teacher training; and providing basic training in a shorter period of 
time (one year); (ii) promotion of a system that fully integrated pre-service training and 
continuous professional development; and (iii) rationalizing the existing system for in-
service teacher training by transferring this responsibility to teacher training institutes 
(IFPs), which are part of the Ministry of Education.  
 
Since 2006, the IFPs have increased the number of pre-service graduates from 5,228 in 
2006 to 10,033 in 2009. In addition, 5,563 primary school teacher graduates have 
improved their qualification level through the IAP/IEDA distance education learning 
courses. Since 2008, the IFPs have conducted continuous training activities for primary 
school teachers and managers, led by the IFPs trainers, and this program benefited greatly 
from an increase in FASE funding in 2008.  
 
Page  4
Pre- and in-service teacher training will remain a priority in the next strategic sector 
plan and continue to benefit from funding through FASE. The current number of newly 
graduated teachers should be sufficient to ensure a continued decrease in the pupil: 
teacher ratio, which is still high. At the same time, the project will continue to focus on 
increasing the capacity of the IFPs to implement the integrated teacher training system: 
pre-service training and on the job training, distance training and support to new teachers 
in the workplace.  
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Production and Distribution of Free Primary School Books  
 
The Government of Mozambique has declared free primary school. This means that all 
children shall have access to a full primary education cycle of seven years, regardless of 
financial means. In order to implement this strategy, the Government agreed to distribute 
free textbooks to all children. Every year, approximately 12 to 14 million books (82 
titles) are produced and distributed to primary schools from grades 1-7. The planning is 
based on an annual school survey conducted each March as well as a ratio of one 
textbook per subject per student - most books having a life-span of three years (with the 
exception of workbooks from grade 1 and 2 which have a one year life span). This 
program has contributed to increased enrollment in primary schools. However, it also 
represents a large portion of the sector's budget (in 2009 the production and distribution 
of textbooks for primary education represented about 15 percent of the FASE 
expenditures).  
 
In spite of the success of this program, there are still students without books. This 
subcomponent will, through FASE, continue to support the distribution of free textbooks 
as well as assist in ongoing Government efforts to find ways to reduce the cost of 
production and ensure better coverage. The Government's plan to achieve this is to: (i) 
continue savings by acquiring property rights for more book titles; (ii) rationalize the 
number of titles particularly in grades 3 to 7; (iii) improve book conservation by 
improving the quality of the books and improving storage conditions at schools; (iv) 
increase replacement rates, particularly for key subjects; and (v) implement actions to 
make textbook distribution more competitive.  
 
Linked to the objective of improving quality of education, the challenge is to 
continuously improve the capacity of teachers in the use of textbooks in the classroom to 
achieve better student learning outcomes.  This challenge is directly linked to the need for 
greater focus on this within teacher training and as a part of regular supervision, which is 
discussed in the teacher training component.  
 
Subcomponent 2.3: Curriculum Reform for Primary and Secondary Education  
 
In 2004, the ministry introduced the new curriculum for primary education with the 
objective of contributing to improving the quality and relevance of education. The 
curriculum transformation aims to support efforts to reduce dropout and failure rates, and 
gender and regional disparities. The transformation was based on the need to adjust the 
structure and content of the curriculum to the changing reality of the country and today's 
Page  5
world. A curriculum plan for primary education was developed and programs and school 
manuals were validated and approved. The results achieved with the introduction of the 
primary education curriculum are demonstrated through the: (i) increase in completion 
rates for primary education, equity and reduction of repetition and drop-out rates; (ii) 
perception that the curriculum is innovative, as demonstrated through the introduction of 
Mozambican languages, local curriculum and new subjects; and (iii) provision of 
textbooks and teacher manuals that are consistent with the primary education curriculum 
plan and with the teaching programs, and more attractive and adapted to the Mozambican 
reality.  
 
In 2006/07, the MOE initiated the reform of secondary education. The main objective of 
this reform is to align with the basic education curriculum and improve its responsiveness 
to changing societal needs in terms of ensuring that secondary school leavers have the 
necessary competencies to become productive adults.  
 
The project, through FASE, will continue to support ongoing curriculum reform 
activities in both primary and secondary education with continued focus on the 
development of basic skills in speaking, reading, writing and numeracy among all 
students in the first years of school and the consolidation of these skills throughout the 
next cycles of learning. This goal, which is taken as an indicator of the quality of 
teaching, should be achieved in parallel to and support of the reduction of school failure 
levels, the subsequent increase of completion rates at the appropriate age and with the 
skills defined in the curriculum, and the increase in the number of students pursuing their 
education at the next level.  
 
Subcomponent 2.4: Direct support to school program (ADE)  
 
The direct support to school program (ADE) is a program that transfers funds directly 
from the central level to schools for the purchase of basic materials to support teaching 
and learning processes.  An evaluation of the program has shown that the program has a 
positive impact in terms of ensuring funding for the purchase of basic materials (i.e., 
pens, pencils, notebooks, complementary reading materials etc.) and strengthening the 
functioning of school councils who are responsible for the management of funds.  
Currently the program is based on number of students only and places around US$2.5 per 
student per year in all primary schools.  In 2006, a pilot project was introduced to provide 
additional support for orphans and other vulnerable children affected by the HIV/AIDs 
pandemic in the amount of US$1.5 per child through the ADE structure.  In 2009 this 
pilot operated in 13 districts. This has been considered unsustainable and was 
discontinued. However, with the expected increase in ADE funding, a social protection 
component will be introduced to support the most vulnerable children throughout the 
country. The Government is also planning to introduce an element of performance-based 
financing in future ADE allocations.  
 
In 2008, the ADE program was expanded to include secondary schools and institutions 
for technical-vocational training.  
 
Page  6
The project, through FASE, will continue to support the ADE through the direct transfer 
of funds from the central level to the school level. The integration of the social protection 
aspect of the program that targets orphans and vulnerable children will also continue to 
be supported.  The ADE should be regarded as the main fund available to primary 
schools for the purpose of: (i) funding the school's recurrent expenses (i.e., maintenance, 
electricity and water); (ii) funding basic learning materials aimed at improving the quality 
of education; and (iii) ensuring the increased participation and retention of vulnerable 
children.  
 
Subcomponent 2.5: Subsidies for literacy workers  
 
The Government Five Year Plan (PQG) expects a reduction of the adult illiteracy rate 
(measured through household surveys) from 48.1 percent in 2009 to 30 percent by 2014. 
In order to reach this target, one million people will need to develop literacy skills every 
year. This subcomponent will continue to provide subsidy payments for literacy workers 
involved in different literacy programs provided by government and non-governmental 
organizations. In 2003, the payment of trainer subsidies was introduced (550 MT per 
month). Beginning 2011, an increase in the monthly amount of the subsidy is anticipated 
from 550 MT to 650 MT (approximately US$20/month). This program is traditionally 
co-financed by the internal source of funding.  The payment of subsidies has been a 
consistent element of the programs financed by FASE, reflecting the Government's 
commitment to reducing the high illiteracy rate in the country, particularly among rural 
women. Despite a clear commitment and emphasize on adult literacy, progress has been 
slow, as external factors such as lack of a literate environment play an important role in 
sustaining literacy.  
 
Component 3: HIV/AIDS Prevention and Mitigation (US$ 11.8 million, of which US$ 
2.1 million financed by FTI and US$ 1.6 million financed by IDA)  
 
The results of HIV prevalence obtained through INSIDA 2009 indicate that 11.5 percent 
of Mozambicans between the ages of 15-49 are infected with HIV. The highest 
prevalence rates are found among girls aged 15 24. In 2009, the prevalence rate in 
pregnant women aged 15-19 was 8 percent; and 16 percent for women between the ages 
of 20 24. The gender difference is serious. Women aged 15-19 are 3 times more prone to 
contamination than men the same age and 4 times more prone between the ages of 20 24.  
 
In spite of efforts made, there is not yet evidence that the epidemic is decreasing. 
However, there is some evidence that the situation has stabilization in the north and that 
the infection rate in the central part of the country has decreased, excluding Zambézia.  In 
the south, the epidemic is still growing. Over the past five years there has been significant 
progress in: (i) the mainstreaming of HIV/AIDS as a cross-cutting issue into the sector, 
through budgeted plans; (ii) the expansion of funding for prevention, care and mitigation 
at provincial and district levels; (iii) the expansion of antiretroviral treatment to all 
districts, and (iv) the launch of the community counseling and testing initiative.  
 
Page  7
The education sector has been hit particularly hard as the high prevalence rate of 
HIV/AIDS among teachers and administrative staff in Mozambique strongly impacts 
both access to and quality of education, in part because of the challenge of having to 
constantly replace teachers who become sick and can no longer teach and in part because 
of illness-related absenteeism. This component will therefore contribute to achieving the 
project outcomes in components 1 and 2.  
 
The sector has formulated its interventions on the basis of its four functions in the 
combat of the HIV/AIDS pandemic:  
 
-
as employer: aiming to develop HIV/AIDS prevention and impact mitigation 
actions for teachers, school directors and other staff;  
 
-
as educator: aiming to develop HIV/AIDS prevention and impact mitigation 
actions for students, including support to orphans and vulnerable children;  
 
-
as system: aiming to develop an effective institutional framework that will allow 
the sector to provide an adequate response to HIV/AIDS in order to carry out its central 
education mission in spite of the epidemic's impact;  
 
-
as part of the national response: aiming to develop effective relationships with 
other governmental and non-governmental partners to respond to the epidemic.  
 
The project, through FASE, will focus on mainstreaming HIV/AIDS prevention and 
mitigation activities into existing key sector programs (i.e., school curriculum; textbooks, 
ADE, teacher training,  etc.), as well as on-going planning, budgeting and monitoring 
processes. It will also provide support to the implementation of the HIV/AIDs work place 
policy that aims to support education officials (teachers and administrators alike).  
 
Component 4: Strengthening the Management of the Education Administrative System 
(US$ 50.3 million, of which US$ 8.8 million financed by FTI and US$ 7.0 million 
financed by IDA)  
 
The rapid expansion of the sector along with decentralization of responsibilities and 
financial resources requires continued support for strengthening institutional capacity at 
all levels of the system's management. The objective of this component is to continue 
strengthening management capacity within a decentralized education system.  Effective 
decentralization requires institutional capacity.Strengthening institutional capacity 
requires, but is not limited to, investing in the provision of means (such as transportation, 
communication, supplies), clear orientation in terms of the role of education sector staff 
in the implementation and monitoring of activities, clear procedures and regulations, 
placing people in the right position, strong incentives, and supervision and capacity 
building.  
 
Subcomponent 4.1: Continuing the consolidation of the reforms in the area of financial 
management and procurement as well as planning budgeting and monitoring.  
 
This subcomponent will support an integrated planning and monitoring system that 
builds on the principle that decentralization requires greater accountability systems to 
Page  8
avoid inequities in the service delivery of educational services. In this context the project 
will continue to support the following activities:  
 
-
Capacity building activities  aimed to increased the knowledge of provincial and 
district officials in strategic planning and budgeting of education;  
 
-
Initiation of the process of design of procurement plans at provincial levels and in 
selected districts where capacity has been strengthened;  
 
-
The upgrading of the existing EMIS supported as well by additional resources 
from UNESCO. This sub-component will aim at strengthening  integrated monitoring and 
evaluation by assisting the directorate of planning through: (1) provision of technical 
assistance to review and upgrade the existing EMIS system; (2) provision of technical 
support for the design of an integrated planning and monitoring system that builds on the 
principle that decentralization requires greater accountability systems to avoid inequities 
in the service delivery of educational services and (3) provision of technical assistance to 
conduct the impact evaluation of selected interventions which will serve to support policy 
and timely decision making.  
 
-
Impact evaluation studies of selected interventions to inform policy decision-
making.  
 
-
Provision of the Project's financial support, through FASE, to provincial 
directorates and district services to facilitate their functioning and responsiveness to 
manage the implementation of the system at decentralized levels. The Project's financing 
to Provincial Directorate of Education and Culture (DPECs) and Secretary for Education, 
Youth and Technology at district level (SDEJTs) in addition to funds made available 
from the internal component of the budget was introduced in 2008. It is expected that 
support will remain at the level of execution in 2009 and 2010.  
 
-
Provision of technical assistance in the area of financial management, 
procurement, and construction.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This is a country-wide program that will focus on the national, provincial, district and 
school level educational system. All new classroom construction and rehabilitation will 
take place on existing school premises. The Ministry of Education prepared an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) in May 2008.  The proposed project triggers three safeguards policies: 
(i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), (ii) Pest Management (OP 4.09), and (iii) 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  The ESMF addresses OP/BP 4.01 and OP 4.09, 
and the RPF addresses OP/BP 4.12.  As such, the ESMF and RPF were revised and 
disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank's InfoShop in December 2010.  
However, no major resettlement issues or loss of/restriction to access to valuable 
socioeconomic assets are anticipated as a result of the SPEC implementation. The 
framework provides a process to protect against community land donation and/or loss 
of/restriction to access to valuable socioeconomic assets which can be the result of 
coercion from the community upon select individuals. The RPF also allows for 
monitoring mechanisms to be in place to ensure no person is worse off as a result of the 
project activities.   
Page  9
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS) 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTEN) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as an EA category B and it triggers OP/BP 4.01, OP 4.09, 
and OP/BP 4.12 respectively for environmental and social assessment due to envisaged 
potential negative impacts related to construction activities, as well as potential loss 
of/restriction of access to valuable socio-economic assets. Such negative impacts would 
include solid waste management, vegetation clearing, soil and water pollution, air 
pollution from increased dust, potential use of chemical for the control of termites during 
the construction phase, and potential injuries to construction workers as well as 
temporary loss of access to valuable socioeconomic assets.  
 
The Pest Management OP 4.09 is triggered due to the fact that the Project may 
purchase, acquire, use and/or involve application as well as disposal of pesticides to 
control for termites in the wood procured and used for construction of schools as part of 
Component 1 activities. The specific considerations with respect to pest and pesticide 
management issues relevant to the Project are addressed in the Project's ESMF.  The 
Project aims to (i) promote the use of biological and/or environmental management for 
pest control, in this case termites; and (ii) strengthen capacity of the Project implementing 
entity to promote and implement safe, effective and environmentally sound pest 
management in accordance with the classification of pesticides and their specific 
formulations as per the World Health Organization's Recommended Classification of 
Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to Classification (Geneva: WHO 1994-95). 
Furthermore, any pesticide financed by the Project for the control of termites will be 
manufactured, packaged, labeled, handled, stored, disposed of, and applied according to 
standards acceptable to the Bank. The Project will not finance the purchase or distribution 
Page  10
of any pesticide to treat school construction materials for termites nor would it finance 
any additional activities with negative impacts different to those implemented under the 
parent project. Furthermore, the Borrower will ensure that Contractors are instructed not 
to cut any trees  for the purpose of construction materials or firewood or any other reason 
when under contract for the project; rather more environmentally friendly alternatives 
would be developed to ensure project is socially and environmentally in compliance with 
OP/BP 4.01 principles and guidelines (i.e. "greening environment projects" that involve 
all schools, students and teachers in tree nurseries and tree planting in the respective 
districts in Mozambique, as part of their civic programs.  
 
The ESMF provides guidelines for preparation of required environmental and social 
management plans (ESMPs) to mitigate and manage any and all potential impacts 
anticipated from activities to be undertaken under the project. The ESMF provides an 
environmental and social checklist, environmental and social screening form, and 
environmental and social guidelines for contractors designed to ensure that adverse 
environmental and social impacts from project activities are identified and captured in the 
planning stages of each sub-project. Moreover, the ESMF describes the Pest Management 
approach to be adopted in this Project which addresses (a) Pesticide use and management 
for termite control; and (d) Monitoring and evaluation.  The pest management approach is 
designed to minimize potential adverse impacts on human health and the environment 
and reflect the guiding principles of an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach.  
 
Both the ESMF and RPF that were prepared in May 2008, were revised in December 
2010, and provide unified approaches for addressing all identified potential negative 
impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long term impacts envisages due to anticipated future activities in the 
project area, from an environmental and social perspectives. All identified impacts will 
be localized, temporal and reversible. All known impacts will be managed in ESMF and 
RPF.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternatives were applicable. The project will be constructing/rehabilitating existing 
schools/institutions at identified existing locations.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower prepared both an RPF and ESMF for the project in May 2008, which were 
revised in December 2010 to capture the project vision of anticipated activities. The 
ESMF and RPF provide a framework for management of all potential negative 
environmental and social impacts during classroom construction and/or rehabilitation.  In 
terms of technical capacity, the Ministry of Environment (MICOA) in Mozambique has 
decentralized the environmental (and social) management function to provincial offices. 
Page  11
Officials in provincial offices work with project teams to ensure compliance with 
legislation and requirements from World Bank safeguard policies.  
 
While a commitment to education for all children is reflected in all Government 
documents, Mozambique faces a dramatic shortage of school infrastructure in both urban 
and rural settings. Therefore, significant resources will be devoted to improve and 
rehabilitate the school/classrooms infrastructure, and where needed, to build new schools 
to meet the increasing demand for education.  The expansion of coverage and the 
improvements in quality will have a very significant social impact.  The positive impact 
outweighs limited negative social impacts.  To mitigate any possible social impact caused 
by project activities, the Ministry of Education, based on their environmental and social 
management framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), has 
recently developed a leaflet on environmental and social issues that the MOE distributed 
to the schools, district authorities as well as to construction companies as annex of their 
contracts. The leaflet will contribute to increased knowledge on key issues relate to 
environmental and social issues for school and district managers.  
 
Although no major resettlement issues as well as loss of/restriction to access to valuable 
socioeconomic assets are anticipated as a result of the Strategic Plan for Education and 
Culture (SPEC) implementation, the Ministry prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) in May 2008 which was then updated in December 2010. The framework provides 
a
process to protect against community land donation which can be the result of coercion 
from the community upon select individuals. The RPF also allows for monitoring 
mechanisms to be in place to ensure no person is worse off as a result of the project 
activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the various ministries involved in the implementation of the 
project. Both the ESMF and RPF were prepared in May 2008 in consultation with these 
stakeholders as well as beneficiary communities and the general public. Then the 
government revised the ESMF and the RPF and these were publicly disclosed in 
Mozambique and at the World Bank's Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/29/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/29/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  12
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/29/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/29/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/29/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  13
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sophie Naudeau 
04/04/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
04/04/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz 
04/04/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
 
04/04/2011 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/04/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter Nicolas Materu 
04/04/2011 
Comments:   
