                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/07/2011                                     Report No.: AC6090
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Namibia                               Project ID: P070885
Project Name: Namibian Coast Conservation and Management Project
Task Team Leader: Jean-Michel G. Pavy
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2005        Estimated Board Date: September 1, 2005
Managing Unit: AFTEN                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Central government
administration (25%);Sub-national government administration (25%)
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (40%);Biodiversity (40%);Other
environment and natural resources management (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              4.90
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             19.64
         FINLAND, Govt. of (Except for Min. for Foreign Affairs)         2.00
         FRANCE, Govt. of (Except for Min. of Foreign Affairs-MOFA) 0.50
         GERMANY, Govt. of (Except for BMZ)                              1.70
                                                                        23.84
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The combined Project development and global objective is to assist Namibia to conserve,
use sustainably and mainstream the biodiversity of the Namibian coast.

 Outcome indicators

 OI 1. Increase in km2 and number of terrestrial and marine ecosystems of biodiversity
importance under effective management by year 5 compared to baseline situation.

 OI 2. Increase in the number of people engaged in sustainable use activities by year 5
compared to baseline.

 OI 3. Coastal biodiversity better incorporated into planning, policy, institutions and
investment at national, regional and local levels by year 5 compared to baseline.
3. Project Description
The Project has four components: (i) Component 1: Policy, Legal, Institutional and
Planning Framework for Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) conducive to
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Use; (ii) Component 2: Targeted Capacity
Building for ICZM conducive to Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Use; (iii)
Component 3: Targeted Investments in Critical Ecosystems for Biodiversity
Conservation, Sustainable Use and Mainstreaming; and (iv) Component 4: Project
Management and Performance Monitoring.

 Component 1: Legal, Institutional, Policy and Planning Framework for Integrated
Coastal Zone Management

 The objective of this component is to fill the current gap for mainstreaming of
biodiversity conservation and management into policy, legal and institutional structures
affecting the sustainable development of the coastal zone. Such a policy should fall
within existing national, regional, local and sectoral frameworks. The Namibia Coastal
Management White Paper will provide an overarching and comprehensive framework to
support integrated planning and decision-making affecting coastal lands and waters,
based on the carrying capacity of the Namibian coast as a whole. It will be based on a
highly participatory approach involving the identified stakeholder groups in multiple
consultations and meetings.

 Subcomponent Intermediate Outcome Indicators:
 1.1.1 Option Paper on policy and legal aspects developed and disseminated;
 1.1.2 Formal determination of line ministries related to the amendment or development
of new legislation and policies obtained;
 1.1.3 ICZM legislation drafted and submitted for gazetting;
 1.2.1 Consultative process and documentation on clarification of institutional mandates
developed and implemented;
 1.2.2 Environmental Policies and Management Plans for coastal authorities (Henties
Bay, Swakopmund, Walvis Bay and Lüderitz) developed;
 1.3.1 Coastal Policy (White paper) published and endorsed by Cabinet; and
 1.4.1 Operational modalities for National Permanent Coastal Zone management (CZM)
Mechanism developed and financial sustainability strategy and action plan related to
ICZM developed and implemented.

 Component 2: Targeted Capacity Building for ICZM Conducive to Biodiversity
Conservation and Sustainable Use

 This component will fill the capacity gap at all levels in support of integrated coastal
zone management biodiversity conservation and sustainable use, including
mainstreaming of coastal biodiversity and resources into development planning and key
economic activities.

 Subcomponent Intermediate Outcome Indicators:
 2.1.1 Training conducted at central, regional and local levels in needed skills such as (a)
Participatory approaches & mediation; (b) EIA and SEA; (c) M&E, including principles,
approaches, tools (GIS and mapping) and effective data use; (d) Sustainable resource-
based economic development; and (e) Law enforcement and prevention;
 2.2.1 Ministry of Environment and Tourism (MET) and Ministry of Fisheries and
Marine Resources agreement on coastal and marine biodiversity data hub operational;
 2.3.1 Awareness about Integrated Coastal Zone management (ICZM) among line
ministries, coastal Regional Councils, Local authoritiess and local communities increased
by 70% compared to baseline; and
 2.3.2 Regional coastal profiles for all 4 regions developed.

 Component 3: Targeted Investments in Critical Ecosystems for Biodiversity
Conservation, Sustainable use and Mainstreaming

  This component uses targeted investments and activities to address on-the-ground gaps
in coastal biodiversity conservation and sustainable use throughout the Namib coastal and
marine ecosystems rooted in under- and un-protected biodiversity hotspots. These
activities will be complemented by MET’s Strengthening Proteced Area Network of
Namibia (SPAN) Project, which addresses management and sustainability issues in
targeted national terrestrial parks.

 Subcomponent Intermediate Outcome Indicators:
 3.1.1 Three new coastal terrestrials Protected Areas (PA) and 1 Marine protected Areas
(MPA) zone created;
 3.1.2 Seven management plans (3 existing PAs, 3 new PAs and MPA) for ecosystems of
biodiversity importance in place and in line with local development plans;
 3.2.1 Investments through Matching Grants are approved and completed; and
 3.2.2 Enforcement of Management Plans strengthened.

 Component 4: Project Coordination and Reporting

 This component reflects the incremental need for an operational project coordination
structure. The Project, through this component, will support the establishment and
operationalization (through staffing, office infrastructure and Project management-related
capacity building) of a slim Project Management Unit (PMU) housed in the Erongo
Regional Council. The Erongo Regional Council hosts currently the Integrated Coastal
Zone Management Committee (ICZMC) Secretariat as well as the NACOMA preparation
coordinator.

 Subcomponent Intermediate Outcome Indicators:
 4.1.1 Ninety percent of project activities identified in annual work plans satisfactorily
implemented; and
 4.2.1 Monitoring reports (incl. annual audit) are produced and disseminated in
accordance with PIM and annual work plan schedule.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Government of the Republic of Namibia (GRN) is implementing the Project with
support from a MET Project Coordination Office (PCO) based in Swakopmund
responsible for day to day project management and coordination. A Project Steering
Committee (SC) guides MET and its project team in the implementation of the project. It
comprises MET (chair) and Ministry of Regional Local Governments, Housing and Rural
Development (deputy-chair), Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, Ministry of
Mines and Energy, Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry, Ministry of Work and
Transport, Communication, National Planning Commission and Chief Executive Officer
(CEOs) of Kunene, Erongo, Hardap and Karas Region. The Integrated Coastal Zone
Management Committee (ICZMC) provides inputs and advice to the SC as defined in the
financing agreement. It comprises the regional councils of the four coastal regions,
coastal focal points from MET, MRLGHRD, MFMR, MME, MAWF and MWT and
coastal local authority representatives from Swakopmund, Walvis Bay, Henties Bay and
Lüderitz and non-institutional stakeholders and co-opted entities. A Scientific Group
(SG) provides scientific input as requested by SC, ICZMC or MET/project team and was
put in place to assist in screening matching grant proposals, develop indicators for coastal
zone management monitoring mechanisms and to contribute to targeted capacity building
efforts.

  The up-dated definition of the project#s intervention zone, the Namibian coastal zone, is
taken from the final draft Coastal Policy: Landward/eastern boundary indicating 10-25
fog days per year and seaward boundary core coastal zone of 12 nautical mile territorial
waters and 200nm EEZ. The inland coastal zone boundary is based on the principle that
environmental and socio-economic considerations must go hand in hand.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Claudia Sobrevila (AFTEN)
   Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.01

 Insufficient capacity related to EA, particularly for those required in a coastal/marine
environment has been identified during appraisal. To a limited extent this finding is still
relevant due to the pending EMA regulations (to be approved in 2011) and overall limited
capacity at local and regional levels. However, a Coastal Zone Management Policy is
under development with a White Paper finalized. Strategic Environmental Assessments
(SEA) have been completed for the Northern as well as for the Southern regions. SEA
principles have been integrated in the Namibia Coastal Management Policy (White
Paper) and related local and regional planning processes. It should be noted that the
project#s EMP features are embedded in the Matching Grant screening and supervision
tools.

  The classes of eligible micro-activities under component 3 together with the list of
ineligible activities, identified by stakeholders during project preparation, indicate
project-funded activities that are likely to have no adverse impacts on the environment, or
minimal impacts that are site-specific, easy to mitigate, and technically and institutionally
manageable. These activities will largely focus on biodiversity conservation and
rehabilitation, sustainable use of prioritized ecosystems, targeted IEC activities and
targeted research activities, all supporting the project’s aim to positively affect the
environment. However, as small-scale physical works may be funded by the project,
NACOMA is classified as an environmental safeguard category "B" project. As a
consequence, an EMP was requested by ASPEN to ensure that the project’s on-the-
ground activities are carried out in line with World Bank EA Policy OP4.01 and similar
Namibian EA requirements, and to ensure that all possible negative impacts are
considered and mitigation measures are spelled out prior to the implementation of any
on-the-ground activities.

 OP 4.12

 OP/BP 4.12 was triggered during project implementation because of restriction of
access to natural resources due to the inclusion of new terrestrial protected areas (PA) in
the project in November, 2008 and in February, 2009. At the Bank request, the recipient
prepared a Process Framework (PF).

  The PF describes the participatory process by which: (1) the criteria for eligibility of
affected persons will be determined; and (2) measures to assist the affected persons in
their efforts to improve or restore, in real terms, to pre-displacement levels, their
livelihoods while maintaining the sustainability of targeted protected areas.

 The PF establishes a process and mechanisms by which (1) potentially affected
individuals participate in the project activities, in particular the natural resource
management process, (2) determines measures necessary to achieve resettlement policy
objectives, if any, (3) ensures that these impacts are reflected in the monitoring and
evaluation (M & E) system and (4) ensures that no one is worse off from the project.

 The PF is implemented through Action Plans which involves (1) a participatory
planning approach (including a communication and consultation process) that PAs
follow, and which include direct PA beneficiaries but also the larger community that the
PA members belong to; (2) a targeting strategy that ensures that #affected individuals#, if
any, are identified; and (3) an integrated project M&E system to ensure that no one is
worse off by the project initiative of supporting PAs.

 Already the design of several Action Plans have been initiated (1) one includes the
establishment of a more permanent communication program and to expand the Dune Belt
Contingency Management Committee (CMC) into a Park Consultative Forum, (2)
another takes into consideration communication constraints with the Topnaar Community
residing in the Namib-Naukluft Park with the aim to improve the trust relationship with
the community and ensuring that the remaining Process Framework activities are
completed in time and efficiently, and (3) a further being designed to provides a specific
grievance procedure for marine protected areas.

  The PF, which is dated March 31, 2009, was reviewed by ASPEN on June 2, 2009 and
disclosed in-country (NACOMA webpage) and in INFOSHOP on June 09, 2009. An up-
dated version has been cleared by ASPEN on April 2, 2011 and disclosed in coastal
offices of the Ministry of Environment and Tourism, the Ministry of Fisheries and
Marine Resources, the coastal local authority offices and the coastal regional authorities#
offices as well as in INFOSHOP on April 5, 2011. The PF is expected to be reviewed
from time to time during implementation to assess whether it is still accommodating the
specific reality of an emerging protected area management system with variable users,
beneficiaries and restrictions. Any further revision would be subjected to the Bank
clearance and to a new full disclosure process both in country and at Infoshop.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Project-funded activities are likely to have neither any major adverse impact on the
environment or on livelihood. If any, environmental and social impacts are expected to be
minimal, site-specific, easy to mitigate, and technically and institutionally manageable
through the Environment management Plan (EMP) or a Process Framework.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The recipient has prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which was
reviewed and approved by ASPEN, and was disclosed at InfoShop and in-country prior to
Project appraisal. The EMP has been developed on the basis of preparatory stakeholder
workshops held during project preparation in Namibia, review of documents relating to
the NACOMA project, World Bank EA Policy OP4. 01, and similar Namibian EA
requirements, and consultations with key stakeholders on the coast.

  To ensure that the intent of OP 4.12 is indeed carried out through the Project
Participation Plan a specific grievance or appeals process has been included in the PF for
terrestrial protected areas and the same will be done for the NIMPA, with an agency
identified to receive appeals. This has been prepared in case there is a group of
stakeholders that feels its interests are being curtailed by a restriction on access, and that
the additional elements of a process framework should be formulated and agreed on. If
the complainant is not thus satisfied, he or she would then have recourse to a disinterested
agency that has responsibility for protecting the rights of citizens in the area. Bank
supervision includes a special effort to determine whether any such situations have
emerged and, if so, whether the Project and the Government has properly handled the
situation according to OP 4.12 (last specific safeguard compliance supervision mission
carried out in September 2010, see section 1.)

  The Government of Namibia, specifically the Ministry of Environment and Tourism,
has gained experience with applying safeguard policies for project development based on
another recently approved project (the Integrated Community-based Ecosystem
Management - ICEMA project), for which an Environmental and Social Assessment and
Management Plan, a Resettlement Policy Framework, and a Indigenous Peoples
Development Plan were prepared and disclosed by the MET. Adequate technical and
legal capacity and expertise exist in Namibia for developing mitigation and management
plans, as well as relevant social and environmental monitoring.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key Project stakeholders are line ministries such MET, MFMR, MME, MAWRD, MWT,
MRGLH, and regional and local governments involved in CZM, as well as the private
sector around biodiversity hotspots and the respective management committees of the
coastal and marine protected areas. Additional key players are research institutions,
members of an established CZ scientific group, provide technical input to the SC as well
as training institutions, CBOs and NGOs.

 The mentioned above, stakeholders have taken an essential role in Project design
through numerous meetings and workshops, in which Project design was decided upon
and related decisions took place. To ensure that the Project engages in effective
information dissemination, consultation, and stakeholder participation during
implementation, a Project Participation Plan, describing stakeholder involvement and
participation processes per component, has been finalized during project appraisal.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 01/13/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             03/08/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/23/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03/24/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/05/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/05/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process           Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector     Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s    Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Jean-Michel G. Pavy                       04/04/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Claudia Sobrevila                         04/05/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour                   04/05/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Dahlia Lotayef                            04/07/2011
  Comments:
