Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6125 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/29/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P125331 
Project Name: Human Development - Social Protection Pilot Project 
Task Team Leader: Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 1, 2011 
Managing Unit: SASSP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (70%);Other human development (30%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Rapid Social Response Program 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To improve the delivery of cash-based social safety nets in pilot districts of Nepal while 
enhancing the human capital development and education outcomes of eligible children through 
technical assistance and capacity building to the Ministry of Local Development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be funded by the RSR-MDTF and will finance three component as follows:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening institutional capacity to design and implement the HDSP (US$ 0.8 
million).  This component will provide the technical assistance and training to develop the 
project systems.  Four elements will be supported: (i) a review of current cash transfer programs; 
(ii) design of operational systems including the targeting, enrollment, payment, and case 
management; (iii) design of a Management Information System (MIS) and web portal. The MIS 
will be integrated at the central and local DDC/VDC levels together with providing technical 
assistance to establish the monitoring mechanisms with schools, banks or other payment centers, 
and communities and households; and (iv) training and capacity building on system 
Page  2
implementation at central and local level.  The majority of this component would be managed by 
the Bank team using the Bank-administered portion of the grant.  
 
Component 2: Implementation of the HDSP (US$ 0.6 million). The component will provide 
goods and services required to implement the pilot in the two districts.Implementation will 
involve, among other activities: (i) provision of core computer hardware for local offices; (ii) 
supplies and forms for enrollment; (iii) creation of the beneficiary database; (iv) establishing the 
MIS system and necessary connectivity between localities and the center; (v) providing linkages 
with payment systems.  Specific items will be agreed jointly with MoLD, UNCDF and the Bank 
teams.  The cash transfer payments to beneficiaries in the pilot districts will be provided through 
GON and UNCDF resources.  
 
Component 3: Evaluating the HDSP (US$ 0.6 million).  This component will support the design 
and implementation of a rigorous evaluation of the pilot program, including (i) a process 
evaluation of the operational procedures to assess administrative efficiency and constraints at 
both the center and local DDC/VDC levels. It will determine whether operational standards were 
followed and where procedures may not be adequate and require adjustment if scaling up is 
considered; (ii) an impact evaluation of the socioeconomic and behavioral effects on 
beneficiaries.  The evaluation will examine whether incomes of beneficiaries increased and how 
transfers were spent as well as whether educational and relevant nutrition outcomes improved 
among children in beneficiary families; and (iii) a cost-effectiveness assessment which will help 
policy makers determine whether the pilot program provides a potentially better alternative to 
current mechanisms.   Findings from the evaluation would be disseminated to stakeholders 
within government and the donor community in Nepal.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nepal   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
03/15/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi 
02/23/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
03/16/2011 
Comments:  Cleared as Category C, on understanding that computers hardware, UPS, batteries  etc 
purchased under the project will be disposed off in an environmentally responsible manner. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mansoora Rashid 
03/29/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
