Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5342 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/07/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nepal 
Project ID: P118179 
Project Name: Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 1 
Task Team Leader: Joop Stoutjesdijk 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (76%);Flood protection (15%);General agriculture, fishing 
and forestry sector (9%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (76%);Water resource management 
(16%);Decentralization (8%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
43.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Local 
Communities 
1.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve irrigation water delivery to and management in 
the project's command area.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Bank support for the Modernization of the Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme (MoRJaKIS) 
is proposed in two phases.  Phase 1 (which is being discussed here) will mainly focus on 
modernization of the higher-order irrigation infrastructure (especially intakes and feeder and 
branch canals), enhancing the capacity of the WUAs to operate and maintain the improved or 
new irrigation infrastructure, and the preparation and initiation of an agricultural development 
program.  Phase 2 would mainly focus on the modernization of the lower-order irrigation 
infrastructure (sub-branch and tertiary canals and water courses), continuation of the WUA 
development, and implementation of a comprehensive agricultural improvement program.  
 
Page  2
Component 1 - Scheme Modernization (US$38.6 million) will construct and modernize the 
main canal system, including hydraulic structures, feeder channels, river bank protection, and 
roads.  
 
Component 2 - Strengthening of Water Users Associations (WUA) (US$2.2 million) will 
strengthen WUAs to assume full responsibility for the management, operation, and maintenance 
of the modernized infrastructure.  
 
Component 3 - Agricultural Production Support (US$2.9 million) will carry out a series of 
agriculture-based activities in the project area to start narrowing the existing productivity gaps 
and enhance land and water resource uses through demonstrations, farmer field schools, and 
other adaptive processes.  
 
Component 4 - Project Management (US$4.4 million)wil ensure effective project management 
and coordination, and monitoring and evaluation and impact assessments.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Rani Jamara and Kulariya irrigation scheme constitutes three independent traditional 
irrigation systems constructed, operated and managed by the indigenous Tharu community.  The 
scheme is located in Kailali District of the Far Western Development Region (one of the least 
developed regions in the country) and comprises nine village development committees (VDC).  
Tikapur is the main township and market center in the project area.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
DoI is implementing the Irrigation and water Resources Management project (IWRMP). DoI has 
the engineering technical capacity and experience in implementing such irrigation projects.  On 
the social and environmental management, DoI has gained familiarity and experiences with 
regard to Bank's social and environmental safeguard requirements through the ongoing IWRMP 
and its predecessor National Irrigation Support Project.  However, in the context of the project, 
specific capacity strengthening support may be necessary, which needs to be assessed during 
Environmental Assessment of the proposed project. An Integrated Social and Environmental 
Assessment (ISEA) was carried out during preparation of the ongoing IWRMP; and in the course 
of IWRMP implementation social and environmental guidelines have been developed and are 
being used. The proposed project will benefit from these existing frameworks and guidelines and 
their implementation experiences.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Integrated Social and Environmental Assessment and an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework were prepared for the Irrigation and Water Resources Management 
Project.  This assessment has covered many of the issues in the irrigation sector and the 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
environmental and the task team proposes that the social and environmental assessment for the 
proposed project builds as much as possible on the existing studies and only covers identified 
gaps of information and analysis necessary for the proposed project. A social assessment, an 
initial environmental examination, and an Environmental Management Plan will be prepared 
before appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Not sure yet, but likely. as the source River Karnali is known to have protected and 
endangered aquatic species of Gangetic dolphin, Marsh mugger, and Gharial crocodile; and the 
Karnali River corridor (forests) is a wildlife movement route (elephant, tiger, and rhino, etc.).   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Unlikely to be triggered, but will be confirmed during the preparation studies.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Phase 1 project will have little emphasis on development of agriculture in the project area.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Unlikely to be triggered, but will be confirmed during the preparation studies.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
About 11,000 households, comprising 65,000 people, will benefit directly from the project.  
The ethnic composition of the project area includes the Tharu as the dominant group with 48 
percent of the population.  Other groups are Chhetri (17 percent), Dalits (15 percent), Brahman 
(10 percent), Magar (3 percent), and others (7 percent).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
There will unlikely be land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
There are no dams upstream on the scheme's water source.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The water source for the schemes is the Karnali River, which is a tributary of the Ganga 
River.  A preliminary review of hydrological data of the Karnali River and the abstraction rates 
in the Rani Jamara and Kulariya Scheme shows that the intake volume is excessive for the area 
under irrigation.  It is estimated that the water intake volume will reduce after the investments 
have been made and the WUAs have been trained.  Even though OP 7.50 on International 
Waterways applies, it is likely that the proposed project falls under the exception to the 
notification requirement of paragraph 7 (a) and (b) of the OP.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
04/11/2011 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguard-related studies will start in June 2010, and are expected to be completed early 
2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joop Stoutjesdijk 
04/06/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
04/07/2011 
Comments:  cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
04/07/2011 
Comments:  Discussed with TTL and cleared. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
