Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/17/2011 
Report No.:  AC5931
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nepal 
Project ID:  P112893 
Project Name:  Kabeli Transmission Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michael Haney 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 14, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (50%);Renewable energy (50%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00
6.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are: (i) to support the addition of transmission 
capacity to the Integrated Nepal Power System; and (ii) to provide access to electricity to 
communities in the area of the Kabeli 132 kV transmission line.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components: (i) Component 1: the Kabeli Corridor 132 kV 
Transmission Line Component, to be implemented by the Nepal Electricity Authority 
(NEA); (ii) Component 2: the Rural Electrification-Grid Extension Component, to be 
implemented by NEA; and (iii) Component 3: the Off-Grid Rural Electrification 
Component, to be implemented by the Alternative Energy Promotion Center (AEPC).  
 
The Kabeli Corridor 132 kV Transmission Line Component consists of a transmission 
line of approximately 90 kilometers in length and four substations.  Associated technical 
assistance will be provided.  
 
Page  2
The two rural electrification components will fund the provision of access to electricity 
to communities in the project area.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located in eastern Nepal.  The transmission line will extend from the 
area of Kabeli Bazaar (in the north of Panchthar District) to Damak in the south (in Jhapa 
District).  Substations will be built at Kabeli, Phidim, Ilam and Damak.  A short portion 
of the TL (about 8%) passes through the plains/Terai area, the remaining length is in the 
hills (about 12 % in the Siwalik/Churia hills and the remainder in the Mahabharat / Mid-
hills). Hilly areas are generally susceptible to landslides and erosions. The Siwalik zone 
is more fragile and prone to erosion and landslides. At the micro-level, stability and 
erosion risks can vary highly over short distances, and it is generally possible to select a 
relatively more stable location for a given tower. River bank cutting is the dominant form 
of erosion in the Terai area and flood-plains in the river valleys.There are no national 
parks or other protected areas in the area surrounding the route of the transmission line.  
The transmission line passes through rural areas and the main land use in the transmission 
line corridor is agriculture, forest, river and flood plain, and barren land.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In November 2010, NEA completed an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) of the 
proposed transmission line and substations.  The Social Impact Assessment was 
completed in December 2010.  
 
Potentially large scale, highly significant and/ or irreversible impacts are unlikely. The 
anticipated environmental impacts of the transmission line and substations are 
Page  3
manageable and can be mitigated to an acceptable level. The main anticipated 
environmental impacts of these investments are related to:  i) forest loss/degradation, ii) 
risk of soil erosion and landslides, iii) health and safety issues, and iv) project-generated 
waste.  The key social impacts as brought out through the social impact assessment and 
alignment planning surveys are related to small land acquisition for the transmission 
towers, substations and restrictions on use of land within the transmission corridor.  
There are also impacts of crop and tree losses.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The transmission line alignment was chosen from among various alternative potential 
routes based on the principle of avoiding forest areas and densely settled areas to the 
extent possible.  In addition to this selection principle, another guiding factor while 
deciding the position of angle towers from the alternative/potential towers sites was to 
avoid or minimize the risk of soil erosion and landslides.  These factors also guided the 
selection of the sub-stations sites.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In November 2010, NEA completed an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) of the 
proposed transmission line and substations.  This IEE was based on the transmission 
alignment as presently planned and included the angle towers, the locations of which 
have been fixed by NEA.  However, the location of the majority of the towers will be 
finalized only during the construction process.  Once all tower locations are fixed a site-
specific Environmental Mitigation Plan will be prepared focusing on key issues identified 
by the IIE.  
 
The Social Impact Assessment was completed in December 2010.  For the off-grid rural 
electrification component, AEPC will use the 'Environment Assessment Guidelines for 
Community-owned and Managed Micro Hydro Schemes' that are in use under the 
ongoing Power Development Project, and will prepare Vulnerable Community 
Development Plans for each village in which microhydro schemes are installed, in 
keeping with the practice established under the ongoing Power Development Project.  
 
NEA has carried out an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) of the TL which meets 
Government of Nepal and World Bank requirements.  In addition to the consideration to 
environmental factors critical to the selection of the alignment and tower/ sub-station 
sites, the IEE has identified potential impacts and proposed mitigation measures. The 
mitigation measures include: i) limiting clear-cutting of vegetation to less than 5 m wide 
(as may be necessary for cable stringing); ii) trimming only of trees to the height less than 
5
m
below stringing cable along the RoW beyond 5 meters width for cable stringing; iii)  
no ground clearance of herbs and shrubs and maintenance of shrubs/ herbs below cable 
Page  4
line after construction; iv) compensatory plantation (25 saplings for the loss of one 
common or protected tree species above 10 cm DBH ); v) provision of alternative fuel to 
workers; vi) banning workers from wildlife hunting; vii) use of bio-engineering and other 
appropriate soil erosion/ landslide/gully protection measures around towers; vii) 
maintaining ground vegetation in the cleared areas (non-forest timber products, etc.); ix) 
proper management of excavated spoils; x) collection and safe disposal of hazardous 
wastes (spent machine lubricants, engine oils and other chemicals); xi) provision of 
necessary occupational health and safety items/ facilities to workers, etc.  
 
With respect to the rural electrification grid-extension investments, the exact alignments 
of the rural distribution lines are not known at this stage. Therefore, for purposes of 
identifying and managing the potential environmental impacts of the low-voltage rural 
electrification investments, each specific investment proposal will: i) consider 
environmental consequences while selecting distribution lines, ii) be screened for 
potential environmental impacts, and iii) a site-specific Environmental Mitigation 
Implementation Plan prepared.  Compliance monitoring will be carried out for 
investments financed under this component.  
 
NEA's Environment and Social Studies Department (ESSD) provides support to the 
management of environmental and social aspects of NEA.  ESSD staff are generally 
aware of the environmental and social issues associated with transmission lines. ESSD 
staff have gained experience with Bank safeguard requirements under transmission line 
contracts funded under the ongoing Power Development Project.  ESSD has reasonable 
experience and capacity for preparing EIAs, IEEs and EMPs of transmission lines. 
However, there is a need to improve implementation effectiveness and compliance 
monitoring and auditing to ensure implementation of the measures identified for the 
mitigation of the anticipated negative impacts.  Mitigation and monitoring activities in 
the past have been adversely affected by lack of clarity on the organizational 
responsibility/mandate for this, and deficiency in coordination between projects and the 
ESSD.  As a way to improve safeguards performance in this project, NEA plans to create 
a
sub-unit under the project management unit with responsibility for environmental 
compliance monitoring during construction as well as for implementing the 
environmental measures beyond the contractor#s responsibility.  This sub-unit will work 
under the guidance of and in coordination with the ESSD.  
 
A
Social Impact Assessment was carried out in the territories of the Village 
Development Councils through which the proposed transmission line will pass and where 
the sub-stations will be built.  Extensive consultations were carried out with local 
stakeholders.  A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared to address the impacts for 
the construction of towers at angle points where 2.8 ha of private land will be acquired, 
affecting a total population of 203 people in 34 households.  The RAP describes the 
entitlement policy which conforms to relevant policies of the Government of Nepal and 
the requirements of the World Bank, the livelihood rehabilitation packages as well as the 
implementing arrangements including institutional, monitoring and grievance redress.  
 
Page  5
A
Social Management Framework (SMF) was prepared in line with the relevant 
domestic and World Bank policies on land acquisition, resettlement and indigenous 
peoples, to address adverse impacts under these activities, such as the line corridor and 
transmission towers whose final alignment and locations can be determined only during 
implementation.  The SMF describes the legal and policy framework, basic principles and 
entitlement policy to be followed in the planning of the mentioned project activities. It 
also prescribes the procedures and requirements on public consultation as well as the 
monitoring process.  The SMF lays out the planning steps, review and approval process 
as well as the institutional setup and responsibilities for managing and monitoring the 
planning and implementation of any action plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the IEE and SIA, project area communities were consulted, a public notice was 
published in a Nepali national newspaper to inform residents of the project area as well as 
national stakeholders of NEA#s intention to develop the transmission line project and to 
solicit concerns and suggestions with regard to the proposed project.  The public notice 
was also posted to each of the project area VDCs and public deeds of inquiry were 
carried out.   Rapid Rural Appraisal / consultations were carried out at the different 
project sites to inform people about the project and to solicit feedback.  District-level 
stakeholders such as District Development Committee (DDC) and District Forest Office 
were also consulted.  NEA has disclosed the IEE, SIA, RAP and SMF through its public 
website. During the implementation of the project local stakeholders (affected people, 
Community Forest Users Groups etc) will again be informed of the proposed mitigation 
measures and consulted when site-specific mitigation measures are detailed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/04/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/10/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/04/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/21/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/04/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/21/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2011 
 
Page  6
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  7
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michael Haney 
01/25/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Drona Raj Ghimire 
01/25/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
01/25/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/03/2011 
Comments:  Cleared. For further details please refer email of 02/03/11 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
02/03/2011 
Comments:   
