Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/06/2010 
Report No.:  AC5798
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nicaragua 
Project ID:  P121779 
Project Name:  Nicaragua Social Protection 
Task Team Leader:  Theresa Jones 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 6, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: February 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
19.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Project will support the implementation of the family and community-
based social welfare model. The Project Development Objectives are to: (i) improve the 
basic conditions of welfare and social wellbeing of extremely poor beneficiary families 
with children in selected poor localities; (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of the 
Family to implement the family and community-based social welfare model; and (iii) 
support the improvement of the integrated school nutrition program through 
implementation of a change in food content.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project will finance activities in three components.  The first component is: 
Improving the basic conditions of welfare and social wellbeing of extremely poor 
families (US$11.1 million). The aim is to improve extremely poor families# basic 
conditions of welfare and social wellbeing through supporting the gradual 
implementation of the Family and Community-based Social Welfare Model. The Model 
combines community-based educational workshops, family counseling, and family grants 
(transfers). This component will support three subcomponents: (i) Community-based 
Educational Workshops: The aim of this Subcomponent is to support the MIFAN in 
Page  2
strengthening the organization and structure of the community-based workshops and 
improve their content and develop additional modules; (ii) Family Counseling: The 
objective of this Subcomponent is to provide personalized counseling for families who 
have one or more children not going to school and/or working. MIFAN#s professional 
social workers will meet with the families at least once a month for two years and will 
work closely with these families on the development and implementation of a tailored 
Family Improvement Plan; and (iii) Family Grants (transfers): This Subcomponent will 
provide family grants in the selected localities to all the families with children under the 
age of 13 years conditional on parents regular attendance to the community-based 
educational workshops.  
 
Component 2. Strengthening of MIFAN#s Capacity (US$3.9 million). This component 
aims to strengthen the efficiency, effectiveness, and management of the family and 
community-based social welfare model by building the capacity in the Ministry of the 
Family. In addition to supporting implementation of the Model in the selected localities 
to be covered under Component 1, these activities would support MIFAN#s overall 
vision to align all of its programs with the new model. There will be three 
Subcomponents: (i) Strengthening the operational and administrative capacity of the 
MIFAN: This Subcomponent will strengthen the operational and administrative capacity 
of the MIFAN to implement the family and community-based social welfare model; (ii) 
Development and Implementation of a Registry of the Beneficiaries of Social Assistance 
Programs: This Subcomponent will support the design and implementation of 
improvements in the information available on beneficiaries of social assistance programs 
of the Ministry of the Family; (iii) Project Management and Evaluation: This 
Subcomponent will strengthen the MIFAN at the central, regional and local levels for the 
technical management, coordination, supervision and evaluation of the proposed Project.  
 
Component 3. Support to the Integrated School Feeding Program (US$4.5 million) This 
Component will improve the Integrated School Nutrition Program through the 
implementation of a new school lunch in targeted municipalities.  The Component would 
finance the Program in the 26 municipalities prioritized under the Component 1 of this 
Project during the second semester of the 2011 school year and the first semester of 2012 
for nearly 110 days, promoting improvement in public primary school attendance and 
student retention. Approximately 243,000 primary school children would benefit from 
this Program in the 26 municipalities. The estimated cost of the school feeding is about 
US$0.17 per child, per day including transportation, which is comparable to the unit costs 
of school feeding programs in other Central American countries. The Component will 
finance the school lunch, nutrition-educational materials and the administrative costs of 
the Program, including the transportation and distribution of the lunch to the schools.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed Project will benefit extremely poor families in selected localities in 26 
municipalities in six targeted Departments (Chinandega, Leon, Matagalpa, Esteli, Madriz, 
and Jinotega). The proposed Project would also support capacity building of the Ministry 
Page  3
of the Family so that they could met their objective to implement the family and 
community-based social welfare model (without transfers) eventually nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project triggers the safeguard policy, OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples). The indigenous 
population is estimated to be approximately half a million people. According to the 
census in 2005, the indigenous people numbered about 400,000 in about 900 
communities in the Carribean Coast. Although indigenous people live in all zones and 
most departments in Nicaragua, a large part is also integrated with the national 
population.     Given the objectives of the project to: (i) improve the basic conditions of 
welfare and social wellbeing of extremely poor beneficiary families with children in 
selected poor localities; (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of the Family to 
implement the family and community-based social welfare model; and (iii) support the 
improvement of the integrated school feeding program through implementation of a 
change in food content, it is expected that the project would have a positive impact on 
consumption levels, schooling of children, and utilization of social services, including for 
the indigenous population who are often the poorest. Recommendations from the IPP 
have been included in the Project design and will be included in the financing plan of the 
Project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indigenous peoples and ethnic communities will benefit from project  activities, mainly 
the improvement in the capacity of the Ministry of the Family to work with extremely 
poor families and the progress made to date to articulate social services at the local level 
to ensure that they reach these families.  The indigenous and ethnic communities (afro-
descendants), live on a socio-economic level which is lower than the rest of the 
Page  4
population in Nicaragua. For example, the income per capita is significantly lower, and 
close to 100% of some indigenous communities do not have public services such as 
health, drinking wáter and electricity. The positive impacts, therefore, are expected to be 
significant for indigenous people in particular.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Given the nature of the project no adverse impacts are expected.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient has conducted a social assessment satisfactory to the Bank. This 
assessment was completed the last week of October and concluded the first week of 
November. Outcomes of this assessment have been included in the IPP. The social 
assessment also analyzed the possible impact of the new modality proposed under the 
school feeding component. The Bank has received and approved of a final version of the 
IPP, dated November 14, 2010. The IPP describes a set of activities to be supported under 
the capacity-building component of the Project which focuses on promotion and 
communication strategies adequate for indigenous populations to ensure their 
understanding of the model, its validation in the indigenous communities targeted under 
the Project, as well as consultations and adaptations for the eventual application of the 
model in the South Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAS) and the North Atlantic 
Autonomous Region (RAAN). The IPP also includes the costing and indicators by which 
progress will be measured, as well as a summary of how other findings are already 
included in the Project Components. During the first year of the Project, the adaptation of 
the Model will be completed for the indigenous communities which are located in seven 
of the 26 municipalities. In addition, the Model will be culturally adaptation for those 
indigenous communities in the Atlantic Coast, which are not targeted under the Project, 
but where the MIFAN would eventually implement the Model in the future.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include staff within the Ministry of the Family and other government 
agencies such as the Ministries of Education and Health, and the rural poor, including 
indigenous communities, who are living in the targeted departments. Consultations were 
carried out in 4 localities with both groups of stakeholders.  The IPP, dated November 14, 
2010, has been finalized, approved  and will be disclosed in both the Infoshop and the 
MIFAN's website prior to appraisal. It will also be disclosed, i.e. made available to 
indigenous peoples communities, at strategic locations. The exact mechanisms for 
consultations during project implementation are still being defined.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/30/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/03/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  6
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Theresa Jones 
12/06/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter 
12/04/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/07/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
12/06/2010 
Comments:   
