Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/20/2010 
Report No.:  AC5678
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Niger 
Project ID:  P123567 
Project Name:  Niger Second Emergency Food Security  Support  Project 
Task Team Leader:  El Hadj Adama Toure 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 16, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: January 4, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (70%);Crops (20%);Animal production (10%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
15.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to increase rice production in targeted areas, and restore 
productive assets for targeted food insecure households in the Region of Tillabery.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be implemented through the following components:  
 
Component 1:  Restoration of productive assets for food-unsecured rural households 
($2.00 million) - (i) Recapitalization of households# husbandry of small ruminants, sheep 
fattening and livestock health and nutrition monitoring; and (ii) Expansion of the village 
lean period food bank system through the establishment and management of 
approximately forty five (45) cereal storage facilities.  
 
Component 2:  Strengthening irrigated rice production system ($12.00 million) - (i) 
Rehabilitation of four irrigated schemes for a total of approximately 1,073 hectares 
including, inter alia, the consolidation of their protection system, and the implementation 
of the environmental and social safeguards mitigation related measures (but excluding 
any acquisition of land and payment of compensation for land acquisition, and other cash 
Page  2
compensation or assistance paid in cash for involuntary resettlement); (ii) Strengthening 
of ONAHA#s  capacities to monitor and evaluate rice production, and to prepare its 
restructuring plan; (iii) Strengthening of the cooperatives# seed multiplication and 
distribution system, consisting of the rehabilitation of the seed production station, the 
provision of improved genetic material, and the provision of training and technical 
assistance to strengthen the capacities of key stakeholders along the seed supply chain; 
and (iv)  Strengthening of the technical and financial management capabilities of the 
cooperatives operating in the  rehabilitated schemes through the provision of consultants# 
services.   
 
Component 3:  Project Coordination ($1.00 million) - Carrying out a program of 
activities to coordinate, monitor and evaluate the Project.  
 
The Project is part of a collaborative effort between The World Bank under the Global 
Food Crisis response Program (GFRP), the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD), the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), and the 
Belgian Fund for Food Security (BFFS) with parallel and self-standing financing 
contributing the Emergency Food Security and Rural Development Program, a 
coordinated framework to support rural households with high exposure to food insecurity.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will focus its intervention in the Region of Tillabery, with restocking of small 
ruminants, construction of lean period food banks and support to production of irrigated  
rice along the Niger River Valley. More specifically, the FPCR financing will support 
rehabilitation of 1073 ha of irrigated perimeters and the development of cooperatives 
seed multiplication system in order to increase domestic rice production along the Niger 
River Valley. It will also support the distribution of small ruminants and the creation of 
lean period food banks to households that have been affected by the 2010 food crisis in 
the Region of Tillabery.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Medou Lo (AFTWR) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No activity to be funded under the Project is expected to have a significant negative 
environmental or social impact. The potential impacts are likely small-scale, site-specific 
and thus easily manageable. However, all activities must be screened to determine the 
need or not to carry out an Environmental and/or Social Assessment. Environmental and 
Social Impacts Assessment reports, and mitigation plans when applicable are subject to 
clearance by the Bank and the Bureau des Evaluations Environnementales et des Etudes 
d#Impact (BEEEI).  
 
Even if procurement of pesticides is not envisaged under the project, the project#s 
objectives may result in increased use of agrochemicals such as pesticides due to the fact 
that the project aims to increase production in the irrigated areas. The Pest Management 
Plans prepared by the PRODEX and PAC are being adapted and updated by WRDSEM. 
It will also be applied to the proposed project.  
 
Since some types of activities may potentially have small-scale social impacts that 
involve land acquisition/involuntary resettlement, the Project Coordination Unit will be 
responsible for following up safeguards issues as and when they arise during project 
implementation. Consultants will be engaged to prepare Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs) as and when necessary.  
 
The proposed project will rehabilitate 1073 hectares of irrigation perimeters alongside 
the Niger River, an international waterway. The perimeters to be rehabilitated in this 
project are already included in the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) bulk water allocation, 
and the project will not finance additional or alteration of existing schemes that will 
adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparians or be 
adversely affected by the other riparian possible water use. As required by OP/BP 7.50, 
the Government has sent notification on September 27, 2008 to the Niger Basin Authority 
(NBA) to inform riparian countries about the proposed project activities. As the proposed 
activity was initiated by NBA under the WRDSEMP, NBA promptly responded on 
Page  4
September 30, 2010 providing a no objection to the Government of Niger to proceed with 
the processing of the proposed Project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is classified as environmental category B because no activity funded under 
the Project is expected to have a significant negative environmental or social impact.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Recognizing the emergency nature of the proposed project and the related need for 
providing immediate assistance, while also ensuring due diligence in managing potential 
environmental and social risks, an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment 
Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared since the exact location of some activities may 
not be known at appraisal. The ESSAF has been developed to ensure compliance with the 
World Bank#s safeguard policies. The intention of this framework is to: (i) prevent the 
execution of sub-project that might cause significant and irreversible negative impacts; 
(ii) decrease or manage potential adverse impacts through modifications to sub-project 
design, location or execution; (iii) prevent or mitigate cumulative impacts of small scale 
investments; and (iv) enhance positive environmental and social impacts of sub-projects.  
 
To ensure effective application of the World Bank#s safeguard policies, the ESSAF 
provides guidance on the approach to be taken during implementation for the selection 
and design of subprojects and the planning of mitigation measures. The ESSAF includes: 
(i) tools for environmental and social screening of Project#s activities, and (ii) a proposed 
checklist of likely environmental and social impacts of each activity or group of 
activities. EAs/EMPs, RAPs and/or PMPs, as necessary, will be prepared, consulted 
upon, reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed.  
 
The Borrower knows and has already experienced Bank safeguard policies with other 
bank-funded projects in the agriculture and rural development sector. Through the 
implementing agencies of the ongoing Agro-sylvo-pastoral Exports and Markets 
Development Project (PRODEX), the Second Community Action Program and the Niger 
Basin Water Resources Development and Sustainable Ecosystems Management Project 
(WRDSEM), the Country has sufficient capacity to implement safeguards measures 
within project activities. The Coordination Unit of PRODEX will be in charge of the 
implementation of the project activities, including safeguards related measures. The 
PRODEX Technical and Fiduciary Coordination Unit   is composed of experienced staff 
who successfully implemented the closed Second Private Irrigation Promotion Project, 
including an environmental and social safeguards specialist. PRODEX also has a MoU 
with the Government#s Bureau of Environmental Impact Studies (Bureau des 
Evaluations Environnementales et des Etudes d#Impact-BEEEI), which is the 
Page  5
Government Agency responsible for reviewing Environmental and Impact assessments 
(EIAs), supervising implementation compliance of the Envioronmental and Social 
Management Plans, and for ensuring proper dissemination of safeguards related 
documents.  
 
Nonetheless environmental and social assessments that will be undertaken for project 
activities, will also determine needs for additional capacity building on safeguards as 
necessary.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESSAF will be disclosed within the country in the sector ministries, in the  
"Gouvernorat" of the Region of Tillabery, and in the Bureau des Evaluations 
Environnementales et des Etudes d'Impact (BEEEI), which is the national agency 
responsible for reviewing EIAs and supervising implementation compliance of the 
ESPMs, and at the World Bank Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/24/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/31/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/27/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/29/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/24/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2011 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
N/A 
Is a separate PMP required? 
N/A 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
N/A 
Page  7
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr El Hadj Adama Toure 
12/13/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
11/08/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
12/20/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
12/13/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
12/13/2010 
Comments:   
