Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/23/2011 
Report No.:  AC6038
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Niger 
Project ID:  P117365 
Project Name:  Urban Water and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Matar Fall 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (80%);Water supply (20%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (25%);Regulation and competition policy 
(25%);Participation and civic engagement (25%);Access to urban services and housing 
(25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
0.80
0.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to assist the Recipient to increase access to 
sustainable water services and to improved sanitation services in selected urban areas.  
 
This would be achieved through: (a) the expansion of water production and distribution 
capacities, and facilitating access to services through programs for constructing social 
water connections, public standposts and on-site sanitation facilities; and (b) 
consolidating the achievements of the urban water sub-sector reform and strengthening 
capacities to deliver and manage services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has three components (i) urban water supply in Niamey, Agadez, Arlit and 
Tahoua and in 18 secondary centers; (ii) urban sanitation in Niamey and Dosso and (iii) 
institutional support and capacity strengthening.  
 
Page  2
Urban water supply (US$68.7 million).  This component will to be implemented by 
SPEN (the urban water holding company).  It would include the following activities.  
 
o
Niamey:  (i) construction of a 2,000 m3 water storage tank; (ii) expansion of 
distribution networks by approximately 200 km; and (iii) construction of 28,600 
household connections and 130 standposts.  
 
o
Three cities (Agadez, Arlit and Tahoua): (i) construction of 23 groundwater 
boreholes, laying of a 25-km transmission pipe and construction of three water storage 
tanks; (ii) expansion of distribution networks by approximately 200 km and (iii) 
construction of 5,000 household connections and 141 standposts.  
 
o
Secondary centers: (i) rehabilitation of one small water treatment unit and two 
elevated water storage tanks; (ii) construction of 20 groundwater boreholes and laying of 
a
10-km transmission pipe; (ii) expansion of water distribution networks by 
approximately 180 km; and (iii) construction of 3,500 household connections and 182 
standposts.  
 
o
Water quality improvement: supply and installation of treatment facilities in five 
towns where the quality of groundwater does not comply with standards (excessive 
fluoride in Tessaoua and Roumdji, iron in Matankari and nitrates in Gazaoua and 
Goudoumaria)  
 
Urban sanitation (US$18.0 million).  This component will be implemented by the 
Directorate of Basic Sanitation (DAB) and include the following activities:  
 
o
Sanitation infrastructure: (i) 23,500 household latrines and 5,000 hand-washing 
and soakaway facilities, (ii) 20 public sanitation facilities, (iii) 500 school latrine blocks, 
and (iv) one sludge treatment facility.  
 
o
Information, Education and Communication (IEC): outreach and demand 
management for the on-site sanitation program.  
 
o
Consultant services: (i) preparation of bidding documents and supervision of 
works for the sludge treatment facility, and (ii) contract management agency services 
(Maître d'ouvrage délégué - MOD) for the execution of the latrine component and 
training of local masons and contractors.  
 
Institutional strengthening and capacity building (US$4.1 million).  This component will 
be implemented by the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in collaboration with concerned 
institutions. It would include the following activities:  
 
o
Institutional support to the urban water sub-sector reform.  
 
o
Environmental and social management support.  
 
o
Capacity building and support to the project implementation agencies in the 
Ministry in charge of Water and Sanitation (Ministry of Water, Environment and Fight 
against Desertification (Ministère de l'Eau, de l'Environnement et de la Lutte contre la 
Désertification, MEELCD)).  
 
o
Coordination and project management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
For urban water supply, the project will focus on four main cities: Niamey, Agadez, Arlit 
et Tahoua and 18 secondary centers.  The sanitation component will focus on Niamey 
and Dosso. Specific sites of intervention in the said cities will be determined by the 
detailled technical studies.   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Demba Balde (AFTCS) 
Mr Taoufiq Bennouna (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the project is expected to generate substantial social benefits through the 
increase of access to water and sanitation services for peri-urban dwellers and 
disadvantaged social groups, and therefore contribute positively to livelihood 
opportunities. Project construction activities (mostly pipe laying) may cause adverse 
environmental and social impacts, but those impacts are expected to be minimal, site-
specific and manageable to an accepted level. The water infrastructure sub-projects are 
not expected to lead to new land acquisition or significant restriction of access to sources 
of livelihood.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential operational phase impacts of the sludge treatment plant are expected to be 
manageable. As Niger is not yet familiar with sludge treatment systems like the one that 
will be introduced with the project, DAB will (i) contract technical assistance from a 
specialized international NGO during the construction; and (ii) enter in partnerships with 
other African sanitation utilities (Senegal and Tunisia) which will provide know-how and 
experience on technical issues and share lessons on dealing efficiently with sludge 
haulers.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not including the sludge treatment system in the project would have been a worse 
scenario not only economically, but also environmentally, according to the growing 
Page  4
quantities of wastewater sludge from onsite sanitation facilities that would be spread out 
in the urban environment without treatment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The guidelines to be followed and measures to be taken to mitigate adverse impacts of 
the project are detailed in the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared by the Recipient as part 
of the project preparatory activities. The ESMF provides environmental guidelines and a 
screening mechanism to ensure that construction and subsequent operation and 
maintenance of the WSS infrastructure are carried out in an environmentally and socially 
sustainable manner.  The RPF outlines the principles and procedures to be followed in the 
event of land acquisition, impact on assets and/or loss of livelihoods.  Both frameworks 
identify procedures to be followed during the planning, design and construction phase of 
project activities, together with measures to mitigate and monitor such impacts. They also 
include a screening process for sub-projects setting criteria for triggering specific 
Environmental Assessments (EAs) and specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), if 
needed.  
 
A
review of the capacities of implementing institutions concluded that there is adequate 
institutional and regulatory capacity for environmental management at the national level. 
Given its prior successful experience under the previous water and sanitation project 
(WSP), the Bureau des Etudes et Evaluations Environmentales (BEEI) of the Ministry of 
Environment, in close collaboration with the PCU, will take the lead in monitoring and 
overseeing the implementation of environmental and social mitigation measures, 
including the validation of the screening process for construction activities and genuine 
consultation of beneficiaries. BEEI will also ensure that environmental and social 
monitoring and evaluation reports are prepared and submitted timely. Notwithstanding 
the proven existing capacities, additional capacity building requirements have been 
addressed in the ESMF and RPF and budgeted for under the project to implement the 
recommended capacity improvement measures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Appropriate consultations took place on December 04-11, 2011 for the development of 
the ESMF and the RPF as per the guidelines, and the level of consultation is 
commensurate with the two instruments. Potential affected populations, national and 
local Governments were informed of the objectives, scope and potential impacts of the 
project activities.  Stakeholders (residents and representatives of civil society) welcomed 
the project and recommended that (i) communication campaigns be carried out in 
targeted areas prior to launching social connections programs; (ii) the price paid for 
household latrines be kept at a minimum; and (iii) efforts be made to mitigate the impact 
of pipe laying and of the construction of connections on households' environment and on 
pedestrian and road traffic.  These concerns were addressed in the project design and the 
ESMP.  The ESMF and the RPF were approved by the Bank and the Government. Both 
documents have been disclosed in Niger and at the Bank's Infoshop on January 28, 2011.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/26/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/26/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matar Fall 
02/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Taoufiq Bennouna 
02/22/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Demba Balde 
02/22/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/22/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
02/22/2011 
Comments:   
