                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: AC5315


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/17/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Nigeria                               Project ID: P121455
Project Name: State Employment and Expenditure for Results Project
Task Team Leader: George Addo Larbi
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2011       Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTPR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General public administration sector (35%);Other social services
(25%);Vocational training (20%);General transportation sector (10%);General
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
Theme: Other public sector governance (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            200.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
                                                                         0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the composition and effectiveness of
public expenditure by strengthening public management systems and service delivery whilst
enhancing their employment generation in participating states. The support will strengthen
systems that will allow for better use of resources and redress legitimate concerns and enhance
community and civil society participation in decision making.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The project is designed around two main components - public financial management (PFM and
service delivery - under which selected activities will be implemented to produce outputs that
will contribute towards the achievement of the PDO. The latter will have three sub-components:
a) training and skills development; (b) youth employment and (c) Community Driven
Development (CDD).

 Component 1: Strengthening Public Financial Management systems: The three selected states
are already making some progress in basic public financial management reforms. For example all
three states have passed procurement and fiscal responsibility legislations, but need technical
assistance and guidance in their implementation. Others have initiated budget reforms, including
medium term expenditure framework (MTEF). This component will support ongoing efforts by
the states to develop and modernize their public financial, personnel and payroll management
processes and institutions, with the objective of improving its efficacy and in managing public
resources. It will tailor support to the current status of PFM in each state. The menu of activities
to be implemented to achieve the PDO will include the following: (a) enactment and
implementation of an organic public finance management legislation; (b) strengthening capacity
for budget preparation and public investment management, implementation and monitoring and
public access to financial information, (c) improvement in accounting, cash management,
financial reporting, expenditure controls and audit; (d) improvement in personnel and payroll
controls; (e)strengthening public procurement systems and processes; and (f) design and
implementation of State Integrated Financial Management Information Systems (SIFMIS). The
component will also support training and capacity building in the key PFM areas mentioned
above. The proposed state-level reforms PFM reforms will be coordinated with those undertaken
at the federal level. The component will support development of social accountability in key
activities such as budget and public procurement and involve the public in planning and
oversight of public expenditure. the PFM reforms will enable better allocation of resources to
achieve improvements in service delivery performance and employment.

 Component 2: Service Delivery with Employment Opportunities: The objectives of this
component are twofold: (a) immediate/short-term job creation for youth and (b) medium term
skills development/enhancement for youth. This component will thus present a menu of options
for service delivery, using approaches that have been tested and proven to work in other Bank
assisted projects in Nigerian states, including LEEMP in Bayelsa state. The component will have
three sub-components as follows:

 Component 2a: Training and Skills Development Support Fund: The objective of this
subcomponent is to increase access, improve quality of skills acquisition and development for
youth empowerment through relevant formal and non-formal vocational and technical training
institutions. The overall goal is to leverage support on ongoing training and skills development
activities and initiatives including private and public skills development enterprise in the three
states. The strategic focus would be on skills and entrepreneurship development and its relevance
to current and future labour market demands to tackle youth unemployment through vocational
skills acquisition to make participants more employable or self-employed. This component will
be closely coordinated with component 2b to define training and skills needs.

  Component 2b: Youth Employment: The objective of this sub-component is to reduce youth
unemployment and increase income via job creation schemes in the three participating states and
linked to the training and skills development programme under component 2a. It will support
youth employment program that aims to actively engage all eligible youths (not limited to
militants) in productive employments in public works and agriculture. The sub-component will
finance two key activities with value chains that generate employment in both urban and rural
areas, namely:
 (i)    Support to small Public Works Contracts to generate employment in the Urban areas.
Following a model that is successfully working in Lagos state, this activity will generate
employment through award of small competitive contracts to the private sector to improve public
space, reduce environmental hazards and enhance the efficiency of the existing road space,
reduce vehicle operating cost and improve road safety, in particular pedestrian safety and
maintenance of street lights.

 (ii) Support to youth employment in agriculture in rural areas. Activities that ensure the
engagement of youth in agricultural production, processing and marketing will be supported
under this component. Public and private sector led agricultural schemes with massive
engagement of youth (skilled or semi-skilled) in the areas of crops, animal husbandry, fishery
and forestry will be financed under this subcomponent.

 Component 2c: Community Driven Development: The three states already have CDD projects
in the form of CSDP (Bayelsa) and Fadama III (in all three states). The CDD sub-component
will use existing institutional arrangements in Fadama and CSDP to provide resources to CDD
implementing agencies in order extend CDD interventions to additional communities currently
not included CSDP to ensure effective service delivery for economic and social improvement
of rural and poor communities in the three States. The component will support health, education,
water, rural roads and rural energy, environment and sanitation, rural enterprise and livelihood
activities, and safety net micro projects, solely executed by the communities or user groups
themselves. The CDD will also create employment opportunities for youths in the rural areas.
The existing Fadama and CSDP implementing agencies (and other arrangements that are
assessed to meet the standard practice of CDD approach in states where there is no CSDP) will
be used to implement this component. It is expected that component 2 will be delivered and
implemented in partnership with non-state providers of services.

 Component 3: Project Implementation Support and Coordination: The component will support
project coordination at national and state levels, including centrally provided technical
assistance, quality assurance and other support services to states. It will also fund project
operating costs of the PIUs and provide training and capacity building for project staff. The PIU
at the state level will be supported by multi-sector Technical Review Committee for each of
Components 1 and 2. The TRC will include technical experts in the relevant fields and civil
society representatives and provide advice on all technical proposals submitted by interested
service providers.

D. Project location (if known)
The project will focus on three states: Bayelsa, Delta and Rivers. In spite of its economic
significance, the proposed project area is ecologically fragile. The project area is a floodplain of
about 20,000 km² including wetlands, creeks and a net work of drainage. The area can be divided
into four ecological zones: coastal barrier islands, mangrove swamp forests, freshwater swamps,
and lowland rainforests. The major environmental and social problems witnessed in the region
are those related to the petroleum industry activities. The SEEFOR project was developed in
close consultation with the government and other stakeholders to support Youth and
Employment Initiative includeingincluding training and capacity building in support of an
immediate public works program. This proposed project is expected to have overall positive
environmental and social impacts.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Nigeria, has demonstrated its commitment to mitigating adverse social and environmental
impacts in the implementation of a range of World Bank projects including category A projects.
There are adequate legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with
World Bank safeguards policies triggered by the PPP program. In Nigeria, the Federal Ministry
of Environment is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring
compliance with national environmental standards. It has different departments with field offices
in every region of the country. However, some of the challenges faced by the FMEnv include:
low capacity for data collection and monitoring, lack of adequate operating budget, operational
vehicles and other equipment needed for site visits and monitoring of compliance with EIAs and
the duplication of EIA responsibilities in other government line ministries and agencies.
Importantly a number of ongoing and pipeline projects will provide the needed capacity building
support to the EIA unit of the FMENv in this respect. In addition, the project management unit
will recruit an environmental specialist to be responsible and accountable for all safeguards
issues. He or she will be supported by consultants to be engaged on needs basis. Besides, the
safeguards specialists in the World Bank team will provide additional guidance as required.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
     Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered by the State Expenditure Effectiveness
for Opportunities and Results project. Although the objective of component 2b is to reduce youth
unemployment in three participating states of Bayelsa, Delta and Rivers, it supports small Public
Works Contracts thereby triggering OP/BP 4. 01. In addition, component 2c which focuses on
community driven development will fund health, education, water, rural roads, rural energy,
environment and sanitation, rural enterprise and livelihood activities, and safety net micro
projects. The net potential environmental impact is likely to be positive. However, a few minor,
site specific adverse typical category B impacts are also envisaged. Therefore, the proponent will
prepare and disclose Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) since the exact
locations and potential adverse impacts are not known in sufficient details.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                 X
     The project area has large swampy terrain interpassed with creeks, estuaries, and wetlands. It
is envisaged that some of the proposed activities may encroach, albeit on a small scale, into
critical ecosystems of the Niger Delta. As part of safeguards due diligence, the ESMF, that will
be prepared by the borrower, will outline procedures to mitigate potential adverse impacts when
this policy is triggered.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No         TBD
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                               X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                          X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                           X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                    X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    This project will not lead to any large scale acquisition of land or denial of access to usual
means of livelihood. However, activities in component 2 may lead to small scale land acquisition
or temporary re- location of potential PAPs thereby triggering OP/BP 4.12. Since the exact
locations and the number of people to be impacted are not known at this time, the project
proponent will prepare and disclose a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prior to appraisal.
The RPF will outline measures to avoid and minimize resettlement as well as assist PAPs in their
effort to improve or at least restore their standards of living.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 11/24/2010

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The ESMF and the RPF will be prepared and disclosed in the country as well as in the Bank
   Infoshop.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr George Addo Larbi                                           05/17/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       05/17/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Anand Rajaram                                               05/17/2011
      Comments:



1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
