Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5815 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/09/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Niger 
Project ID: P123399 
Project Name: NE Safety Net Project 
Task Team Leader: Giuseppe Zampaglione 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 22, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTSP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (50%);Public administration- Other social services 
(30%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (70%);Nutrition and food security (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to establish an efficient and well-targeted safety net system 
and through such system to increase the access of the vulnerable poor to cash transfer and cash-
for-work programs so as to contribute to the reduction of their food insecurity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will be implemented in the five poorest regions of the country (Tillabery, 
Tahoua, Dosso, Maradi, and Zinder), in coordination with the Government and other Technical 
Financial Partners operating in the project area. It will be financed through a Specific Investment 
Loan (SIL) for a total amount of $70 million over five years.  
 
The project will have the following four components:  
 
Component 1: Setting up of a safety nets system (US$6 million). Significant technical 
assistance and capacity building will be necessary for setting up the Niger safety net system. This 
component will invest in designing and establishing appropriate legal instruments, manuals, 
Page  2
procedures, IT solutions, and training modules in view of: (i) establishing the institutional 
framework of the safety net system; (ii) designing a transparent targeting mechanisms to identify 
and register the poorest households; (iii) setting up a robust and technically well-supported 
management information system; (iv) designing payment mechanisms to ensure that 
beneficiaries receive the cash in a transparent, safe, and timely manner while reducing the risks 
of fraud and corruption; (v) developing a strong mechanism to monitor project implementation, 
progress of safety net programs and the impact of the micro-projects on the environment; and 
(vi) designing a sound evaluation system to gauge efficiency, effectiveness and impact of safety 
net programs. Vehicles, ICT equipment, and other physical assets directly required to establish 
and manage the project will also be financed by this component.  
 
Component 2:  Unconditional cash transfers for food security and nutrition (US$40 million). 
This component will provide a monthly transfer to an estimated 80,000 poor households of 
approximately FCFA 10,000 for a period of 24 months. This amount is equivalent to about 
US$20 and is equal to approximately 15 percent of monthly expenditures for the poorest.  To 
ensure tangible longer-term impact of the cash transfer program beneficiaries will attend 
information and sensitization sessions on good nutritional and health practices and on sustainable 
small investment strategies. This combination of services (cash transfers and trainings) is 
expected to provide opportunities to: (i) improve access to food; (ii) improve human capital; and 
(iii) invest in productive assets. The selection of beneficiaries will be carried out at different 
levels (regional, departmental, municipal, village, and household levels) and will rely on a 
number of targeting techniques including community participation. Individual households will be 
selected among the poorest, using Proxy Mean Testing methodologies to be validated at the 
community level. Local financial institutions will be recruited based on their capacity and 
experience to make payments to beneficiaries based on a centrally managed database.  
 
Component 3: Cash-for-work for assets building and soil conservation activities (US$20 
million). This second component will provide short-term labor intensive work and direct income 
support to individuals in areas affected by temporary food insecurity. Each year approximately 
250 communities that experience higher than average level of food insecurity will be targeted by 
the cash-for-work program. The micro-projects will provide temporary income support to 
approximately 50 to 100 people (men and women) for a period of three to four months. The 
program will promote participation of women and youth and is expected to reach approximately 
15,000 people annually, for a total of about 60,000 during the four years of implementation of 
this component. The selection of micro-projects will involve participation from the community 
and local authorities. Projects selected are expected to contribute to livelihoods improvement for 
the entire community, and thus to include soil conservation activities designed to slow 
desertification as well as the maintenance, rehabilitation, and construction of small 
infrastructures. Targeting will be based on the National Assessment of Vulnerable Areas and on 
self-targeting criteria (workers remuneration will be set at US$2.5 per day, just below the market 
wage to discourage better-off households from participating).  
 
Component 4: Project management (US$4 million). This component will finance costs related 
to managing the project, and will ensure that the CFS is operational, and that it successfully and 
efficiently carries out its primary function which is to implement the project in conformity with 
the Financing agreement, with project documents and with the operational manual, in pursing the 
Page  3
Project development objective  This component will finance: consulting services directly related 
to the management of the project, training of personnel, non civil servant staff salaries, and other 
operating costs (such as office space, utilities and supplies, bank charges, communications, 
vehicle operation, maintenance and insurance, building and equipment maintenance costs, travel 
and supervision costs). Salaries and fees for targeting and registration, micro-project selection, 
data collection and data analysis for project monitoring and evaluation will also be financed by 
this component.  
 
Arrangements for Project Management: A Safety Net Unit (CFS - Cellule Filets Sociaux) will 
be established by the Government to implement the project.  A Steering Committee, a Technical 
Management Unit, and Regional offices will form the CFS. The Steering Committee (CP - 
Comité de Pilotage) will be responsible for the direction, coordination, and monitoring of the 
implementation activities of the Project. The Technical Management Unit (UGT - Unité de 
Gestion Technique) will support the design and implementation of safety net programs, 
including: administration, coordination, monitoring and evaluation, and recruitment of private 
bodies, NGOs, and/or decentralized government agencies, to be involved in the implementation 
of project activities. Finally, the CFS regional offices (AR - Antennes Régionales) will operate 
under the supervision of the Coordinator of the UGT to facilitate project implementation in their 
respective region by coordinating and supervising implementation (including financial operators 
to be recruited at the central level to handle payments to the beneficiaries).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be mostly located in rural communities in the regions of Tillabery, Tahoua, 
Dosso, Maradi and Zinder. The Safety Net Unit will be located in the capital city of Niamey.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has been exposed to World Bank requirements in terms of Safeguard policies 
within the context of other World Bank-financed projects. In particular, the Program on 
Community Actions (PAC - Programme d'Actions Communautaires) has developed a 
comprehensive Environmental and Management Framework (ESMF).  However, the GoN 
capacity to conduct safeguards assessment and issue recommendations as required by Bank's 
procedures and guidelines is limited. Qualified local or international consultants will be recruited 
to assess safeguard risks, and produce the relevant documentation for proper mitigation.  The 
existing safeguards documents used by the PAC could be updated and adapted to the Safety Net 
Project. Selected staff of the UGT will have the direct responsibility to monitor compliance with 
environmental, social and resettlement guidelines, as described in the ESMF and in the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The micro
-
projects to be facilitated under component 3 (Cash
-
For
-
Work may have the 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
potential of some localized environmental impacts. However, it is anticipated that these impacts 
will be minimal as investments will be small (maximum of US$ 25,000) and will primarily 
involve construction, rehabilitation and maintenance activities. An ESMF will be prepared prior 
to appraisal and measures required to prevent, minimize, and/or mitigate adverse impacts will be 
incorporated in the Project Implementation Manual.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Component 3 on Cash-For-Work may involve some minor land acquisition and/or changes in 
access to resources, with subsequent impacts on population movements and settlements. A RPF 
will be prepared, and measures required to prevent, minimize, mitigate, and/or compensate for 
adverse impact will be incorporated in the operations manual.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/19/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
.
Terms of references for the ESMF and for the RPF are being prepared.  
 
.
The government is in the preliminary stages of identifying some qualified consultants to 
carry out the relevant studies.  
 
.
It is expected that a first draft of these studies will be available by end December 2010 for 
comments by the task team.  
 
.
These documents will be disclosed in-country and in Bank's Infoshop prior to project 
appraisal. 
 
.
The Sector Unit has agreed to accept transfer of safeguards responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Giuseppe Zampaglione 
12/07/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
12/07/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
12/07/2010 
Comments:   
