Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/24/2011 
Report No.:  AC6006
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Niger 
Project ID:  P123399 
Project Name:  Niger Safety Net Project 
Task Team Leader:  Carlo Del Ninno 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTSP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (50%);Public administration- Other social services 
(30%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (70%);Nutrition and food security (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to establish and support an effective safety 
net system which will increase access of poor and food insecure people to cash transfer 
and cash-for-work programs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The credit will finance the following components: (i) Safety Net System; (ii) Cash 
Transfers; (iii) Cash for Work; and (iv) Project Management.  
 
Component 1:  Safety Net System (US$3.2 million # Total costs including 
contingencies)  
 
This component will support the establishment of a well-performing safety net system 
by investing in a management information system (MIS), targeting and payment systems, 
monitoring and evaluation, and capacity building. Technical assistance supported by this 
component will include the development of legal instruments, policies, manuals, 
procedures, ICT solutions, and training modules in view of: (i) designing and 
implementing a well-performing MIS to monitor project implementation and the progress 
of the safety net programs; (ii) designing an efficient and cost-effective targeting system; 
Page  2
(iii) designing an efficient and cost-effective payment system; (iv) designing a sound 
monitoring and evaluation system to gauge efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of safety 
net programs; (v) designing and implementing a grievance management system; (vi) 
designing accompanying measures as #soft# conditions attached to the payment of cash 
transfers in Component 2; and (vii) articulating other technical manuals.  
 
Component 2: Cash Transfers for Food Security (US$48.6 million # Total costs 
including contingencies)  
 
The cash transfers and accompanying measures are expected to support targeted poor 
and food insecure households by increasing their income and investing in their human 
capital. This component will benefit s
ome 1,000 villages in the 20 poorest départements 
of the 5 poorest regions of Niger. The selection of départements is based on the number 
of poor and general security conditions. 80,000 poor households will benefit from these 
activities over two cycles and four years of implementation. Selection of beneficiaries 
will be carried out using an array of targeting techniques, including geographic targeting, 
proxy means testing methodologies (PMT), and community participation. Monthly 
transfers to poor households will be 10,000 FCFA (about US$20, equal to approximately 
15 percent of the poverty line for a rural family) for a period of 24 months. Payments to 
beneficiaries will be based on a centrally managed database and will be effectuated by 
fixed/mobile branches of microfinance institutions and mobile phone companies. The 
transfers will be paid to women as representatives of their households and they are 
expected to increase the level and quality of food consumption.  
 
This component is structured into three subcomponents, to provide an opportunity to 
test the system and its procedures, and improve the capacity of the UGT to effectively 
manage the program:  
 
#
Subcomponent 2.1 # Starting phase # (US$4.8 million- total costs including 
contingencies). The project will start disbursing to approximately 10,000 beneficiaries in 
the regions of Dosso and Maradi.  
 
#
Subcomponent 2.2 # Expansion phase # (US$33.50 million- total costs including 
contingencies). Upon a positive assessment on how beneficiaries of Subcomponent 2.1 
have been selected, paid, and supported, the cash transfer will expand to all beneficiaries 
and will reach its full scale. If needed corrective measures will be introduced in the 
implementation of the project to ensure the achievement of the PDO.  
 
#
Subcomponent 2.3 # Accompanying measures (US$10.3 million- total costs 
including contingencies). Accompanying measures will start with Subcomponent 2.1 and 
will continue under Subcomponent 2.2.  
 
Component 3:  Cash for Work (US$10.5 million # Total costs including contingencies)  
 
This component will provide short-term income support to individuals through cash for 
work programs in areas affected by temporary acute food insecurity, and will produce 
and maintain public goods. On a yearly basis, this component will finance approximately 
900,000 working days in communities experiencing an unusually higher than average 
level of food insecurity. The program will provide 60 days of temporary working 
opportunities to approximately 15,000 people annually, for a total of 60,000 people 
during the life of the project. A manageable number of NGOs will be contracted to hire 
and supervise participants for a period of about three to four months, during the lean 
agricultural season. In addition to wages, the component will also finance non-wage costs 
to ensure the basic provision of materials and equipment. Cash for work programs may 
Page  3
include activities such as soil conservation to slow desertification and protect the 
environment, rehabilitation of small infrastructures, and sanitation projects. Activities 
addressing other local needs, as expressed by communities, will be considered. 
Communes will be selected each year on the basis of vulnerability and food security data 
to benefit from the program. Rural communities will initially be targeted and based on 
findings from the mid-term review, urban or peri-urban communities may be included. 
The selection of individuals will be based on self-targeting, with remuneration being set 
just below the market wage (est. 1,000 FCFA per day or, US$2.2 per day) to discourage 
participation of better-off households. This self-targeting will be complemented by 
categorical selection criteria if the demand for labor exceeds supply.  Workers will be 
paid twice a month by payments agencies using the methodology developed under 
component 2.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (US$7.7 million # Total costs including 
contingencies)  
 
This component will finance all costs related to the management of the project. 
Component 4 will ensure that the unit implementing the project, the Cellule des Filets 
Sociaux (CFS) is operational, and that it successfully and efficiently implements the 
project in conformity with key project documents including the Financing Agreement, the 
procurement plan, and the project implementation manual. This component will finance: 
consulting services directly related to the management of the project, training of 
personnel, vehicles, office furniture and equipment, non-civil servant support staff 
salaries, and other operating costs.  
 
Implementation arrangements  
 
The project will be implemented by the newly created Safety Net Unit, CFS, (Cellule 
Filets Sociaux) through a decree (arête N. 0236/PM of 16 Dec, 2011). The objective of 
this Unit is to establish and manage an effective safety net system in order to improve the 
living conditions of poor households, to protect them from the impact of shocks, and to 
reduce their level of food insecurity. The Unit will manage funds made available by the 
GoN and other partners for implementing safety nets projects. The CFS responds to good 
governance principles and retains best practices in designing appropriate institutional 
arrangements to implement safety net projects.  
 
Three units comprise the CFS: (i) a Steering Committee, CP (from the French acronym 
Comité de Pilotage), (ii) a Technical Management Unit, UGT (from the French acronym 
Unité de Gestion Technique), and (iii) regional offices (Antennes Régionales # AR). The 
CFS is under the direct auspices of the Office of the Prime Minister, and its key staff 
includes a coordinator, three managers (cash transfers, accompanying measures, and cash 
for work), an administrative and financial officer, an internal auditor, a monitoring and 
evaluation expert, and a procurement officer. Its institutional arrangements are capable of 
managing the proposed Bank-financed project. The CFS will, therefore, support the 
establishment of a safety net system and manage the other components of the proposed 
project. The Government of Niger, the World Bank, and other donors acknowledge the 
importance of creating a permanent agency to manage safety net programs, with a law 
and a separate budget line. However, the current calendar to secure IDA15 financing and 
the context of political transition in Niger does not allow for the establishment of a 
permanent agency. As this project is being prepared, there is no parliament in Niger. The 
design of the Safety Nets Unit created by the GoN on December 16, 2010 is close to that 
Page  4
of an agency, and can become such if the new government is in agreement, and the new 
parliament approves a legislation to that end.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be mostly located in rural communities in the regions of Tillabery, 
Tahoua, Dosso, Maradi and Zinder. The Safety Net Unit will be located in the capital city 
of Niamey.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Social  
 
The social objective of the project is to reduce vulnerability to food insecurity among 
the poorest households through: (i) regular cash transfers to extremely vulnerable 
households who will be required to attend trainings on eight essential family practices 
(EFP) in health, sanitation, nutrition, and reproductive health; and (ii) cash for work to 
vulnerable populations during the lean agricultural season and/or in response to 
temporary shocks. The additional income provided through the project will help the 
targeted households improve access to food as well as invest in human capital and 
productive assets. The EFP training on the eight essential practices are expected to lead to 
the adoption of new practices that can positively impact food security for the 
beneficiaries.  
 
The social risks for the project primarily revolve around: (i) exclusion and inclusion 
errors in the targeting, which could cause tension regarding the selection of beneficiaries; 
(ii) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) under Component 3 on cash for work and in 
particular, potential resettlement issues and restriction of access to some sites linked with 
Page  5
land rehabilitation works and other small community works. Concerning the risk related 
to targeting, the methodology adopted seeks to ensure transparent identification and 
registration of beneficiary households by combining: (i) geographical mapping of poverty 
in consultation with technical institutes and local authorities; (ii) PMT data collection 
conducted by an independent third party; and (iii) the use of a MIS system to ensure the 
transparent identification and registration of the beneficiary households. In addition, the 
list of beneficiaries targeted in each village will be shared with the beneficiaries along 
with explanations of the targeting process to ensure transparency. Finally, an effective 
grievance system, accessible and easy to use by the communities, will be established 
before Components 2 and 3 start disbursing in order to achieve greater accountability in 
the safety net system and to provide a vehicle for addressing complaints and grievances 
that arise during the implementation process. To address the potential risk of Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) under Component 3, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
has been developed; it identifies all possible risks and proposes effective mitigation 
measures to be required of all stakeholders. The RPF has been published on February 18, 
2011.  
 
Environment  
 
Beyond its social protection objective, the cash for work seeks to improve the living 
conditions of the targeted communities by facilitating the rehabilitation of key communal 
assets and infrastructure. The micro projects which will be identified in consultation with 
the communities are expected to contribute to this objective through improving physical 
access to marginalized areas, increasing availability of basic social services, improving 
access to clean water, and contributing to the protection of the main livelihoods.  
 
The Project falls under environmental classification B, as the cash for work projects 
may only have a limited and localized environmental impact given their small scope. 
Indeed, material investment to each micro project will not exceed 20% of total wage and 
non wage costs (or an average of US $2,250 per village).  
 
The list of projects anticipated can be broken down into two categories. Category one 
focuses on environmental projects comprises activities such as construction of small 
terraces and earth banks (half-moons or demi-lunes), repairs of dunes, firebreaks, 
reforestation and tree planting, rehabilitation and protection of lakes and water points). 
Category two includes small infrastructure rehabilitation activities and rehabilitation and 
repairs of koori banks, construction and rehabilitation of livestock vaccination corridors, 
cleaning and rehabilitation of village water wells, rehabilitation and maintenance of 
community infrastructures and sanitation projects. Both categories of projects could 
restrict access of populations and livestock to the work site, possibly creating conflict 
between the herders and farmers or within the same livelihood group. The rehabilitation 
works may create some risks to the physical safety of the workers. The trees planted 
could increase risks of future deforestation or wild fires, and rehabilitation of open water 
sources may increase risks for water borne diseases in the area. Pollution and loud noises 
can be expected during the implementation of activities under category 2.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is only expected to have limited short-term negative impacts as described 
above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Mitigation of environmental risks  
 
World Bank safeguard policy 4.01 on environmental assessments has been triggered by 
the Project, by Component 3 in particular.  An Environmental Safeguards Management 
Framework (ESMF) has been developed and disclosed on February 18, 2011. It is 
expected that the UGT will use the Bank screening procedures to identify, assess, 
evaluate, mitigate and monitor the impact of the projects. Templates of relevant tools are 
included in the ESMF. These assessments will involve consultations with key 
stakeholders and will inform the design of specific resettlement and environment 
protection action plans. Once the action plans have been drafted, public consultations will 
be held and community systems to handle grievances will be established. All key 
stakeholders involved in the Project will be sensitized and trained on the mitigation 
measures.  
 
A
wide array of tools and trainings will be developed and adopted to address 
corresponding risks arising during micro-projects implementation (described under 
question 1). Based on the nature of the risks, some communities would have to be trained 
on conflict management; some works may required the provision of ear protection, 
protective headgear, gloves, masks, and safety shoes to workers to mitigate safety and 
health concerns; and adequate trainings on worksite safety measures will be provided to 
the workers on the first day of work. For activities such as tree planting, implementing 
agencies will have to facilitate some sensitization campaigns to prevent excessive tree 
cutting and wildfires. A community management plan would have to be developed for 
activities that could entail resource management (for instance water points, or 
rehabilitated lakes).  Finally, communities would have to be trained to minimize health 
risks that would be associated with the undue consumption of rehabilitated open water 
sources. This could take place within the framework of the training on the 8 essential 
family practices on health, sanitation and nutrition (Project component 2 on cash 
transfers) if the same communities are targeted by component 2 and 3.  
 
Mitigation of social risks  
 
World Bank safeguard policy 4.12 on involuntary resettlement has been triggered, by 
the project and by Component 3 in particular. In order to minimize adverse impacts 
associated with the risks of population resettlement due to cash for work activities, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed to identify all such risks and 
Page  7
propose effective mitigation measures that each stakeholder has to adopt.  This RPF has 
been disclosed on February 18, 2011. lThe document stipulates that NGOs responsible 
for the execution of the micro projects will have to: (i) develop an action plan for 
reinstallation for all micro projects affecting more than 200 individuals; and (ii) develop a 
succinct action plan for all micro projects affecting between 50 and 200 individuals. 
These action plans will be elaborated in close partnership with the UGT according to a 
process detailed in the RPF. Specifically, information regarding the potential impact of 
the micro projects will be shared with affected populations; micro projects will be 
defined and the potential for reinstallation assessed; and the action plan (s) will be 
developed and submitted to the UGT for approbation. These action plans will be financed 
within the budget allocated by the Project to each sub-projects. Compensation of 
populations affected could be made in cash or in kind, after consultations with all key 
stakeholders. Mechanisms to estimate the value of the compensation are described in the 
RPF. In addition, the RPF describes the process according to which the Project will 
monitor and evaluate compliance with the safeguard measures.  
 
In order to address the risk of inclusion and exclusion, the targeting methodology 
adopted will ensure transparent identification and registration of beneficiary households 
by combining: (i) geographical mapping of poverty in consultation with technical 
institutes and local authorities; (ii) PMT data collection conducted by an independent 
third party; and (iii) the use of a MIS system seeks to ensure the transparent identification 
and registration of the beneficiary households. In addition, the list of beneficiaries 
targeted in each village will be shared with the beneficiaries along with explanations of 
the targeting process to ensure transparency. Finally, an effective grievance system 
accessible and easy to use by the communities will be established before component 2 
and 3 start disbursing to achieve greater accountability in the safety net system and to 
provide a vehicle for addressing complaints and grievances that arise during the 
implementation process.  
 
The UGT will hire an environmental and social safeguards specialist who will work in 
close collaboration with the regional antennas to ensure full compliance with safeguards.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key project stakeholders include the NGOs that will be recruited for the implementation 
of the cash for work activities; the beneficiaries, who will be involved in project planning 
and implementation; representatives of relevant line ministries who will be involved in 
the technical validation of the micro-projects selected for implementation; and 
representatives from the National Office for Environmental Studies and Impact 
Evaluation (or BEEI the French Acronym for the Bureau d#Evaluation Evironnementale 
et d#Etudes d#Impact) who will monitor the micro-projects to ensure the respect of local 
environmental norms.  
 
A
workshop is scheduled on February 10, 2011 in Tahoua, Niger, to disclose the RPF 
and the ESFM to key stakeholders in Niamey. Participants include civil society 
representatives, civil servants and key government officials from the relevant line 
Page  8
ministries, regional authorities, representatives from the BEEI, and financial and 
technical partners (UNICEF, WFP, European Union).  During this workshop, the key 
government counterparts will present the ESMF and the RPF, and will hold discussions 
regarding potential risks and key mitigation measures proposed under the manual.  
 
Consultation and disclosure on safeguards policies will continue after Project 
effectiveness. Under the supervision of the UGT, NGOs recruited for the implementation 
of the cash for work activities will hold public communications to share information with 
the potential beneficiaries regarding their rights in regards to relevant safeguards policies. 
The Project will share information pertaining to the grievance management system that 
will be established to promote social accountability.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/18/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/18/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carlo Del Ninno 
03/24/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
03/24/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
03/24/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Setareh Razmara 
03/24/2011 
Comments:   
