Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  59854 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/22/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Niger 
Project ID: P117365 
Project Name: Urban Water and Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Matar Fall 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sanitation (80%);Water supply (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (25%);Regulation and competition policy 
(25%);Participation and civic engagement (25%);Access to urban services and housing 
(25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
0.80
0.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the proposed project is to increase access to sustainable WSS services in 
selected urban areas, thus contributing to the achievement of MDGs.  This objective will be 
achieved through: (a) the expansion of water production and distribution capacities, and 
facilitating access to services through programs for constructing social water service 
connections, public standpipes and on-site sanitation facilities; and (b) consolidating the 
achievements of the urban water sub-sector reform and strengthening capacities to deliver and 
manage services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would comprise three components: (i) urban water supply in Niamey and 
in 18 secondary centers; (ii) urban sanitation; and (iii) Institutional support and capacity 
strengthening.  
 
Page  2
Component 1 - Urban water (US$39 million): includes the following activities.  
 
-
Niamey (US$20M):  this subcomponent would help to:  (i) build a 2,000 m3 water storage 
tank, (ii) expand the distribution networks by 290 km; (ii) expand access to water by installing 
20,000 household connections.  
 
-
Secondary centers (US$19M):  This subcomponent would help to: (i) expand the water 
production and storage capacity through the construction of: 24 groundwater boreholes, one 
water treatment unit and two elevated water storage tanks; (ii) expand water distribution 
networks by 184 km; and (iii) expand access to water by installing 4,260 household connections 
and 268 standpipes.  
 
Component 2 - Urban sanitation (US$10 million): This component would include the following 
activities:  
 
-
Expand access to improved sanitation services in Niamey through the installation of 21,600 
household latrines and 50 public sanitation blocks; (ii) provide sanitation services to children in 
70 schools; and (iii) provide technical assistance to: (a) mobilize populations, manage contracts 
and supervise works; (b) train local masons and contractors; and (c) support media campaigns, 
hygiene education and training activities.  
 
Component 3 - Institutional support and capacity strengthening (US$5 million): This 
component would include the following activities:  
 
-
Institutional support to the urban water sub-sector, including: (i) preparation of the second 
phase reform in view of the end of the ongoing affermage contract by 2011; (ii) specific 
technical assistance and studies; (iii) technical audit of the performance contracts of SPEN and 
SEEN; (iv) assistance to the update of the financial model of the sub-sector; and (v) improve 
SPEN and ARM staff skills (training in project management, regulation, procurement and 
financial management);  
 
-
Environmental and social management sub-component, including capacity strengthening for 
all project implementation entities and for SEEN, the private operator of the urban water sub-
sector, including capacity strengthening for all project implementation entities and for SEEN, the 
private operator of the urban water sub-sector;  
 
-
Capacity building and support to the project implementation agencies in the Ministry of 
Hydraulics, including: (i) developing capacities in sector management and reforms; and (ii) 
providing logistic, material, and financial support required for the project implementation;  
 
-
Coordination and project management, including: (i) incremental operating costs of the PCU; 
and (ii) expenditures related to monitoring, financial audits, training, communication and 
organization.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
For urban water supply, the project will focus on Niamey and 18 secondary urban centers As 
regards urban sanitation, the project will focus on peri-urban areas of Niamey. However, specific 
areas of intervention in the said cities will be determined by technical studies.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has successfully implemented the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the previous Water sector Project (WSP - closed in 
Page  3
December 2009).  While the same institutional framework used for the WSP will be adopted for 
the proposed project, any capacity strengthening measure deemed necessary to improve the 
safeguard function in this operation will be carried out.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Demba Balde (AFTCS) 
Mr Taoufiq Bennouna (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered because of the potential environmental impacts resulting from project 
activities (notably civil works). However, those impacts are expected to be minimal, site-specific 
and manageable to an accepted level according to the acquired experience in building such 
infrastructure under the previous project. The project mostly concerns the extension of water 
distribution networks and boreholes that will be rehabilitated or replaced under the project are 
scattered in 18 secondary centers across the country and will not therefore, have any cumulative 
impact on groundwater tables. Since specific areas of intervention cannot be confirmed before 
project appraisal, the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will formulate standard methods and procedures, along with 
institutional arrangements for screening, review, approval and implementation and monitoring of 
subprojects' specific EMPs, including the preparation of environmental clauses to be inserted in 
contractors' bidding documents.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The project will avoid all cultural property resources, and if necessary reroute the water 
distribution networks. Triggering OP 4.11 or not will be decided on the basis of the ESMF 
findings.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will include rights of way for water distribution networks, and minimal land 
acquisition for water production, distribution and sanitation facilities. For that purpose a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared by the Borrower in order to identify 
social issues at stake (resettlement, restriction of access and land tenure). The Borrower's 
experience in this area aquired under the previous project is a strong plus in that respect.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
OP 7.50 is not triggered as the project does not include additional water production capacity 
drawing water from the Niger River.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
01/22/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since specific areas of intervention cannot be confirmed at this stage, the Borrower will 
prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) acceptable to the Bank before project appraisal planned on October 
01, 2010. The ESMF and RPF will be prepared in accordance to Bank safeguard policies, as 
well as national environmental policies. On completion and approval by the Government and 
the Bank, it will be disclosed in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop and consulted upon 
before project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matar Fall 
02/22/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/22/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
02/22/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
