Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.:59963 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 15, 2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P111179 
Additional Project ID 
(parent)
:
P093806
 
Project Name: Kainji Hydropower Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Amal Talbi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: Not applicable 
Estimated Board Date: April 1, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTWR 
Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance  
Sector: Renewable energy, Water 
Theme:  Climate Change and Water Resources Management 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
 
Carbon Finance Amount (US$m.): 2.84 million 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Environmental Category: A 
–
Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing                        Simple [ ]                         Repeater [ ]  
Is this a transferred project                 Yes [ ]                    No [X ] 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]: 
 
Rehabilitation of Kainji Hydro Power Plant as a carbon finance project is envisaged under the 
Niger Basin Water Resources Development and Sustainable Ecosystems Management Program 
(WRDSEM). The project development objective of the WRDSEM is to enhance regional 
coordination, development and sustainability of water resources management in the Niger River 
Basin. The specific objective of the Kainji Hydro Power Plant Rehabilitation project is to 
improve the performance of the power generating units at Kainji power station to generate 
additional electricity of about 240 MW for the Nigerian grid.  The proposed project will enhance 
the availability of cleaner electricity (without any associated green house gas emissions) from the 
hydro resources, which otherwise could have come from thermal sources. The rehabilitation 
project thus contributes to green house gas reductions, making it potentially eligible to earn 
additional revenues from the sale of carbon credits.  
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]: 
 
The WRDSEM project has the following three components: 
 
Component 1: NBA institutional strengthening and capacity building  
This component focuses on enhancing the capacity of the NBA and its National Focal Structures 
including other national institutions involved in implementing the First Phase Project of the 
Niger Basin Program. The key sub-components identified are: (a) 
Strengthening and capacity 
building of the NBA; (b) Strengthening and capacity building of national water resources 
management institutions; and (c) Institutional support and strengthening of regional water 
resources management and planning.
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation, optimization, and development of regional infrastructure 
This component focuses on rehabilitating and upgrading the existing large water infrastructure of 
regional relevance, and supporting the regional planning framework. The subcomponents 
include:
 
a)Rehabilitation of Kainji dam and hydropower plant. 
This subcomponent includes: (i) 
rehabilitation and harmonization of productive electromechanical equipments to provide 
additional 240 MW capacity; (ii) rehabilitation of auxiliary services; (iii) rehabilitation of the 
navigation lock; (iv) upgrading instrumentation and monitoring equipments; (v) improvement of 
the flood warning systems and development of a decision support and management system; (vi) 
implementation of the environmental action plan to mitigate potential impact of the rehabilitation 
of Kainji and Jebba sites; and (vii) operational support and reinforcement o f PHCN and the 
National Focal Structure in Nigeria. 
b)Rehabilitation of Jebba hydropower dam. 
This subcomponent consists of: (i) selected 
rehabilitation o f electro-mechanical; (ii) re habilitation of auxiliary services; (iii) civil works for 
stabilization of the tailrace channel and rehabilitation of upper navigation lock; (iv) upgrading of 
instrumentation and monitoring equipment; (v) prevention of tree invasion; and (vi) 
reinforcement of the maintenance workshops. 
c)Assessing optimization and management options for the development of regional water
 
infrastructure 
 
Component 3: Sustainable management of selected degraded ecosystems and rehabilitation 
of small water infrastructure  
 
The carbon finance project corresponds to Component 2(a) of the parent project described above, 
and thus is not a separate activity as such. The carbon finance project therefore does not trigger 
any additional safeguards issues.   
 
The carbon finance project involves the rehabilitation of the hydropower units 5, 6 and 12 and is 
expected to provide an additional 240 MW of electricity to the Nigerian grid. The project aims at 
securing power production and avoiding further production shortage or breakdowns. As the 
rehabilitation of units is completed and they are put into service, the operating units will be 
harmonized and balanced in terms of energy production in order to extend the service life of the 
turbines. The result of the rehabilitation project will be enhanced harmonization of power 
Page  3
production units, rehabilitated auxiliary services and priority units and upgraded dam safety 
equipment and practices, which are essential for reliable generation of electricity at the dam and 
a
significant contribution to the easing of Nigeria’s power shortages. 
 
The project will enhance the availability of carbon free electricity generation from the hydro 
resources. Generation from the revamped Kainji Hydropower plant will displace some of the 
thermal capacities that would have hitherto been used to meet demand for electrical energy 
supplies from the grid. Reduced greenhouse gas emissions will thus occur as a result of 
displacement of thermal generation by carbon free generation from the hydropower plant.  The 
rehabilitation of the Kanji Hydropower Plant will not only provide additional power supplies to 
the grid but it will also ensure that a portion of this incremental power is generated from 
renewable sources, which will contribute to the country’s sustainable development. 
 
D.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 
(if known): 
 
The project is located in Kainji on the Niger River in western Nigeria. It involves the 
rehabilitation of units 5, 6 and 12 of the hydropower plant, which is funded under the parent 
project. All safeguards and disclosure requirements have been conducted under the parent 
project.  The Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) under the parent project 
covers all the environmental and social impacts of the project. This project does not involve any 
additional activities at the project site and therefore there is no need to prepare a separate ESIA 
document for this project. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:  
 
The Power Holding Company of Nigeria, the executing agency of the project, has an adequate 
number of environmental and social specialists on their staff. In addition, there is a staffed 
Environmental and Social Unit at both Kainji and Jebba hydropower plants. Therefore, there is 
institutional capacity for safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 
 
Paula Lytle, Senior Social Development Specialist   (AFTCS) 
Amos Abu, Senior Environmental Specialist   (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 
X
The planned activities will have potential environmental impacts that will trigger OP 4.01. 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework and the Environmental and Social Audit 
were disclosed on 26
th
 February 2007. An Environmental and Social Audit for Kainji and Jebba 
Dams was also disclosed on 26
th
 February 2007.  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(
please explain why)
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project team will determine if this project involves land acquisition/involuntary resettlement 
or not. 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
OP 4.37 will be triggered. A dam safety inspection panel will be established and coordinated by 
the NBA.  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The riparian notification has been done under the parent project through the NBA in which all 
Niger River riparian countries are represented. 
The nine riparian states regularly approved proceeding 
with the Project by resolutions of the council of ministers.  In addition, they were formally notified of the 
details of the Project by letter  from the Niger Basin Authority dated March 9, 2007 and no riparian 
requested additional clarification following this letter from the NBA.
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address 
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)  
 
X
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A   
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:   February 1, 2011.   
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
 
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
The safeguards instruments for the parent project: Environmental and Social Management 
Framework, the Environmental and Social Audit and Resettlement Policy Framework were 
disclosed on 26
th
 February 2007.  
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Amal Talbi 
03/01/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Alexandra  Bezeredi  
03/01/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Jonathan Kamkwalala 
03/01/2011 
Comments:   
(Template Version November 2007) 
 
