Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
RESTRUCTURING STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/03/2011 
Report No.:  AC6040
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P090135 
Project Name:  Nigeria Federal Roads Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ajay Kumar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 3, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Administrative and 
civil service reform (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
330.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
32.00 
 
Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 
3.00
35.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PDO will remain the same as that of the original and is as follows:  
 
to reduce passenger travel times, vehicle operating costs and traffic related fatalities on 
targeted federal roads and assist the FGN to manage Nigeria's federal road assets in a 
sustainable manner.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed restructuring includes changes in project roads to be financed by the credit 
under component A and changes in capacity building program to support institutional 
reforms under component B. In addition, a third component C is included to finance 
works, goods, and services for road safety enhancement.  The section below describes the 
proposed changes in design:  
 
Component A.  Rehabilitation, Upgrading, and Maintenance of selected Unity Roads  
 
Page  2
The current design includes rehabilitation, upgrading, and maintenance of 636 km of the 
road network under OPRC contracts at an estimated total cost of US$320.00 million.  The 
revised design includes:  
 
a) Rehabilitation of 442 km of road network to be constructed under International 
Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) method, at an estimated cost of US$236.00 
million. The selection of roads was based on strategic importance and economic rate of 
return (sub-component A1).  
 
b)
Upgrading and maintenance of 340 km of the road network spread over the country 
along 14 road sections, at an estimated cost of US$68.00 million. The selected roads were 
identified from a long list of roads based on strategic importance, ability to improve 
access to agricultural communities along the road, and improve transportation of food 
items and other natural resources. The project will finance scarification and reinstatement 
of failed sections of existing carriageway and shoulders, patching of potholes, provision 
of earth and lined drains, sealing of cracks, provision of crushed stone base and sub-base 
course, priming and provision of 50mm thick asphaltic concrete overlay or over new 
base, road marking and safety signs (sub-component A2).  
 
The following is a list of the Original/New Roads for Rehabilitation and Upgrading:  
 
1. 
Lagos-Ibadan: Withdrawn  
 
2.
Abuja-Kaduna-Kano: Withdrawn  
 
3.
Enugu-Abakaliki /Ogoja Junction-Ikom: Retained  
 
4.
Gombe-Biu road: Replacement; requires full engineering design  
 
5.
Akure-Ilesha road: Replacement; requires full engineering design  
 
6.
Mokwa-Bida road: Replacement; requires full engineering design  
 
7.
Enugu-Abakaliki Road: Original road  
 
8.
Ogoja Junction-Ikom Road: Original road  
 
The roads for upgrading and maintenance are as follows:  
 
1. 
Jebba-Lafiagi Road in Niger State  
 
2.
Takai-Albasu-Gaya Road in Kano State  
 
3.
Nafada-Gombeabba Road in Gombe State  
 
4.
Hong-Mubi Road in Adamawa State  
 
5.
Kurfi-Charanchi Road in Katsina State  
 
6.
Okpala-Igwurita Road in Imo State  
 
7.
Ado Ilumoba-Agbado-Ikare Road in Ekiti State (Sect.A)  
 
8.
Ado Ilumoba-Agbado-Ikare Road in Ekiti State (Sect.B)  
 
9.
Rumukurushi-Chokocho Road in Rivers State  
 
10.
Lafiagi-Mokwa Road in Niger State  
 
11.
Dingaya-Galambi-Rungo Road in Jigawa State  
 
12.
East-West-Odi Road in Bayelsa State  
 
13.
Lafia-Doma Road in Nasarawa State  
 
14.
Akure-Owo-Ifo Road Route R35 in Ondo State  
 
Page  3
Component B:  Institutional Strengthening and Policy Reform  
 
This component supports reforms in the road sector, allowing for more effective and 
efficient management of the road infrastructure. In view of the emerging government 
priorities, specific areas for support have been modified in the proposed restructuring.  
 
Key reforms to be supported by the project include:  
 
A. Development of a road sector policy program.  Currently there exists Vision 2000, 
developed by the Federal Ministry of Works in 1996, with a focus only on federal roads.  
More recently, the National Transport Policy was drafted in 2010 by the Federal Ministry 
of Transport providing an overall vision for all modes of transport.  Within the overall 
policy framework, there is a need to develop a road sector policy program, detailing long 
term strategic role of the road sub-sector and identifying key prioritized investments in 
support of that vision.  The program will need to integrate roads at all three tiers of 
government:  national highways, intra-state roads, and intra-urban and rural feeder roads. 
This sub-component would finance technical assistance and training to develop a road 
sector policy program.  
 
B. Setting up a road sector data base. This sub-component would finance technical 
assistance, training, and goods to develop a road sector data base to document inventory 
of road assets in the country.  Road condition surveys would be conducted as part of the 
data base and the information will be used for planning purposes.  
 
C. Road sector management reform studies and capacity development.  At a two-day 
workshop in June 2008, the Federal Government of Nigeria expressed its willingness to 
reform the road sector through sustained institutional and policy changes so as to ensure 
efficient and safe road transport sector with the private sector playing a leading role.  One 
of the proposals discussed was to create a semi-autonomous National Roads Board and a 
Road Fund.  In November 2010, the Federal Ministry of Works has set up a committee to 
review the 2008 Federal Road Authority Bill.  This sub-component will finance technical 
assistance and capacity building to support the government in its objective to set up a 
Roads Authority.  As an interim measure, this component will also finance studies and 
technical assistance to strengthen the role of RSDT in management of a core road 
network in the country.  
 
D. Technical Support to RSDT and FRA. This will support the Project Management.  
 
E. Goods and equipment for RSDT and FRA. This will support the Project 
Management.  
 
F. Design and Construction of FRA Building. Withdrawn and funds to be utilized for 
footbridges under Component C.  
 
G. Review of National Road Design Standards and Axle Load Control.  The existing 
Highway Manual Part 1 - Design was revised in 2008 but the exercise was not finalized 
Page  4
as three volumes of the manual remained incomplete.  The revision of the Part 2: 
Maintenance was concluded in 2009 but provisions were not made for Contract 
Maintenance Operations. These lapses require both parts of the Highway Manual to be 
revised and updated accordingly.  This sub-component will finance technical assistance 
to support revision of these manuals.  
 
H. Training of RSDT/FMW/FMF and FRA. FRA/RF replaced by FERMA staff.  
 
I. Incremental Operating costs of RSDT and FRA. This will support the Project 
Management.  
 
J. External Audit of Financial Accounts and Management.  This sub-component will 
finance consultancy services to conduct annual audits of the project financial 
management systems.  
 
K. Support of Pavement Evaluation Unit and Bridge Maintenance Unit. Support will be 
provided through asset management system for FERMA, PEU, and BMU (under item N).  
 
L. Establishment and Capacity Building of the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory 
Commission, PEU, and BMU. Withdrawn  
 
M. Road Safety Enhancement and Sector Studies. Withdrawn and funds diverted to 
Component C.  
 
N. Development of an Asset Management System.  This sub-component will support the 
development of an Asset Management System in FERMA. The system will be an 
integrated system for managing roads and bridge structures for use in the planning, 
programming and managing of works (capital, maintenance, rehabilitation and 
reconstruction) on roads and bridges on the Federal Road Network.  This sub-component 
will finance consultancy services and equipment.  
 
O. Implementation of Governance and Accountability Action Plan. This sub-component 
will finance consultancy services and goods to support: a) development of a disclosure 
policy, including systems and procedures; b) annual system process monitoring; c) 
establish a complaint handling mechanism; d) capacity building of key staff.  
 
P. Monitoring and Evaluation Studies. This sub-component will finance consultancy 
services to conduct: a) user satisfaction surveys; b) socio-economic and travel time 
surveys.  
 
Q. Urban Transport Study.  The project will finance preparation of strategic long-range 
transportation planning program to improve mobility throughout the metropolitan area 
and on main corridors in Kano and Abuja.  This sub-component will finance studies, 
training, and goods.  
 
Page  5
R. Calibration and Adaptation of HDM-4. This sub-component will finance consultancy 
services for calibration and adaptation of HDM-4 model to Nigerian conditions.  
 
Component C:  Road Safety Improvements  
 
Support to FRSC (US$10.00 million):  This component supports the Federal Road 
Safety Corp (FRSC) to pilot the "safe corridor" approach on the project roads, as well as 
other high traffic roads for an estimated amount of US$10.00 million. FRSC has 
conducted road safety audits on the project roads and developed multi-sector 
interventions to improve road safety. The safety component of the safe corridor approach 
would finance training, capacity development, vehicle and other equipment, with a 
specific focus on:  
 
a) 
Safe Corridor Intervention on Four Project Corridors  
 
b)
Safe Corridor Intervention in Abuja-Kano Expressways  
 
c) 
Safe Corridor Intervention on Abuja City Expressways  
 
d)
Capacity building and training for FRSC staff  
 
Support to FCT in safety improvements (US$10.00 million):   The project would 
finance: a) pedestrian over-bridges at six locations at an estimated cost of about US$5.00 
million; and b) investments in traffic management, including street markings, intersection 
improvements, street lighting, etc with the objective of improving road safety and traffic 
flow, at an estimated cost of US$5.00 million.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project comprises rehabilitation and long term management and maintenance of 
priority sections of roads in different parts of Nigeria.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The key safeguards issues and impacts include soil erosion, loss of vegetation due to the 
creation of borrow pits, soil and water pollution due to spillage of toxic and hazardous 
materials,  and adverse physical environmental impacts resulting from noise and dust 
during construction. None of these impacts is however expected to be large scale, 
significant and irreversible. Most impacts are localized in relation to the places where 
construction works are carried out. They are also limited in time by the length of the 
construction contracts. All this supposes however that firstly effective environmental 
management plans are put in place to mitigate the adverse impacts; secondly any project 
related social or economic displacement is handled through resettlement action plans; 
thirdly that appropriate support will be drawn as needed from national plans and 
institutions in relevant areas such as HIV/AIDS, road safety and environmental standards.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower's capacity to manage safeguards policies within the sector is weak.  The 
project will provide assistance to strengthen the environmental and social capacity within 
the sector, in particular within the Road Sector Development Team (RSDT) to be later 
transferred to the new FRA.  The Environmental Management Policy Framework and the 
Resettlement Policy Framework for the project have been prepared, approved, and 
disclosed as per Bank guidelines. The project will ensure that the specific EMPs and 
RAPs where necessary for each road segment are prepared on the basis of the already 
approved Environmental Management and Resettlement Policy frameworks by the 
selected long term contractors. These will be approved and disclosed according to Bank's 
safeguards policies as well as the national policies prior to beginning of construction. 
Basic Environmental and social management capacity is already in place in the RSDT 
with the recruitment of an environmental and social specialist to follow up environmental 
and social safeguards concerns as they arise during project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders including FMT, FERMA, RSDT team, ADB, concerned groups and 
local communities participated through public consultations, field visits and surveys for 
the project. In addition, the local populations along the project roads who are the key 
stakeholders were consulted in the course of the preparation of the environmental and 
Page  7
social safeguards policy frameworks. The consultation process also continued during the 
ongoing screening for EA categories and the preparation of EMPs and RAPs the selected 
roads for period maintenance and rehabilitation. The stakeholders will further be 
consulted at the commencement of works.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/21/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/29/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2006 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  8
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ajay Kumar 
03/17/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amos Abu 
03/14/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Caroline Mary Sage 
03/17/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
03/17/2011 
Comments:   
