Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6025 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/01/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P124905 
Project Name: Nigeria Erosion  and Watershed Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Amos Abu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 20, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: October 20, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%);Forestry (30%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (10%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (40%);Other environment and natural 
resources management (20%);Water resource management (20%);Biodiversity 
(10%);Climate change (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
350.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed PDO is to reduce vulnerability to erosion in targeted areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This multi-sector project is expected to support a transformation in how Nigerians relate to their 
land.  To respond to the President of Nigeria's request to the Bank to support the country to 
address severe erosion in southeastern Nigeria, the Project would take a comprehensive 
watershed management approach coupled with an investment focus on gully erosion prevention 
and rehabilitation (via a rapid-response facility) as indicated below. Also, via a cross-state 
learning element, the project will be dynamic, visible, active, transparent, push for reforms, and 
provide a framework for action that could be scaled out nationwide.  
 
There are three project components as follows:  
 
Page  2
Component 1. Investments in targeted areas (US$ 280 -300 M):  This component would aim to 
support on-the-ground interventions to address, prevent and reverse land degradation. The 
primary focus would be on addressing severe gully erosion in southeastern Nigeria, focusing on 
but not limited to the Anambra-Imo and Cross River basins.  A strategic combination of 
engineering, biological, and community-centered low-tech measures would be deployed to (i) 
stabilize severe erosion sites, and (ii) prevent emerging erosion problems early on when 
intervention costs are low. Accordingly, interventions will include structural, vegetative, and 
adaptive natural resource based livelihood measures, coupled with micro-catchment planning 
where necessary; examples include:  
 
(i) 
Structural land management measures and civil works such as cross-drainage, check 
dams, gabions, terracing and other slope stabilization works, river groynes, geotextiles, etc.  
 
(ii) 
Vegetative land management measures such as afforestation, agroforestry, grassing, 
bunds, live check dams, no tillage, buffer strips, etc.  
 
(iii) 
Adaptive livelihood measures important for mobilizing local stakeholders to carry out, 
maintain and monitor erosion management practices, and to reduce pressure on land.  
 
(iv) 
Strengthening of communities and local authorities to carry out participatory micro-
catchment planning in targeted investment areas, establish community resource management 
areas, promote selected land and water management and livelihood practices, and participate in 
investment implementation and monitoring.  
 
This component will be implemented with appropriate planning, preparation, stakeholder 
involvement, and monitoring. A Gully Rapid Action for Slope Stabilization (GRASS) Facility is 
proposed to address the many emergency situations in existing gully propagation that pose 
immediate threats to lives, livelihoods, and critical infrastructure. Investment priorities for the 
GRASS facility will be informed by a rigorous typology of erosion problems. In addition, the 
component would support communities and local agencies to stem rills and incipient gullies in 
their early stages of formation, and address constraints to collective action.  
 
Component 2. Institutional development and information systems for erosion management and 
watershed planning (US$ 40-50M): This component would address longer-term sustainability by 
strengthening the enabling environment to address erosion and watershed degradation problems 
in a comprehensive manner across sectors and States. The component would support 
modernization and coordination of the many institutions involved in planning, management, 
assessment, enforcement, and monitoring of watershed and erosion related activities from sub-
watershed to basin scales. To reinforce good design and prioritization of investment, the 
component would also support improvements in the policy environment, data modernization, 
development and application of analytical and monitoring tools, and diagnoses of watershed 
problems. The component would tentatively finance:  
 
(i)  
Development of watershed action plans and monitoring arrangements based on analytical 
and stakeholder input including land use/land cover mapping.  
 
(ii) 
Development of coordination mechanisms for multi-sector and multi-scale planning, joint 
approaches; enabling policies, regulations, and by-laws; and harmonized guidelines for improved 
land and water management across actors at Federal and State levels;  
 
(iii) 
Strengthening of regulatory compliance, environmental assessments, and contract 
management related to erosion management at Federal and State levels; and Establishment of a 
Page  3
comprehensive Dynamic Information System as well as other analytical, data, ICT, and 
monitoring tools that would support planning, prioritization, outreach, and management of 
investment activities. These could include real time land/water data networks; innovative use of 
ICT, remote sensing and use of Geographic Information Systems.  
 
(iv) 
Training to modernize federal and state institutions, coupled with outreach activities to 
help address land-degrading behaviors at all levels of implementation,  
 
(vi) 
Establishment of an innovation facility to pilot possible payments for environmental 
services, investment competitions, innovation fairs, and other events.  
 
Component 3. Project management (US$ 8-10M): This component would aim to support the 
government at Federal and State levels to implement this project.  This will include support for 
project management, including fiduciary aspects (procurement, financial management, 
environmental and social safeguards), project M&E, strategic communications, and 
documentation.  In particular, a strong monitoring and learning framework will be set up to learn 
from past and ongoing interventions for adaptive management all through the process of project 
planning, implementation, and evaluation.  
 
Proposed instrument and scope. The proposed operation would be envisioned as a six-year 
Strategic Investment Loan (SIL).  The financial needs of the targeted States for rehabilitation of 
existing gullies are significant.  Based on States estimates, the rehabilitation of priority sites 
alone could amount to more than US$6 billion.  Activities would need to be implemented in a 
phased manner based on absorptive capacity and learning from initial implementation efforts to 
scale-up to larger levels.  The final project cost will be determined during further project 
preparation, but a notional IDA financing envelope of US$ 350 - 450M is proposed to enable the 
project to initiate work at the scale required.  The principle of ensuring adequate counterpart 
funding at state and federal levels for these activities was also confirmed during the mission 
wrap-up meeting but exact amounts are pending.  
 
Additional support from partners would be explored during preparation, including the Global 
Environment Facility, and partners involved in the TerrAfrica program.  This project is expected 
to establish the enabling environment at targeted Federal and State-level institutions for scaling-
up erosion and watershed management activities in the Country and exploring the phases of 
future work required (including for further Bank support to be considered)   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will focus initially on erosion hotspot in Nigeria including Abia, Anambra, Cross 
River, Ebonyi, Edo, Enugu and Imo. The actual selection of states and sites will depend on an 
agreed selection criteria to be finalized before appraisal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project is expected to have highly positive environmental and social impacts, as it provides 
incentives for improved environmental management in critical and sensitive areas with active 
participation of communities. In addition, it would improve watersheds management and reduce 
land degradation by promoting biodiversity-friendly land use practices. The borrower has several 
years experience in applying and implementing World Bank project. There are adequate legal 
and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards 
Page  4
policies triggered by the proposed project. In Nigeria, the Federal Ministry of Environment 
(FMEnv) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring 
compliance with national environmental standards. It has different departments with field offices 
in every region of the country. The project Management Unit will recruit an environmental 
specialist to be responsible and accountable for all safeguard issues. He or she will be supported 
by consultants. Further, the safeguard specialist in the World Bank team will provide additional 
guidance to the TTL and PMU.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS) 
Mr Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In component 1, the project will finance the rehabilitation of existing gullies through 
interventions such as structural land management measures, civil works and vegetative land 
management measures in pursuance of its project development objective. However, the exact 
locations and sites could not be ascertained at the time of project preparation. The potential 
impacts are likely to be small-scale and site specific, typical of category B projects. To 
successfully identify and manage potential adverse impacts on the environment from project 
funded activities such as those enumerated above, the borrower will prepare an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF). This will be disclosed in-country and at the Banks 
Info shop prior to project appraisal. However, in view of the Gully Rapid Action for Slope 
Stabilization (GRASS) sub-component, site specific ESIAs or EMPs for activities that would 
take place within the first year of the project will be prepared and disclosed once sites are 
identified and in lieu of commencement of civil works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project is not expected to impact any known Ramsar site. However, since the project 
would be dealing with drainage, and infrastructure in waterways and may impact possible 
infringement on adjacent wetlands cannot be completely ruled out. The ESMF and site specific 
ESIAs will contain sections detailing how natural habitat issues would be handled by the project 
if and when the policy is triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Part of the project's intervention would include afforestation and revegetation in the Cross 
River Basin including the protection of the pristine forest which accounts for about 50% of the 
remaining forest reserves in Nigeria.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Some of the intervention activities may lead to the discovery of cultural artifacts. In addition, 
the identification mission was informed that 2 graves have been swept away by gully erosion in 
Anambra State. OP4.09 is triggered and measures to be taken to address the issues of physical 
and cultural resources would be included in the TOR of the ESMF and ESIA.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project interventions will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, land and 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
other economic resources and livelihoods. In situations where this cannot be avoided, the 
borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address the needs of persons 
who will be affected by loss of economic activities, land acquisition and/or relocation. The RPF 
will have to be sent to the bank for review and clearance before it is disclosed publicly in country 
and on the Bank's info shop prior to project appraisal. In addition, in view of the GRASS sub-
component, site specific RAPs or ARAPs for activities that would take place within the first year 
of the project will be prepared  and disclosed once sites are identified.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Part of the proposed civil work activities would include the construction embankments and 
retention dams. These small dams would be less than 10 meters.  Even though OP/BP 4.37 is not 
triggered, as part of due diligence, the civil works, would be supervised by seasoned engineers.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Some of the civil works intervention for the management of gullies such as embankments 
and sediment retention tanks would take place on the tributaries of the River Niger. Since 
Nigeria is a member of the Niger Basin Authority, a riparian notification will be sent to NBA 
headquarters in Niamey for onward transmission to riparian states of the Niger River. In 
addition, part of the proposed activities may include stabilization of the Cross River shoreline 
and planting of trees in the adjoining catchment areas to reduce the silting of the river which has 
its source in Cameroon Republic. A riparian notification would be sent to Cameroon by the 
Government of Nigeria as required.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/12/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Both the ESMF and the RPF will be prepared and disclosed by May 9, 2011 prior to 
appraisal scheduled for in June 20, 2011. Site specific ESIAs, EMPs, ARAPs and RAPs will 
be prepared and disclosed once sites are identified and before the commencement of civil 
works. Riparian notification will be issued prior to appraisal. The sector manager has agreed 
to have transfer of safeguards responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amos Abu 
03/01/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/01/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
03/01/2011 
Comments:   
