Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/07/2011 
Report No.:  AC5917
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P086716 
Original Project Name: Sustainable 
Management of Mineral Resources 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P122828 
Project Name:  Nigeria: Sustainable Mgmt of Mineral Resources-add'l financing 
Task Team Leader:  Ekaterina Mikhaylova 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 31, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SEGOM 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the proposed project are to:  
 
(i) Increase the Government's long-term institutional and technical capacity to manage 
its mineral resources in a sustainable way;  
 
(ii) Establish a basis for poverty reduction and rural economic renewal in selected areas 
of the country via the development of non-farm income generating opportunities through 
small-scale and artisanal mining and to diversify away from oil sources of income.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Economic Development and Livelihood Diversification  
 
A1 - Sustainability of small scale mining and livelihood diversification: (i) Update 
curricular; training of teaching, administrative and support staff; upgrade remaining 
Nigerian Institute for Mining and Geosciences (NIMG) campus and provide additional 
equipment for teaching purposes; (ii) extend institutional capacity building support to a 
Page  2
Mining Community Resource Center and Gemology Center at NIMG for artisanal and 
small-scale mining; (iii) continue staff/skills development support to small-scale mining 
unit at Ministry of Mining and Steel Development (MMSD).  
 
A.2 Financing Programs for Business Development in Mining: (i) Scale-up small grants 
program to artisanal and small scale mining operations and communities; (ii) carry out 
capacity building support to mid-tier mine operators to develop bankable projects, and to 
local banks to evaluate mining projects; provide assistance with business development for 
mine operators; (iii) establish and make operational Ibadan Gemstone Platform to support 
full roll-out of the new and growing gemstone sub-sector; (iv) establish and make 
operational Dimension Stone Certification Laboratory.  
 
Component B: Governance and Transparency in the Mining Sector  
 
B.1 Legal and Fiscal Reform: Expand this sub-component to include health and safety 
regulations, and explosives act and regulations; finalize and adopt establishing acts for 
NIMG and Mining Cadastre Office (MCO).  
 
B.2 Institutional capacity building. (i) Scale up support to MMSD to strengthen 
regulatory and compliance enforcement functions, including metals sector licensing and 
monitoring; additional support for the Mines Inspectorate, including guidelines for health 
and safety and upgrading of laboratories; (ii) conduct a baseline study of local metals 
plants, design strategies for metals sector development; develop metals sector regulations 
and standards; upgrade testing and research laboratories; strengthen curricula at the 
Metallurgical Training Institute.  
 
B.3 Mining Cadastre. Roll out the mining cadastre system to two regional mining 
cadastre offices (Jos and Ibadan) to improve efficiency; upgrade existing mining cadastre 
system to incorporate lessons learnt from the early years of its implementation.  
 
B.4 Environmental and Social management. Environmental and social mapping of 
existing and abandoned mining sites; socio-economic baseline studies of selected mining 
sites to assess economic feasibility for rehabilitation and alternative use.  
 
Component C: Private Sector Development  
 
Strengthening of geological infrastructure. (i) Additional geophysical, geochemical and 
field surveys (based on the priority areas and focusing on strategic minerals as identified 
in Phases I and II); detailed mineral exploration of targeted mineral sites, archiving and 
documentation of NGSA publications and geological mapping of selected areas on scale 
1:100,000; (ii) development of a national solid minerals information system to promote 
investment in the mining sector  
 
Component D: Project Management and Coordination  
 
Project management arrangements will remain unchanged; additional funding will be 
provided for the duration of implementation (through 2015).   
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As with the original project, the activities under the additional financing will take place 
all over the country, with no specific locations targeted.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will primarily work in the area of capacity building and the creation of 
geological data, thus generating no or only very moderate environmental impacts. The 
successful small grants program will be continued with well-tested review and 
management guidelines for environmental and social. The Environmental Compliance 
department of the MMSD will supervise safeguards compliance of the small grants 
program with support from project-financed social development and environmental 
specialists. The project will take into account lessons learned in the small grants program 
to the artisanal miners and through the safeguards audit conducted for the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Increased mining activities are one expected result. However, since mining will take 
place with better capital equipment and under monitoring of a better staffed and educated 
authority, the impacts of mining will be well managed and their environmental costs 
mitigated according to tested international standards.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared and disclosed the following safeguards documents (i) Sectoral 
Environmental and Social Assessment; (ii) Resettlement Policy Framework, and (iii) 
Process Framework. These instruments  were updated and re-disclosed by the project 
proponent. In addition, the borrower also carried out independent environmental and 
social safeguards audit which showed  the project safeguards compliance to be 
satisfactory.  
 
The PMU will be responsible for the monitoring of all activities and is staffed with one 
Environmental and one Social Safeguard Specialist. Additional manpower can be added 
should the need arise.  
 
For all matters of environmental compliance, the PMU will work closely together with 
the Environmental Compliance department within the Ministry, which has received 
related training through the original project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As with the original project, the proposed activities falling under additional financing will 
be disseminated to the concerned stakeholders through a concise information policy as 
well as through workshops.  The following groups remain the key stakeholders: artisanal 
and small-scale miners, mining communities, NGOs/CBOs, the academic community, the 
government (federal, state and local), the mining professional societies, financial 
institutions, private mining companies and consultants. The updated PID and ISDS were 
disclosed through the Infoshop, according to the standard World Bank procedures. The 
MMSD publishes a bi-monthly sector magazine, project developments have figured 
prominently in previous issues and will continue to be a central subject of forthcoming 
issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/01/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/01/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2011 
 
Page  5
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  6
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ekaterina Mikhaylova 
02/03/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amos Abu 
02/01/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
02/01/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/07/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
02/03/2011 
Comments:  Signed by Masami Kojima, duly authorized to act on behalf of Paulo De Sa during his 
absence 
