Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6080 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/10/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Niger 
Project ID: P125669 
Project Name: Niger Community Action Project for Climate Resilience 
Task Team Leader: Taoufiq Bennouna 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: November 3, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Sub-national government 
administration (30%) 
Theme: Climate change (40%);Other environment and natural resources management 
(40%);Land administration and management (20%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Climate Investment Funds 
63.00
63.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve the resilience of the population and of the 
production systems to climate change, in order to increase national food security.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is one of the four investment projects of the PSCR/Niger. It will be 
implemented by the Government in the areas which area most vulnerable to climate variability 
and vulnerability, in coordination with other national and international technical and financial 
stakeholders. Its total cost will be US$63 million from CIF/PPCR ($35 million grant and $28 
million lending).  
 
Total duration of the CAPCR will be five years. The project will comprise three components: 
(i) Building institutional capacities and political frameworks; (ii) Supporting the adoption of 
climate resilience measures in Local Development Plans, including sustainable land and water 
management and sustainable agricultural practices, and piloting innovative activities on Social 
Protection and Risk Pooling and Insurance of agricultural and pastoral production; and (iii) 
Project coordination and knowledge management, including knowledge sharing.  
Page  2
1. Building institutional capacities and political frameworks (US$8 million). The project will 
aim to make social and economic development policies more responsive to climate change, by 
supporting the mainstreaming of climate variability and change into existing policy and 
institutional frameworks. Specifically, the project will help mainstream climate challenges into 
the upcoming 2013-2020 Poverty Reduction and Accelerated Development Strategy (SDARP) 
and the Rural Development Strategy (SDR) as well into major sectoral plans through assistance 
to planning and budgeting. Furthermore, the institutionalization of Strategic environmental 
assessment tools will be facilitated. The capacities of key national and local institutions, directly 
involved in planning and implementation of measures for climate change adaptation, will be 
strengthened. The underlying assumption is that addressing the vulnerability of rural households 
and communities to climate-related hazards requires a local approach, managed by local 
governments and grassroots communities, in coordination with national bodies and with the 
advisory support of deconcentrated technical services. Information and training initiative would 
focus on the impacts of weather and climate.  
 
2. Improving resilience of land use systems and local populations (US$48 million).  
 
In order to reduce the vulnerability of local populations and improve resilience of land use 
systems to adverse climate change, the proposed project will mainly invest on scaling up 
sustainable land management(SLM) practices and will promote innovative measures such as 
social protection actions in order to address the priority needs of the poorest and most vulnerable 
categories of people while protecting ecosystems services and scaling up investment in land 
productivity.  
 
2.1 The CAPCR will scale up sustainable land and water management (SLWM) actions that 
will aim at halting the downward cycle of land degradation and negative climate impacts. 
Related activities have been shown to be key to increase the resilience of rural communities to 
climate variability and to mitigate the effects of change by increasing agriculture productivity 
and profitability, building soil carbon stocks, conserving biodiversity, etc. The CAPCR project 
adopts a multifocal approach, by supporting best practices integrating land and water 
management and by focusing on sustainable agriculture practices that combine the use of 
drought resistant crops and seeds and improved farming and processing techniques to increase 
yields and expand food production. Local elected authorities (Collectivités 
territoriales/Municipalities) have the legitimate leadership for all initiatives of this component (to 
be included in their respective annual local investment plans). For this, they will receive the 
technical assistance necessary to directly manage the entire process of bidding, selection of 
service providers or contractors, finalization of contracts, technical supervision of public works, 
etc.  
 
2.2 The CAPCR will pilot adaptive social protection, a key policy response to risk and 
vulnerability in the agriculture sector, which can complement agricultural policies and best 
practices by enhancing the adaptive capacity of the most vulnerable categories of people. The 
main expected result is to build adaptive capacity to climate change among poor and vulnerable 
groups and reduce their social vulnerability, within a policy which strengthens the interaction 
between economic growth and social inclusion. Appropriate training will be provided to local 
service providers (national NGOs and community organizations) on major social protection 
Page  3
challenges. Investments will foster implementation of a range of initiatives in support of very 
poor households that are vulnerable to climate stresses and risks. These include: (i) the protection 
and rehabilitation of socio-economic facilities located in areas with high climate risks; and (ii) 
the implementation of a comprehensive programme of social safety nets for households and 
household groups, in order to rehabilitate their livelihoods and revive their economies. Local 
authorities have the legitimate leadership for such initiatives, which will be supported by NGOs 
or other specialized local institutions as well as the private sector. A programme of distribution 
of food vouchers will benefit the poorest and most vulnerable households to enable them to 
purchase essential food items. These initiatives would again have a strong gender dimension. 
Strong collaboration will be established with the other investment project supporting the 
implementation of a weather index based insurance of agricultural and pastoral production 
against climate risks.  
 
3.  Ensuring project coordination and knowledge management, including knowledge sharing 
(US$7 million).  
 
The CAP2 implementing unit, which will be reinforced by adequate expertise, will ensure 
overall coordination and management of the CAPCR activities at central and local level. This 
will include technical assistance and training in planning, fiduciary management, participatory 
approaches, technical, social and environmental assessment. The project will also ensure 
strategic coordination of the entire Special Programme for Climate Resilience (SPCR), by 
supporting the unit located within the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF). Furthermore, 
the project will support development of knowledge and learning products to be shared with 
major ministerial agencies, technical and financial partners and national and international NGOs, 
and knowledge exchange with other PPCR countries, particularly those for whom drought and 
food security are major resilience challenges, and which have adopted community based 
approaches.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will operate all over the country, particularly in areas which are most vulnerable to 
climate risks. The project will be coordinated by the unit of implementation of the PAC2 
programme that will ensure the fiduciary and procurement activities. This unit will work closely 
with the Strategic Coordination Unit (SCU) of the SPCR, and will be located in Niamey. It will 
benefit from ad hoc short-term expertise, as needed.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has been exposed to World Bank requirements in Safeguard policies within the 
context of other projects. In particular, the Program of Community Actions (PAC - Programme 
d'Actions Communautaires) has developed a comprehensive social and environmental mitigation 
framework. However, the GoN capacity to conduct safeguards assessment and issue 
recommendations per Bank's procedures and guidelines is limited. Qualified local consultants or 
international consultants will be recruited to assess safeguard risks and to produce the relevant 
documentation for proper mitigation.  The existing safeguards documents used by the PAC could 
be updated and adapted to the CAPCR. Selected staff of the implementation unit will have direct 
responsibility to monitor compliance with environmental, social and resettlement guidelines as 
described in the ESMF and in the RFP.   
 
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Initiatives undertaken under component 2 (rehabilitation of social and economic facilities) 
may have the potential of some localized environmental impacts. However, this impact is likely 
to be minimal (overall relatively limited investments). A Strategic Environmental Assessment of 
the entire SPCR has already been prepared and its conclusions are relevant for the CAPCR # its 
mains recommendations will be integrated into the project operations manual.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
These planned interventions are not expected to lead to new land acquisition or significant 
restriction of access to sources of livelihood. However, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared for the activities triggered by the OP 4.12  as a due diligence given that the 
specific sites or impacts of envisioned physical investments are not known, The  Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) consistent with OP 4.12 will be prepared by the Borrower, reviewed 
and cleared by the team and disclosed in-country and at Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal. The 
RPF will be used as a guide to conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as needed, as 
they relate to land acquisition and loss of economic activities issues, as well as compensation 
measures to minimize negative impacts on Project Affected People (PAPs).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
04/25/2011 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Government is working with the TTL to finalize TORs for the studies and to identify a 
firm that could prepare the Environmental and Social Assessment as well as the Resettlement 
Policy Framework.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Taoufiq Bennouna 
02/10/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/11/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
02/11/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
