Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6013 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/12/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P120207 
Project Name: Nigeria Power Sector Guarantees Project 
Task Team Leader: Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  
Sector: Power (90%);Oil and gas (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 IDA 
Guarantee 
1,000.00
1,000.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project will contribute to alleviating the power supply deficit by creating a 
conducive environment for private sector to invest in and operate power generation companies 
and sell power to the state-owned Bulk Trader.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The FGN requested Bank assistance with establishing credit support packages.  In a November 5, 
2010, letter, the FGN formally requested World Bank assistance to provide credit support 
packages to underpin PPAs with an initial batch of IPP projects. Specifically, the FGN has 
nominated for the Bank#s consideration 14 IPP projects (13 gas-fired generating plants, and one 
hydroelectric plant rehabilitation) being developed by IOCs, international developers, and local 
Nigerian concerns with which IDA should engage.  The IPPs will be analyzed and reviewed to 
ensure that they incorporate reasonable, internationally-acceptable, technical, operational and 
financial benchmarks to limit the burden of private generation on the sector to a sustainable 
level. Each project will also have to prepare environmental and social safeguards instruments 
that are acceptable to the World Bank.  The proposed structure with the associated PRGs would 
Page  2
underpin the FGN#s drive to increase private sector participation in the power sector and 
increase availability and reliability of power supplies in the country 
 
The proposed IPPs that could be supported under this operation are listed below: 
 
#
AES Africa Power Company B.V. (AES APCO) 
 
#
AGIP 
 
#
Azura Power West Africa Ltd. 
 
#
Chevron Nigeria Ltd. (CNL); 
 
#
Energy Company Nigeria PLC (Encon) ; 
 
#
Geometric Aba Power Ltd. (GAPL); 
 
#
Hudson Power Ltd. 
 
#
Mabon Ltd. 
 
#
MBH Power 
 
#
Mobil Producing Nigeria Ltd. (MPN); 
 
#
Notore Power Ltd. (NPL). 
 
#
Supertek Nigeria Ltd. 
 
#
Total E&P Nigeria Ltd (TEPN); 
 
#
Western Products Company Nigeria Ltd 
 
Through this project, the Bank is expected to guarantee certain payment obligations under 
power purchase agreements.  The Bank is not investing in any infrastructure. 
 
Some of the above projects represent only the first phase of much larger projects.  There are 
also other developers working on additional projects that may be included in this operation. As 
such, these successive IPPs may be considered later for Bank support either on the existing PRG 
envelope should some of the above mentioned project fell behind schedule or on the basis of 
additional financing through the Project .   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is national in scope. The PRGs will cover payments for electricity that will be 
supplied to the national grid by the IPPs (through existing or new associated infrastructure 
described in the PCN).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Because it is not certain that any particular IPP will be accepted for PRG support, the Project will 
use the #framework# approach to provide for safeguards compliance by each IPP being 
considered for support by the Project.  A Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) examining 
broad environmental and social impacts in the relevant energy sectors (gas, hydro) will be 
prepared during project implementation; the ToRs for the SEA will be prepared, consulted upon, 
and disclosed before appraisal. The FGN will update the existing Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that were 
developed by PHCN for NEGIP to meet the safeguards requirements of the Project.  The ESMF 
will include a screening procedure to identify the Bank safeguards policies triggered and  guide 
the Implementing Agency in determining the appropriate level of environmental assessment for 
proposed Project activities, based on Bank EA policy and FGN law and regulations:  full 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) for those projects with major and 
Page  3
irreversible environmental and social impacts, less intensive studies leading directly to 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for projects with minor to moderate 
impacts, or, for activities involving existing or partially existing facilities, Environmental Audits.   
The ESMF will provide detailed guidance to IPP proponents for preparation of ESIAs,  ESMPs, 
and Environmental Audits.  The RPF will guide the FGN and project developers in complying 
with Bank policy on resettlement and acquisition of land and other assets.  It will present the 
principles to be applied and provide criteria for determining when a Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) is needed and the procedures for RAP preparation.  For IPPs with existing EIAs and sites 
already acquired, the Project team would carry out due diligence, by reviewing the EIAs and 
documentation of resettlement and land acquisition for quality and consistency with the 
objectives and principles of Bank safeguards policies, and identifying needs for supplementary 
information and mitigation or monitoring measures that would have to be prepared prior to 
approval for PRG support. 
 
The Bulk Trader will rely on the the Environment, Resettlement and Social Unit (ERSU) of the 
Project Implementation Unit for NEGIP and NEDP for the management of safeguard policies. 
ERSU has demonstrated satisfactory capacity to address impacts of power project and associated 
facilities; in fact, the ERSU prepared both the ESMF and the RPF for NEGIP. NEGIP, TDP and 
NEDP supervision missions have shown that the ERSU#s capacity to implement the ESMF 
properly for those projects is fully adequate. ERSU has overseen audits of substations, prepared 
ESMPs, and supervised preparation of RAPs and implementation of ESMPs for substation and 
distribution line improvements and extensions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASNS) 
Ms Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS) 
Mr Amos Abu (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The IPPs under consideration will involve the construction of power plants (gas and hydro) 
including ancillary activities such as gas pipelines and power transmission lines to evacuate 
power to the national grid. In addition, dry gas and other condensates will be transported from 
nearby oil field and the ELPS to the IPPs. The project thus triggers World Bank Safeguard 
Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), and most of the IPPs it may support are 
likely to fall into EA Category A. To ensure that the implementation of this project is 
environmentally sound and socially acceptable, the following safeguards instruments would be 
prepared and disclosed by the  project proponents: 
 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the NEGIP project will 
be updated to address the environmental and social impacts arising from this project; it will be 
updated, consulted upon, and re-disclosed prior to Appraisal. This document describes how 
safeguards issues will be dealt with in the project. The ESMF will outline the policies, principles, 
institutional arrangements and procedures that the project proponents will follow in each 
subproject in addressing environmental and social issues.  Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessments and Environmental and Social Management Plans acceptable to the Bank will be 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed during implementation. In addition, due to the 
anticipated project and associated future developments, a Sectoral Environmental Assessment 
(SEA) that would examine environmental and social issues as well as impacts associated with the 
power sector will be prepared and disclosed during project implementation. The Terms of 
Reference for the SEA will be prepared prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
None of the power plants under consideration is expected to be located on critical natural 
habitats.  However, the gas pipelines and the transmission lines may pass through some 
wetlands. The ESMF outlines process, procedures and types of actions that would be 
implemented through individual ESIAs to ensure that none of these biodiversity important sites 
is adversely impacted by the project.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The required excavation of the power plants# sites and ancillary activities relating to gas 
pipelines and mounting of the transmission lines may lead to chance finds of physical cultural 
properties. The ESMF will provide guidance for pre-construction PCR surveys and chance finds 
procedures to be implemented through individual ESIAs and ESMPs.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land will be acquired for the location of the power plants and for the rights-of-way of the 
pipelines and the transmission lines that would supply gas and evacuate power to the national 
grid. However, because the exact locations of some of the IPPs and the routing of the ancillary 
facilities are not known in sufficient detail, the Project will prepare a resettlement policy 
framework. The RPF for the NEGIP project will be updated to include the impacts in this 
project; it will be consulted upon, and disclosed prior to appraisal. Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs) will be prepared as and when necessary during implementation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
None of the power projects that may be supported will have any impacts on international 
waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/30/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The following safeguards instruments will be prepared and will be disclosed in-country and 
at the World Bank InfoShop:  
 
Prior to Appraisal:  
 
i.  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) The ESMF for NEGIP will 
be updated to include environmental and social impacts for this project. The update will be 
prepared, reviewed by the Bank, consulted upon, and disclosed publicly, in Nigeria and at the 
World Bank InfoShop, before project appraisal by the Bank.  
 
ii. Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) The RPF for NEGIP will be updated to address 
any land acquisition/involuntary resettlement issues in this project. It will be reviewed by the 
Bank, consulted upon, and disclosed publicly in Nigeria and at the InfoShop prior to 
appraisal.  
 
During Implementation  
 
(i) Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared as and when necessary for the 
individual  IPPs during project implementation, after locations have been confirmed, and 
reviewed and cleared by the Bank.  This report will be disclosed and disseminated according 
to specifications provided in the Resettlement Policy Framework. issues related to 
resettlement of restriction of access by people will be dealt with in the RAP  
 
(ii) 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA and/or Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP): will be prepared for individual IPPs in parallel with the 
feasibility studies by a team independent to the project design team.  These reports will be 
disclosed and disseminated according to specifications provided in the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework.  
 
(iii) 
Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) would examine environmental and 
social issues as well as impacts associated with the power sector. In addition the Sectoral EA 
would evaluate and compare the impacts against those of alternative options, assess legal and 
institutional aspects relevant to the issues and impacts; and recommends broad measures to 
strengthen environmental management in the sector.  The Sectoral EA will pay particular 
attention to potential cumulative impacts of multiple activities in the sector. The ToRs for the 
SEA will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal.  
 
(iv) 
Contractors Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(HSESMPs): In addition, contractors and operators will be required to prepare their own 
Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Management Plan (HSESMP), which are based on 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
the ESMP for the individual IPP and the relevant World Bank Group Environmental Health 
and Safety Guidelines.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
04/12/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/12/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
04/12/2011 
Comments:   
