Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/31/2011 
Report No.:  60635
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  OECS Countries 
Project ID:  P101414 
Project Name:  Eastern Caribbean Energy Regulatory Authority (ECERA) 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre Audinet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 5, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSEG 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (70%);Renewable energy (30%) 
Theme:  Managing for development results (67%);Regional integration (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.60 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to establish and operationalize a regional approach to the 
development of the electricity sector in the OECS Participating Countries by supporting 
the establishment of the ECERA.   
 
3. Project Description 
Part A # Setting up the ECERA [US$ 2.61 million]  
 
Part A will support the creation of the ECERA by the project Participating Countries. 
This part of the project will provide technical assistance to launch ECERA, establish the 
Regional Energy Committee (REC # discussed later in the document), staff the PMU, and 
carry out the legal and consultative process leading to the formulation and ratification of 
the ECERA#s Treaty in each of the Participating Countries. It will also define options for 
ECERA#s self-financing mechanism and prepare for consultant services to review tariffs 
and examine incentives mechanisms to promote renewable energy, as a way to prepare 
the ground for ECERA#s activities.  
 
Part B  # Operationalizing ECERA for the first three years [US$2.99 million]  
 
Page  2
This part of the project will finance the operations of the ECERA for the first three years 
after it comes into force. It will cover the cost of the entity#s day-to-day operations and 
cover specific core regulatory tasks, such as tariff and investment plan reviews and the 
definition of a regional licensing framework for electricity market participants with a 
particular focus on facilitating the integration of electricity production from renewable 
sources into the supply mix.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The physical location of the ECERA would  be in Saint Lucia.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Enos E. Esikuri (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project does not trigger any environmental or social safeguards. Support to the 
establishment of an institution will not trigger issues subject to a social or environmental 
assessment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None needed.   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
While support for analytical work under Part B of the project may not necessitate 
triggering of any safeguard policies, the project documents will indicate that any work-
related studies prepared with Bank financing will be consistent with the safeguard 
policies. Unless future projects and implementation of these studies receive Bank 
financing, compliance with Bank policies would not be mandatory for such work.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not needed   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not required   
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Audinet 
03/30/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Enos E. Esikuri 
03/30/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis 
03/30/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
03/31/2011 
Comments:   
