Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/15/2011 
Report No.:  AC5650
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  OECS Countries 
Project ID:  P103470 
Project Name:  Sustainable Financing & Management of Eastern Caribbean Marine 
Ecosystem 
Task Team Leader:  Dinesh Aryal 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (40%);General finance sector 
(40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%);Vocational training (10%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (40%);Environmental policies and institutions (20%);Climate 
change (20%);Other environment and natural resources management (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.75 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.13 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
4.80 
 Foundation/s 
(identified) 
4.47
12.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to contribute to enhancing the long-term sustainability of 
protected areas networks in the OECS region, by (i) establishing sustainable financing 
mechanisms; (ii) strengthening marine protected area networks; and (iii) deploying a 
regional monitoring and information system for protected area networks. The project will 
contribute to the Caribbean Challenge and to the participating governments# adaptation 
agenda by making coastal and marine ecosystems more resilient to climate change 
through creating effectively managed protected areas that improve coral health and 
ecosystem integrity.   
 
3. Project Description 
2. 
The project will have four components.  
Page  2
Component 1 # Establishment of sustainable financing mechanisms (US$16.071 million 
including US$7.6 million from GEF)  
 
3.
The aim of this component would be to establish a sustainable financing 
mechanism for national PA systems through (a) the formation of a regional endowment 
fund and upport in setting up of country-specific national PA trust funds (NPATFs); and 
(b) the establishment and strengthening of a policy, legal, and institutional framework for 
sustainable financing. Conservation Trust Funds (CTFs) have proven to be an effective 
component of PA financing. CTFs are not intended to completely fill the financing gaps 
of PAs in participating countries. Rather, the CTFs would complement other funding 
sources. Although CTFs cannot provide very large flows of funding, they can provide a 
small assured funding stream.  
 
Sub-component 1A # Establishment and capitalization of a Regional Fund  
 
4.
This sub-component would establish a regional CTF, the Caribbean Biodiversity 
Fund (CBF) and capitalize it with resources from the GEF, KfW, and TNC.  
 
i. 
Establishment of the Caribbean Biodiversity Fund (CBF). This activity would 
finance legal and administrative fees to establish the CBF as a UK based charitable 
organization. The CBF would be established with a Board of Directors (#Board#) and a 
Secretary to the Board. The Board would be responsible for ensuring that the CBF#s 
policy as envisaged in the Article of Association is adhered to.  It would be responsible 
for finalizing and implementing the investment strategy and providing guidelines 
consistent with the Article of Association and the CBF Operational Manual.  It is also 
responsible for hiring an Asset Manager to invest the pooled endowment allocations of 
the participating Caribbean countries through an open and transparent competitive 
process, based on clearly stated criteria.  
 
ii. 
Initial Capitalization of CBF: The CBF would be composed of five individual 
sub-accounts (one for each participating OECS country) of no less than US$3 million 
each with $1.44 million from the GEF and the remainder from KfW and TNC, as well as 
three other sub-accounts, created separately, for the Bahamas, the Dominican Republic, 
and Jamaica. The eight sub-accounts would be jointly invested. Initial sources of funds 
will include donations from the GEF, KfW, and TNC, as well as other financiers. 
Endowment returns would be monitored closely to ensure that each sub-account is 
credited for their share, and is disbursed directly into their respective NPATF on an 
annual basis based on agreed performance targets and co-financing from the government 
and other sources.  
 
Sub-component 1B # Establishment and strengthening of a policy, legal, and 
institutional framework for generating additional financing for PAs  
 
5.
This sub-component would support each participating country in order to 
establish national Protected Areas Trust Funds (NPATFs) through a legislative process 
along with sustainable financing mechanisms to fund these NPATFs.  Furthermore, this 
sub-component would support the development of robust capitalization and 
communication strategies for attracting additional funds to increase the CBF capital from 
other sources including bi-lateral donors, multi-lateral donors, participating governments, 
private sector, NGOs, foundations, and individuals.  
 
i. 
Establishment of NPATFs: The NPATFs would be designed to finance 
sustainable management activities in PAs including critical marine ecosystems. In 
addition to the interest accruing from the CBF, diverse sources of funds could be 
Page  3
channeled through the NPATFs, including fees from tourism development projects, 
international tourist fees, water service fees, private donations, PA entrance fees, and 
other payments for environmental services, as determined by each country. Each NPATF 
would be managed by an independent Board. The project would provide technical 
support under this activity to help participating countries set up the NPATFs. The 
resources that would flow from the CBF to NPATFs during the life of the project would 
help reduce the expected PA financing gap in participating countries. The aim of this 
activity would be to assist participating countries in generating additional financing for 
their PAs, which would be channeled through their NPATFs. The activities envisaged 
under this activity would include:  
 
#
Technical assistance and studies to support targeted efforts to develop new 
financing mechanisms for PAs, such as payments for environmental services (PES), 
dedicated user fees, and taxes;  
 
#
Technical assistance and studies to demonstrate tourists# willingness to pay to 
support national PA systems;  
 
#
Technical assistance to carry out economic evaluations of natural resource 
services to accurately demonstrate the value that PAs and healthy ecosystems provide to 
local and national economies; and  
 
#
Establish, strengthen, and consolidate a policy, regulatory, and institutional 
framework across the participating OECS countries so as to harmonize activities for 
sustainable PA financing.  
 
ii. 
Capitalization Strategy. The initial capital financed by the project in the CBF will 
not generate sufficient resources to fill the PA financing gap in the countries. To reduce 
the financing gap, additional capital has to be raised by the CBF. Therefore, a 
capitalization strategy would be prepared under this activity to increase the initial capital 
of the CBF. The strategy would also have a strong communication and outreach program. 
The project would provide consultant and non-consulting services under this activity to 
prepare the Strategy, and a communication and outreach program.  
 
Component 2 # Strengthening and phased expansion of Marine Protected Area 
Networks (US$0.808 million including US$0.25 million from GEF)  
 
6.
The aim of this component would be to strengthen and expand PA networks, 
representing coastal and marine ecosystems, by supporting the gazetting of at least five 
new MPAs and establishing demonstration sites to showcase good management practices 
in at least two MPAs within the group of OECS countries. The component would support 
a
phased expansion of existing regional MPA networks by obtaining endorsement in 
participating countries for inclusion of new high priority sites which contribute to the 
overall representativeness and resilience of MPA networks in the Eastern Caribbean. The 
expansion of the MPA networks to ensure that they include all priority ecosystems would 
be an important objective, but the implementation of this expansion would depend on, 
among other things, the availability of resources from the financing mechanisms. The 
project would kick start the expansion process by supporting the gazetting of at least five 
new high priority MPAs which would lead to the legal establishment of the MPAs as 
funds come online from the NPATF in each participating country.  
 
Sub-component 2A # Expansion of the system of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs)  
 
7.
The objective of this component would be to designate and obtain government 
endorsement and gazetting new MPAs in participating countries. An act of parliament 
Page  4
would be preferred in getting the designation of the MPA. Designation of these new 
MPAs would be based upon a set of agreed criteria which include bio-geographic 
representativeness, system resilience, political will, stakeholder buy-in, and feasibility 
and contribution to the overall regional network of MPAs.  
 
Sub-component 2B # Establishment of demonstration sites to showcase best practice in 
MPA management  
 
8.
Based on a set of selection criteria that was agreed upon by the participating 
countries for the selection of demonstration sites, prioritization of all potential sites was 
carried out. Further site level assessments would be carried out during project year one on 
the top two prioritized sites # West Coast Marine Management Area (MMA) in St. Lucia 
and Clarke#s Court/Woburn in Grenada # in which a suite of activities to enhance 
management effectiveness and address key gaps in the regional network of MPAs would 
be supported by Project funds. These sites were prioritized from a list of potential sites 
that each country submitted. This project aims to use these sites as #models# to spark 
more interest and financial support for other MPAs in the region. Specific activities to be 
financed under the project would be selected based on stakeholder consultations and 
further analysis of site specific requirements during project implementation. Some of 
these potential demonstration activities to be financed by consulting services, goods 
and/or works for the two model sites would include: (i) Development of managed dive 
sites with moorings, markers and signage; (ii) Development of managed snorkel trails 
with moorings, markers and signage; (iii) Multiple use zoning and demarcation activities; 
(iv) Education and outreach programs; (v) Capacity building at the community level for 
ecotourism; (vi) Provide incentives for fostering partnerships with research institutions; 
and (vii) Sustainable Development Action Plans (SDAPs), as needed.  
 
Component 3 # Deployment of a regional monitoring and information system 
(US$0.572 million, including US$0.34 million from the GEF)   
 
9.
The aim of this component would be to establish a robust and user-friendly 
database on status and trends in the protected area systems of the OECS countries, which 
could serve as a decision support tool to natural resource managers and policymakers. 
Although the emphasis of this component would be on Coastal and Marine Protected 
Area networks, the methods and indicators developed would be highly relevant to 
terrestrial protected areas. The systems would include a monitoring and an information 
management component for the storage and analysis of data, and associated training as 
needed. The project would finance consulting services, equipments, and training under 
this component.  
 
Sub-component 3A#Eco-regional and management effectiveness monitoring  
 
10.
Regional Monitoring would be comprised of two parts.  The first section consists 
of regular observations and data collection on biophysical and socioeconomic indicators 
within the protected area network. Such information is essential to understand status and 
trends in key elements of the larger social-ecological system that comprise the protected 
area network. A core set of biophysical and socio-economic indicators is expected to be 
adopted as part of the project. As noted above (2A), these should include monitoring of 
the resilience of the system to disturbance events#that is, the ability of the system to 
recover following an acute shock (for instance a bleaching episode associated with an El 
Page  5
Nino episode, or a hurricane), which are occurring more frequently in the Caribbean in 
the context of climate change.  
 
11.
The second section #assessing management effectiveness#would go well beyond 
the tracking of ecological and social indicators. There are many dimensions to 
management effectiveness, including governance and cultural context which can 
influence ecological and social outcomes and other protected area management goals. 
Although it is usually beyond the capacity of most PAs to monitor the full range of 
variables that may be involved, the M&E system would adopt a core set of indicators 
based upon the ongoing Bank-GEF supported OECS Protected Areas and Associated 
Livelihoods Project (OPAAL) tool for Monitoring and Evaluation for low-cost, simple 
monitoring of management effectiveness.  
 
Sub-component 3B # Electronic database for an eco-regional environmental information 
system  
 
12.
This would involve setting up a web-based system to house the data, analyze it, 
and make it accessible to key stakeholders in the region and beyond. The project would 
partner with existing systems such as Building the Inter-American Biodiversity 
Information Network (IABIN) or the DataBasin decision support tool to develop the 
transparent, user-friendly informatics infrastructure necessary for long-term ecological 
monitoring and assessment. These systems could be configured to incorporate 
socioeconomic indicators and budgetary data. It would provide the foundation for cost-
effective periodic ecoregional status assessments for the operational area of the project to 
assess conservation outputs and outcomes, as well as a repository for data collected in 
M&E from project sites.  
 
Sub-component 3C # Dissemination and learning networks  
 
13.
The results of the Monitoring and Evaluation System (including management 
effectiveness, the state of the eco-region or protected areas network, assessment of future 
threats and scenarios based on likely trajectories) need to be accessible to decision 
makers. The data would be translated into reports and other media useful reports for 
natural resource managers at the site level as well as nationally, and regionally for the 
OECS countries and civil society. These data and reports are critical building blocks 
needed to identify appropriate actions to be implemented for strengthening management 
effectiveness. Based on the assessment of status and trends in key aspects of the 
Protected Area Systems and Regional Network, the effectiveness of management 
interventions to achieve objectives at various levels could be determined and adaptive 
management could be applied by policymakers at the site level as well as at the PA 
network level.  
 
Component 4 # Project management and coordination (US$1.97 million, including 
US$0.56 million from the GEF)  
 
14.
The aim of this component would be to ensure efficient execution of the project 
funded activities through administration, fiduciary monitoring and reporting, and 
coordination. This component would focus on project and program management 
mechanisms including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and implementation plans. The 
component would support new and existing institutional entities and mechanisms at the 
regional and national level for overall project coordination and supervision and would 
help strengthen the effectiveness and quality of project operations. In addition, a strong 
Page  6
monitoring and evaluation mechanism would be in place to measure performance at 
various project milestones.  
 
15.
The component would finance costs for personnel, staff training, and equipment 
to carry out managerial, financial, and technical coordination through TNC staff and 
national level staff assigned to project implementation, including a program coordinator. 
A
more detailed description of functions, responsibilities, and associated procedures is 
found in the PAD Annex 6, the project implementation plan, and the Operations Manual.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Five of the nine OECS countries, including Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, St. Kitts and 
Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines. Each country submitted a list of 
potential demonstration sites to be considered for project financing. Based on a set of 
selection criteria that was agreed upon by the participating countries, prioritization of all 
potential sites were carried out. Further site level assessments will be carried out during 
project year one on the top two prioritized sites # West Coast Marine Management Area 
(MMA) in St. Lucia and Clarke#s Court/Woburn in Grenada # in which a suite of 
activities to enhance management effectiveness and address key gaps in the regional 
network of MPAs will be supported by Project funds.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSSO) 
Ms Anjali Acharya (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This project is expected to generate significant positive environmental benefits through 
the establishment of effective management systems to conserve the natural integrity and 
biodiversity of the participating member states, while providing opportunities for income 
generation for communities in and around the protected areas. These will be achieved 
through a range of activities, which include direct investments in the sustainable use and 
Page  7
conservation of coastal and marine resources; the restoration of sensitive ecosystems such 
as sand dunes, mangroves, beach zones which have been degraded; and environmental 
guidelines for tourism operations related to diving, snorkeling, non-motorized sports, as 
well as for small infrastructure works (such as visitor center, boardwalk etc).  
 
18.
Possible adverse impacts may be related to the implementation of the 
demonstration activities such as damage to coral and reef systems from mismanaged 
activities; disturbances to bird, mammal and fish species from poor tourism practices; 
noise, dust and air pollution from small infrastructure works (such as visitor center and 
boardwalk); and other education and research-related activities. In any case, 
environmental impacts are expected to be localized and addressed through responsive 
mitigation measures. Given that PAs to be supported under the project and associated 
activities have yet to be specified, an environmental management framework (see PAD 
Annex 10, Appendix 1) has been developed to screen for environmental impacts and 
specify existing and additional mitigation measures to address these potential impacts. 
The project EMF addresses the potential negative impacts identified in the environmental 
analysis of potential demonstration activities and proposes associated mitigation 
procedures to avoid, minimize and mitigate these impacts. This framework will be 
incorporated in the Operational Manual.  
 
19.
While the project is expected to have positive social outcomes relating, for 
example, to improved natural resource and environmental conditions and potential 
economic benefits to local populations from improved tourism and other economic 
opportunities, it is recognized that there may be some potential nonphysical (economic) 
displacement issues associated with possible restrictions on resource use in and access to 
core areas of protected areas to be supported by the project. As such, the project triggers 
the Bank's Operational Safeguard Policy 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement, and a Process 
Framework was prepared (see PAD Annex 10, Appendix 2).  While the proposed 
protected areas to be supported either directly by the project or under the conservation 
trust fund have yet to be determined, no physical involuntary resettlement or relocation is 
expected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential indirect impacts due to anticipated future activities may be related to the 
implementation of activities to strengthen PA management effectiveness through the 
proceeds for endowment fund. These will be assessed at appraisal and the Operational 
Manual of the endowment fund will incorporate mitigation measures, if any.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
21. 
TNC would be the implementing entity for the project supported, and therefore, 
would be responsible for ensuring that social and environmental safeguards are applied 
during project implementation.  This would be done by building environmental and social 
Page  8
safeguards into annual work plans, reviewing safeguard instruments when they are 
produced, and monitoring compliance with these safeguards.  
 
22.
TNC has adequate safeguards capacity and familiarity with the Bank#s safeguard 
policies. It has demonstrated its ability to perform this function more recently during the 
implementation of the project preparation grant. It practices building environmental and 
social safeguards into the design and implementation of projects that they carry out.  
Therefore, it has the ability to implement and report on social and environmental 
safeguards into the implementation of projects. In participating countries, the relevant 
Directorates use best practices which include environmental and social safeguards, in 
carrying out the design, implementation and management of the PAs.  
 
Environmental and social safeguards would further be incorporated in the operational 
manual of the project, and the operational manual for the endowment fund.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
24. 
Key stakeholders for local, national and regional protected area interests were 
identified, and included, among others: (i) regional and international agencies such as the 
OECS-ESDU, the Caribbean Development Bank, United Nations Environment Program- 
Regional Coordination Unit (UNEP-RCU) and the German Development Bank; (ii) 
national Permanent Secretaries, Ministers and relevant agencies in each of the countries; 
(iv) NGOs; and (iv) potentially affected populations of fishermen, dive operators, tour 
operators, local associations and others.  The safeguard issues were consulted on in two 
regional workshops held in February and September 2010, and in-country consultations 
with a wide cross-section of stakeholders including potentially affected people in the five 
participating countries between April and May 2010.  Public disclosure of safeguard 
instruments was done on November 25, 2010.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/12/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/15/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/15/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  9
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  10
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dinesh Aryal 
02/10/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Anjali Acharya 
02/10/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky 
02/10/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/14/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
02/14/2011 
Comments:   
