Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2011 
Report No.:  AC6127
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  OECS Countries 
Project ID:  P123128 
Project Name:  Grenada Safety Net Advancement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ludovic Subran 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
The proposed Project contributes to Grenada's higher level objective to reduce 
poverty and improve equity and human capital development.  The Development 
Objectives of the Project are to: (i) strengthen the basic architecture of the consolidated 
cash transfers program and the capacity of MOSD to implement it; (ii) improve coverage 
of poor households receiving cash transfers; and (iii) improve education outcomes of 
poor children and health monitoring of vulnerable households.  
 
1
Project Beneficiaries  
 
2. 
The Project is expected to benefit roughly 8,000 poor families throughout 
Grenada, benefitting equally men and women. At least half of the beneficiary families 
have children aged 0-17.  
 
2
PDO Level Results Indicators  
 
3. 
The key performance indicators that will be used to track progress towards the 
proposed Project's objectives are:  
 
Page  2
1. 
Increased percentage of beneficiaries who received information about rules and 
procedures of the consolidated cash transfer program;  
 
2.
Increased percentage of payments made for beneficiaries enrolled in the MIS after 
verification of compliance with co-responsibilities;  
 
3.
Increased percentage of households in the poorest quintile that receive the benefit;  
 
4.
Increased percentage of the program transfers reaching the poorest quintile;  
 
5.
Increased primary school attendance rates of beneficiary children; and  
 
6.
Increased percentage of beneficiaries receiving adequate preventive primary 
health services.  
 
4. 
Indicators 1 and 2 are linked to the adoption of critical processes and tools to 
strengthen MOSD's capacity to deliver the enhanced conditional cash transfer program. 
Progress for indicator 1 should happen as of year 2 of implementation and for indicator 2 
as of year 3. Indicators 3 and 4 are linked to the improved coverage of the program. 
Initial progress for these indicators is expected as of year 2 of implementation. Indicators 
5
and 6 are linked to human development outcomes, specifically attendance of poor 
children and monitoring of compliance with preventive health care protocols for poor 
families. They are expected to show progress as of year 3 of implementation.   
 
3. Project Description 
5. 
The total amount for the Specific Investment Loan (SIL) is US$5 million, 
implemented over a four year period.  The proposed Project will consist of two 
Components, described below.  
 
A. Project Components  
 
6. 
Component 1: Improving Conditional Cash Transfers (US$4.5 million). The 
objective of this Component is to improve the delivery of cash transfers. Under this 
Component, cash grants will be financed and disbursements will be made against actual 
payment of benefits and the achievement of selected performance milestones in five 
results areas aimed at the gradual adoption of an overhauled business model.  
 
7. 
The project will help finance a baseline amount of conditional cash transfers for 
an equivalent of US$250,000 by semester for the entire duration of the project. This 
contribution to the total financing by the Government of Grenada (less than 10 percent) 
will start before the introduction of system improvements as the vast majority of the 
caseload are poor households and some of the benefits to be consolidated are already 
conditioned on school attendance (NF and STA). A first tranche of US$250,000 at 
effectiveness is designed to help pre-finance the initial round of quality improvements 
and reward critical achievements made during preparation such as: (i) the budget 
consolidation through the special reallocation warrant; and (ii) the adoption of an 
operation manual for the consolidated program.  
 
8. 
Component 1 will finance an additional amount of the conditional cash transfers 
to reward the gradual introduction of system improvements over year 1-4 in five key 
areas: A) Institutions, Budget and Coverage; B) Beneficiary Outreach and Targeting; C) 
Page  3
Management Information system and Making Payment against Co-responsibilities; D) 
Communication; and E) Monitoring and Evaluation. Disbursement Linked Indicators 
(DLIs) for each results area are outlined in table 2 with the corresponding amounts to be 
disbursed upon verification by the Bank. The target timing of the realization of the DLIs 
is indicative, but linked to the agreed phasing of the critical roadmap. Each DLI is worth 
a
specific amount between US$250,000 and US$500,000. During appraisal, the 
possibility of partial disbursement against certain DLIs on a pari-passu basis will be 
explored.  
 
9. 
There are seven milestones to be achieved under the project, which corresponds to 
the adoption of critical processes, in target years for appropriate phasing, to advance the 
delivery of Grenada's flagship social safety net. The detailed justification, roadmap to 
realization of the DLI, including preparatory processes and activities, and the 
measurement of the DLI being met are detailed in Annex 2 of the Project Appraisal 
Document (PAD): A.1) the actual merger of the three programs crystallized by the 
unified budget line and institutional responsibility transfer to MOSD; A.2) the improved 
coverage by 10 percent among eligible (as per PMT) poor households of the total 
caseload to address partially the under covered families as approved in the 2012 budget; 
B.2) at least 80 percent of the caseload has been deemed eligible as per the new targeting 
mechanism (PMT), which would have been prepared in year 1 of project implementation; 
C.1) the adoption in year 1 of a single MIS and payment cycle for all benefits (additional 
step in consolidation the operational cycle); C.3) in year 3 of the project, the transition to 
a
full-fledged CCT whereby 80 percent of payments made are based on compliance with 
health and education co-responsibilities as decided in year 1; D.2) 80 percent of the 
beneficiaries are informed about the rules and procedures of the new program to foster 
demand for good governance; this will be done mainly at enrollment; and E.4) though 
prepared as of year 1 the monitoring and evaluation plan will culminate with the 
dissemination of the results of the evaluation of the program in the last year of project 
implementation. The verification of these milestones will be made by an external auditor 
in conjunction with the Accountant General Office. The protocols will be finalized during 
appraisal.  
 
10. 
Component 2: Technical Assistance to Improve Implementation Capacity of 
MOSD (US$0.5 million). The objective of this Component will be to bring the external 
knowledge necessary to improve the processes involved in the overhauled cash transfer 
program. Under this Component, technical assistance will be provided to the Ministry of 
Social Development (MOSD) for strengthening MOSD's management, coordination, 
supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the CCT program at the central, regional and 
local levels. The amount under this Component is relatively small and focused on 
supporting the quality design of key intermediate processes to meet the DLIs, as well as 
the knowledge creation in other areas which are not directly supported under Component 
1. Government will provide additional own resources for critical goods as well as the full 
implementation of the processes necessary for the advancement of the CCT.  
 
11. 
The activities to be financed under this Component will focus on providing the 
human resources and technical support needed, mainly through consultant services to 
Page  4
ensure effective implementation of the consolidated cash transfer program. They are 
organized around the five results area outlined under Component 1 and include consultant 
services for: A.1) the review of  process updates in the program rules and procedures; 
A.2) the preparation of a contingency plan for crisis response through the CCT 
(hurricanes, food and fuel shocks); A.3) the funding for external audits; B.1) the support 
to design and phase in the PMT; C.1) the support to develop the MIS (for each phase); 
C2) the design of a Central Beneficiary Registry or registry of the poor; D.1) the design 
of materials and protocols for the envisaged educational workshop and training for 
beneficiaries; D.2) the design of the training plan for MOSD staff and partner Ministries' 
staff; E.1) the design of an impact evaluation and an enhanced process evaluation.  
 
12. 
This technical assistance component is intended to be flexible enough to respond 
to needs and demands formulated by MOSD and could include further work on the 
scenarios for cost-impact for ramp up and additional benefits (differentiated scheme) for 
instance. The team is also trying to secure additional Bank-executed resources to further 
support this technical assistance to learn more from the Jamaican and Latin American 
experience, and the Boys at Risk initiative (see Annex 8).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
country-wide   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ludovic Subran 
04/20/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
04/20/2011 
Comments:   
