Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5887 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/24/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: OECS Countries 
Project ID: P123128 
Project Name: Grenada Safety Net Advancement Project 
Task Team Leader: Ludovic Subran 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 11, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2011 
Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to: (i) enhance the capacity of the Ministry of Social 
Development (MOSD) to implement the consolidated cash transfer program; (ii) increase 
coverage of cash transfers; and (iii) improve school attendance (at the primary level), completion 
(at the secondary level), and health monitoring of poor children.  This would be achieved 
through improving the basic architecture of the social assistance system; introducing a more 
transparent targeting instrument; and the introduction of co-responsibilities in education and 
health.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To achieve these objectives, the proposed Safety Net Advancement Project (SNAP) would 
consist of a US$5 million Specific Investment Loan (SIL) to Grenada. The country has already 
obtained Cabinet endorsement of the major changes foreseen in the improved cash transfer 
program, and has sent a formal request for assistance to the Bank.  
 
The SIL would be composed of two components.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Increasing the Impact of Cash Transfers (US$4.5 million). The objective of this 
component is to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the social safety net through 
supporting the delivery of the advanced cash transfer program to the poorest and most 
vulnerable. It would finance cash transfers to beneficiaries, and disbursements would be made 
against meeting performance milestones aimed at the gradual adoption of an overhauled business 
model.  
 
The path to delivering a unified, full-fledged conditional cash transfer program would involve 
the consolidation of the country's three largest cash transfer programs into a single cash transfer 
unit; and the introduction of co-responsibilities  in education and health. In addition, improving 
the basic architecture of the safety net would be a critical part of the project.  This would involve 
setting up an effective management information system (MIS) to handle enrolment to eligibility 
to verification of co-responsibilities, the creation of an appeal mechanism; stronger audit and 
control mechanisms(to reduce fraud and corruption), and emphasis on exit and graduation . The 
additional resources needed for the effective delivery of such programs, also include appropriate 
staffing and staff re-tooling, development of a new operational manual, launch of a public 
information and communication campaign, the establishment of a protocol for cross-sectoral 
coordination and promotion activities, and the development of processes for crisis response. A 
higher level of disbursements (or performance milestones) would be triggered by the adoption of 
improvements in the delivery of the cash transfer program such as: a better targeting mechanism, 
the adoption of an effective MIS, and the actual verification of co-responsibilities. The final 
agreed milestones would be decided at appraisal. This mechanism is expected to increase 
Government ownership of the project and foster a tighter collaboration between the Ministry of 
Finance and the Ministry of Social Development.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance to Improve Implementation Capacity (US$0.5 million). 
The objective of this component would be to: (i) bring the external knowledge necessary to 
improve the design of the processes involved in the improved cash transfer program; and (ii) 
explore other options to strengthen social protection programs. This component would mainly 
finance activities related to improving the design of the improved cash transfer program, 
including consulting services to develop an effective MIS for enrollment, payment, and 
monitoring; establishment of a Central Beneficiary Registry; introduction of a more transparent 
targeting instrument; and the documentation of the program's policies and procedures, among 
other things.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Country-wide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A - no social or environmental safeguards are triggered.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/07/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ludovic Subran 
03/24/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/24/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helena G. Ribe 
03/24/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
