Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/22/2011 
Report No.:  AC5991
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P118177 
Project Name:  Sindh Skills Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Andreas Blom 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 16, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (65%);Improving labor markets 
(15%);Education for all (10%);Export development and competitiveness (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project will support the Government of Sindh in strengthening its training programs 
to improve the skills set and employability of trainees.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project is structured around three components:  
 
Component 1: Improving and Expanding Short-term Training # US$18.75 million 
(75%) This Component will expand and increase the impact of the existing BBSYDP 
which has been operating for two years, and has already trained over 40,000 unemployed 
youth. It will finance the training contracts for delivering training to approximately 
45,000 trainees over a 2-3 year period.  
 
Training is short-term (3-12 months) with varying degrees of classroom education and 
practical training. The training providers are private sector and non-government training 
centers and enterprises as well as public training institutions. As a condition of receiving 
funding, training providers commit to a minimum level of job placement and/or entry to 
Page  2
further training, of trainees. This minimum level placement rate is initially 30% and will 
be reviewed annually based upon results in order to gradually and realistically raise the 
threshold. Programs not meeting the minimum benchmark will be blacklisted for a 1 year 
before becoming eligible for a new contract. The contracts also contain an incentive to 
place more than the benchmark percent of trainees into a job. These performance criteria 
seek to provide a strong incentive for providers to train youth in skills that are in demand, 
and weed out poor performing providers. Key sectors of employment have for the last 
two years been: textile, heavy manufacturing, and retail and hospitality services. 
However, training providers are free to submit training proposals for any 
trade/occupation. The reported job-placement rate is monitored on a sample-basis by 
third-party validation. Further, training needs assessments and feedback from employers, 
training providers and trainees will inform BBSYPD and the training providers in 
continuously improving job-relevance and quality of training. In addition a net impact 
study will be conducted. The program administration is well documented with all 
guidelines, results, and documentation on the web.  
 
Trainees receive a monthly living stipend of Rs. 2,500 (US$29). Further, trainees 
attending training more than 75 km away from their home are entitled to a mobility 
allowance of Rs. 4,000 (US$ 47). The stipend is conditioned upon 85% attendance, 
which is monitored and enforced. The mobility allowance facilitates access for rural 
youth.  
 
Component 2: Establish Market-driven Institutional Training Programs - US$5.0 
Million (20%) This component will pilot a sector program to establish at least 70 market 
driven institutional training programs in STEVTA administered institutions to better meet 
the skill demands from employers. This will increase the share of trainees finding 
employment.  
 
The training programs to be upgraded will be selected using a transparent competitive 
fund mechanism. The main selection criteria will be the potential to cater to local market 
demand, including explicit buy-in from local employers, quality of upgrade proposal and 
poverty level of district. The application template will be kept simple and institutions will 
receive support in developing the proposals and reaching out to local employer. The 
evaluators will include private sector professionals. The selected institutions will be 
required to implement a set of institutional reforms, namely increased private sector 
participation in institutional management and private sector advice of professionals.  
 
To ensure a focus on results, this program will disburse based upon progress as 
measured by four Disbursement Linked Indicators (Implementation of reforms, approved 
curricula and standards, renovated and equipped facilities, and enrolled students); all 
verified on a sample-basis by an independent third party. The Bank will disburse against 
eligible program expenditures include teacher salaries, equipment and recurrent costs, 
such as training consumables. Goods and services will be procured and accounted for 
using procedures acceptable to the Bank.  
 
Page  3
Component 3 # Capacity Building of Sindh TEVTA US$1.25 million (5%) This 
component seeks to strengthen Sindh TEVTA through technical assistance to implement 
Component 2, establish better information systems and policies, improve the capacity to 
managed its institutions, and enhance monitoring and evaluation services including, but 
not limited, to tracer studies for institutions, net impact studies of training programs, and 
employer surveys. The component can also support capacity development of staff as well 
as strategic policy improvements in the TVET system in the province, for example to 
develop standards, curricula and assessments. The component will finance technical 
assistance, and small amounts of equipment and supplies.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The province of Sindh.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment:  The project activities are environmentally benign, causing no negative 
environmental impacts whatsoever.  No construction will take place under the project, 
and only refurbishment of existing class rooms and workshops will be financed. Hence, 
no negative impacts will occur on any persons due to this project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There exist several strong economic and cultural obstacles for women#s participation in 
training and the subsequent use of the skills in the economy. For example, girls/women 
are at a disadvantage, in particular in rural Sindh/Pakistan due to both poverty and a 
mindset that places women at a lower position. This is compounded by constraints on 
Page  4
mobility and limited interaction. Women and girls are also sensitive to the location of 
social institutions such as schools and medical centers. Training will therefore target 
women and girls for development of skills along with placement ad self-employment 
options. As part of preparations, a study is underway that will: (i) analyze the constraints 
and challenges faced by female trainees and potential trainees; (ii) evaluate obstacles for 
using the acquired skills and identify the training programs and employment 
opportunities where girls (self-)employment is socially acceptable; and (iii) recommend 
strategies for project implementation to enhance female access and benefits from the 
training financed by the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environment:  No adverse social and environment effects are anticipated due to Project 
activities, hence no alternatives have been considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andreas Blom 
02/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
02/22/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
02/22/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/22/2011 
Comments:  cleared endorsing category C on understanding that the project involves no civil work. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
02/22/2011 
Comments:  cleared. 
Page  6
