Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6053 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/09/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P125105 
Project Name: Flood Emergency Cash Transfer Project 
Task Team Leader: Andrea Vermehren 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 14, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2011 
Managing Unit: SASSP 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (70%);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
125.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
190.00 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 100.00 
 
ITALY, Govt. of (Except for Dev. Coop. Dept. - MOFA) 
70.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
350.00
710.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to support the recovery of flood affected households 
by assisting the Government of Pakistan in strengthening the implementation of its Citizen's 
Damage Compensation Program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Effective delivery of cash grants to flood affected families (total estimated cost - 
US$ 110 million)  
 
The component would provide cash grants to eligible households in two installments through 
the commercial banking system. This component will be implemented by Cabinet Division.  
 
Page  2
Coverage and Targeting. The program will provide payments to at least 1 million households 
identified through the provincial housing damage data, and verified by NADRA through 
triangulation with the beneficiary database of phase I of the program, as well as independent spot 
checks according to mutually agreed parameters.  
 
Payments. All eligible beneficiaries will receive, irrespective of the degree of damage to their 
houses, a total of PRs. 40,000. Payments will be made in installments of PRs 20,000 each, and 
they will be staggered within a region in accordance with the logistic plan agreed with partner 
Banks. Payments will be delivered using the same system as Phase I, wherein beneficiaries are 
paid using a ATM/debit card issued to them during the first phase. Informed by NADRA of the 
list of beneficiaries, Partner Banks will set up Point of Sale and ATM machines at payment 
centers, create virtual accounts for payment and activate debit cards enabling beneficiaries to 
withdraw their funds. Help lines will be set-up by NADRA and the Partner Banks to support 
beneficiaries who encounter difficulties with withdrawing their funds, lose their debit cards or 
PIN or experience other issues related to payment.  
 
Grievance Redressal System: Grievance redressal centers will be opened and staffed by 
NADRA and District officials (DCOs). These will be responsible for addressing grievances 
related to eligibility, and inform appellants as to why they are excluded. Depending on the nature 
of the grievance, different stakeholders are responsible for providing solution to the grievances.  
 
Social Accountability and Transparency: To ensure as much transparency of the program as 
possible the eligibility criteria and beneficiary lists will be published on the NADRA website and 
in more basic hard copy notices in villages. In addition, the program implementing agencies will 
collaborate with NGOs in the country that have intensive presence in the flood affected areas to 
engage community organizations and other local institutions, e.g. council of elders, in the 
grievance redress process, communication/outreach and evaluation. This will also account as far 
as practical for gender issues and a voice for women in the process. Furthermore, a mobile-based 
SMS enquiry and response system has been set up by NADRA.  For payment concerns, the 
banks have already set up toll-free telephone help-lines to record and answer complaints.  
NADRA will provide web-based updates on program progress on a dedicated website of the 
program.  
 
Last resort for unanswered grievances or maladministration. The Federal and Provincial 
Ombudsmen will be available to the public to settle disputes.  DFID is planning to fund the 
International Rescue Committee (IRC) to help beneficiaries and/or communities in highlighting 
and lodging their complaints. IRC plan to set up local offices to support these beneficiary 
advisory activities. A more recent initiative launched by Transparency International, supported 
by USAID, includes a fraud hotline available to the general public for reporting fraud and 
corruption-related grievances.  
 
Component 2: Strengthen program management, monitoring and evaluation (total estimated 
cost - US$15 million)  
 
This component would provide technical assistance to enhance program management, 
transparency and accountability at the federal, provincial and local levels through capacity 
Page  3
building, communication and public information, monitoring and evaluation, as well as 
accessible advisory services for beneficiaries. This component will be implemented by NADRA.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Pakistan nationwide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project interventions are not expected to result in any adverse environmental or 
social impacts. Consequently, an Environmental and Social Screening Assessment Framework 
(ESSAF) is not required for the project. Nonetheless, the Bank in collaboration with the 
respective Government entities and relevant donors has commissioned an implementation 
evaluation of the first phase of the CDCP which will be expanded under the proposed project. 
Preliminary results from the evaluation show that there will be a need to reach out more 
effectively to families, such as those headed by females and other vulnerable families that have 
not yet been included in the program.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
Ms Samina Mussarat Islam (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
03/07/2011 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The proposed project comprises cash transfers and technical assistance, therefore the project 
would not have any adverse environmental effects. Accordingly, no environmental safeguard 
issues and/or associated irreversible impacts are expected from this project.  
 
There will be no any negative impacts of this project in terms of dislocation/involuntary 
resettlement. Therefore, social safeguard policies will not trigger.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Andrea Vermehren 
03/07/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
03/08/2011 
Comments:  cleared endorsing category C. This is based on understanding that there will be no 
construction under the project. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mansoora Rashid 
03/08/2011 
Comments:  cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
