Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/10/2010 
Report No.:  AC5745
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P076872 
Original Project Name: Second 
Improvement to Financial Reporting and 
Auditing Project 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P122635 
Project Name:  Second Improvement to Financial Reporting and Auditing Project - 
Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Amandeep Trana 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2010 
Managing Unit:  SARFM 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (53%);Central government 
administration (45%);Banking (2%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (50%);Standards 
and financial reporting (25%);Administrative and civil service reform (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
24.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Overall project development objectives under additional financing remain unchanged 
from PIFRA II, namely to: (a) build capacity to improve accuracy, comprehensiveness, 
reliability, and timeliness of financial and fiscal reporting at all levels of government; (b) 
improve public financial management, accountability, and transparency; (c) enhance the 
capacity of public sector managers to use credible financial information for better and 
informed decision-making; and (d) facilitate oversight of the use of public monies, and 
increase the national and international credibility of government#s financial statements 
and assurance processes. The main additional element during the additional financing 
period will be to emphasize transition and ownership of the IT systems to the relevant 
government agencies (i.e., AG, MoF, and CGA) by end-2012.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Additional Financing will allow deepening of reforms that have been successfully 
established under PIFRA II and a phased transition to substantial incorporation of the 
system under GoP line agencies. It will, inter alia: (i) provide interim support for 
continued operation and maintenance of FABS and full development of the Audit 
Management Information System (AMIS), which will establish stable IT platforms for 
government financial management that can be fully taken over by relevant government 
agencies; (ii) address some continuing issues that impede the full realization of fiscal and 
financial management outcomes from the IT systems; and (iii) build capacity of the MoF, 
CGA, and AGs to apply the IT platforms to key areas of PFM reform and further 
integrate the processes of fiscal policy, budget preparation, and financial management.  
 
Additional Financing will comprise three main components, aligned with the PIFRA II 
structure: (i) Financial Accounting and Budgeting System (FABS) #MoF/CGA; (ii) 
Audit; and (iii) Project Management. Component 1 is centrally concerned with the 
continued operation and maintenance of FABS, capacity building and transfer of 
responsibility to the MoF and CGA. Because the MoF/CGA will take over the operation 
and maintenance of FABS during the AF period, it unifies the former PIFRA II 
components (FABS and Capacity Building and Upgrading of CGA). Component 2 of AF 
provides additional resources to establish the Audit Management Information System 
(AMIS) initiated under PIFRA II and to transition system and performance audit 
practices fully to the OAGP. Project management will be maintained to oversee all 
project operations and promote transition arrangements.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project Directorate will be headquartered in Islamabad with sub-Directorates in all 
the four provinces.  The project would also extend to DAOs in AJK.  Since AJK is a 
disputed territory, the standard disclaimer has been included in the project 
documentation. The project involves construction of government offices, but new 
buildings will be on Government-owned land held free of encroachments, and the 
balance shall be refurbishment and renovation of existing office space by activities such 
as installing electrical and communication wiring, general repair, and maintenance.  
There is no land acquisition anticipated; however, small piece(s) of land, if required, for 
construction of new offices, will be purchased by the Government through commercial 
means. There is no involuntary resettlement envisaged.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The small-scale construction and renovation activities may have low-intensity 
environmental impacts, including soil erosion/subsidence, soil/water contamination, 
choking of sewers/drains, increased sediment loads in receiving water bodies, blockage 
of access roads/paths, air quality deterioration, noise and vibration, increased vehicular 
traffic near the work sites, damage to biological resources, and safety hazards for 
construction workers and nearby population.  
 
All of the above impacts are localized, of low intensity, temporary in nature, and can 
easily be avoided or mitigated with the help of simple 'good practice' precautionary 
measures.  None of these impacts are likely to be large-scale, significant, and/or 
irreversible.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The future activities in the area are likely to include occupation and usage of the office 
buildings.  No significant indirect and/or long term impacts are likely to take place due to 
these activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The 'no project' alternative was considered, however it was rejected since the construction 
and renovation of the office buildings was necessary for the success of the PIFRA-II 
project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has conducted an Environmental Assessment (EA), which includes an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to address the safeguard policy issues discussed 
in Section II.A.1 above.  The EMP provides 'good practice' mitigation measures to 
Page  4
minimize if not totally eliminate/avoid the potential negative impacts associated with the 
small-scale construction and renovation activities.  
 
The borrower has technical staff on board, who are already managing the construction 
and renovation projects for the Organization. Furthermore, almost all of the mitigation 
measures are 'good practice' measures which can easily be implemented by the 
construction contractors at the construction sites.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
set of stakeholder consultations was carried out while conducting the EA of the 
project's construction and renovation activities. The EA has been disclosed at the 
InfoShop.  In addition, the borrower has disclosed the EA appropriately.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/06/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/06/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas 
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Amandeep Trana 
10/15/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
10/18/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
10/25/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
11/05/2010 
Comments:  cleared on understanding that no new safeguards policies are trigerred. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jennifer K. Thomson 
11/26/2010 
Comments:   
