Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/21/2011 
Report No.:  AC5910
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P118779 
Project Name:  Tertiary Education Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Halil Dundar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (80%);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1,890.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1,890.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed Project is to improve the conditions of 
teaching, learning, and research for enhanced access, quality, and relevance of tertiary 
education.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project would support the implementation of the first phase of the 
Government's Higher Education Development Program as outlined in the second 
Medium Term Development Framework for Higher Education for 2011-2015 (MTDF-
HE II), using a Results Based Financing (RBF) modality.  The Government's program 
aims to: (i) ensure fiscal sustainability and effectiveness of expenditure in tertiary 
education; (ii) improve the quality and relevance of teaching and research; (iii) improve 
equitable access to tertiary education; and (iv) strengthen governance and management.  
 
Page  2
The project would support Government reform in tertiary education under two 
components: Component 1 - Program Financing and Component 2 - Capacity Building, 
Policy Design and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).  
 
Component 1 would consist of four subcomponents, aligned with the Government's 
overall program: (i) improved fiscal sustainability and expenditure effectiveness; (ii) 
enhanced quality and relevance of teaching and research; (iii) improved equitable access; 
and (iv) strengthened governance and management.  
 
Component 2 would strengthen capacities for program implementation and M&E 
systems.  It would finance essential technical assistance (TA) and capacity building 
activities, carefully selected and sequenced with the implementation of Component 1 to 
address both policy design and implementation capacity constraints.  This component has 
two subcomponents: Capacity Building of the Higher Education Commission (HEC) and 
Tertiary Education Institutions (TEIs); and Policy Design and M&E.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Pakistan nationwide   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Government's MTDF-HE (II) includes construction of new campuses, building new 
class rooms and rehabilitation and renovation of some of the existing facilities in several 
universities across the country. The expansion of infrastructure under the Government's 
MTDF-HE (II) will mostly take place in the existing campuses and facilities. 
Additionally, the Government plans to establish a number of new campuses and women 
Page  3
universities under its higher education program, provided that additional development 
resources will be available.  In the case of new campuses, no land acquisition is 
anticipated under the Program since land for these campuses is already available with the 
respective Provincial Governments and will be transferred to the respective university for 
this purpose.  
 
The planned construction and rehabilitation activities may potentially cause negative 
environmental and/or social impacts, including possible changes in land forms caused by 
the construction of new buildings, soil erosion caused by site clearance and de-
vegetation, soil and water contamination caused by improper waste disposal, and safety 
hazards for the workers as well as for the nearby population posed by the construction 
activities.  None of these potential impacts are likely to be large-scale, highly significant, 
or irreversible, and can be addressed with the help of appropriate mitigation measures.  
Therefore, the Project has been classified as Environment Category B, in accordance with 
OP 4.01.  
 
No negative social safeguard issues and impacts of the proposed Project are expected 
since there will be no land acquisition and hence involuntary resettlement under the 
ongoing, approved or new projects to be financed under the Program (during project 
implementation). No indigenous people, as defined by OP 4.10, are present in, or are 
collectively attached to, the project areas.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term environmental impacts are likely to take place due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area, other than some possible secondary development in 
the surrounding areas, particularly if the new facility is built outside the campuses.  
 
No indirect or long term social impacts of the proposed Project are likely to take place 
due to anticipated future activities in the project area.  
 
Two main social challenges were highlighted through previous poverty and social 
assessments in tertiary education.  First, despite progress in gender parity in tertiary 
education enrolment , gender disparities remain substantial, particularly in the lagging 
regions such as Balochistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa provinces.  Second, students 
coming from poor and remote areas not only have less access to tertiary education but 
also are more disadvantaged to access to better quality institutions, which are located in 
more developed provinces.  The Project is expected to have overall positive social impact 
as it will improve access to tertiary education for both women and students coming from 
poor households and disadvantaged regions.  MTDF-HE (II) will support education 
opportunities for disadvantaged groups, including female students, through specific 
interventions for expansion of tertiary education in remote areas and the provision of 
financial aid and student loans.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
All public and eligible private universities will participate in this program and about all of 
them have the potential to add facilities. The Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) for the Project has provisions to avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Consideration of the project alternatives such as siting of the new facility has been 
incorporated in the ESMP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), 
which identifies the appropriate mitigation measures to address the potentially negative 
impacts of the construction and associated activities.  The ESMP also defines 
environmental and social monitoring requirements, in addition to documentation and 
protocols the Project will follow.  Capacity building of the Borrower's relevant officers 
would be needed to effectively implement the ESMP. ESMP addresses this need and 
includes environmental and social trainings to be conducted for the relevant officers.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
HEC, the universities that are part of the Program and where construction activities are 
likely to take place, students, surrounding communities, local governments, 
environmental protection agencies (EPAs), and local NGOs are some of the key 
stakeholders of the proposed Project. The ESMP was disclosed on January 19, 2011 
locally by the implemneting agency, and also was placed in the InfoShop on January 13, 
2011. Besides, each construction site will have a copy of the ESMP. The ESMP defines 
the consultation and disclosure requirements the Project will need to fulfill for each 
individual construction subproject under the Program.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/06/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/19/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/13/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas 
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared 
N/A 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  6
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Halil Dundar 
01/14/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
01/14/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
01/14/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
01/21/2011 
Comments:  cleared on understanding that in event of involuntary land acquisition a RAP will be 
prepared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
01/19/2011 
Comments:  cleared 
