Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/03/2011 
Report No.:  AC5812
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P120589 
Project Name:  Natural Gas Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader:  Bjorn Hamso 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Oil and gas (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
72.00
72.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project is to enhance the supply of natural gas in 
Pakistan by reducing the physical and commercial losses of gas in the pipeline system.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has one dominant component (Component 1) and two smaller components:  
 
a. Component 1:  Reduction of unaccounted-for gas (UFG)  
 
b.
Component 2:  Gas appliance efficiency pilot project  
 
c. Component 3:  Technical Assistance  
 
Component 1 includes sub-components that will reduce UFG:  
 
a. Pipeline segmentation and pressure management  
 
b.
Pipeline rehabilitation  
 
c. Cathodic protection  
 
d.
Advanced metering  
 
Page  2
Pipeline rehabilitation will include both replacement of gas pipes and repair of pipes.  A 
transition from steel pipes to polyethylene pipes will take place in most of the 
rehabilitation areas; typically only larger pipes (above 8 inches) will be kept in steel.  
Cathodic protection will be rehabilitated on the remaining steel network in order to 
reduce the corrosion (i.e. reduce the expansion of number and size of holes in the gas 
pipe walls).  The pipeline segmentation implies that bulk meters will be placed in so-
called town border stations and elsewhere in the grid so that incoming gas to a network 
segment can be measured and compared with the aggregate of measured end user gas 
consumption in the segment. The difference between the numbers is the UFG. This 
information, together with leak surveys and other measures, will provide guidance to 
where to undertake pipeline rehabilitation.  Furthermore, pressure management systems 
will be installed in the network segments so that as long as there are leakages, the 
pressure can be kept at a minimum (to meet demand), thereby keeping the gas leakage at 
a
minimum. Advanced metering systems and surveillance systems, will help reducing gas 
theft.  
 
A
pilot project to replace or retrofit inefficient residential gas appliances will be 
undertaken in support of other efforts by the Government to enhance the efficiency of gas 
use.  
 
Technical assistance will support the implementation of the project, organizational 
development, and customer satisfaction surveys.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
With regards to safeguards analysis, the main activity that will have some environmental 
or social impact is the rehabilitation or replacement of gas distribution pipes. The 
proposed rehabilitation of distribution network is located in the urban, largely residential 
areas of Karachi, Upper and Lower Sindh, and Quetta. During the entire project duration 
of 60 months it is estimated that around 5,750 km network would be replaced, of which 
about 3,150 km in Karachi and the remainder in the interior of Sindh and in Quetta 
(Balochistan).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Ms Yuka Makino (SASDI) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main activity under the Sui Southern Gas Company Limited (SSGC) project which is 
likely to have an environmental impact is the rehabilitation of distribution networks in 
urban areas of Karachi, inner Sindh and Quetta along existing right-of-way and does not 
include any land acquisition. The rehabilitation will include excavation of 3 feet wide and 
4-5 feet deep channels. The old pipes will be replaced with high-density or medium-
density polyethylene pipes up to 180 millimeters in diameter. Approximately 300 meters 
are replaced per day per work team. The other activities, which include installation of 
automatic pressure profiling systems, smart meters and conducting underground leak 
surveys will have very limited environmental impacts. Since the exact excavation and 
project sites will be determined after a detailed survey during the implementation of the 
project, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) outlines the 
procedures that will be followed during the project activities. There are no large-scale, 
significant and/or irreversible impacts foreseen due to project activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project areas are urban, residential areas. Therefore, by reducing gas leakage, the 
project is improving the living environment of the residents and reducing the potential for 
any gas-related accidents occurring in the areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
separate Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which includes 
an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared for Sui Southern Gas 
Company Limited, the proposed sub-borrower and implementation agency. The ESMF 
Page  4
provides a detailed account of the procedures to be followed for all project activities, 
especially since the exact location of all pipelines to be replaced and repaired will be 
determined after detailed segmentation and surveys have taken place at various stages 
during the initial project implementation period. Although a framework approach is being 
adopted to safeguards under the Project, no separate plans are required to be prepared, as 
the framework is adequate for all monitoring and mitigation and no particularities are 
attached to specific Project sites that would warrant the preparation of separate plans. Sui 
Southern Gas Company Limited was certified in 2005 by ISO 14001:2004 Environmental 
Management Systems and OHSAS 18001:1999 Occupational Health and Safety 
Management System Standard.  
 
The company has a Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) Manual that covers the 
management of occupational health safety and environmental hazards of its activities, 
processes, equipments and products. The HSE department of the company is required to 
conduct assessment of all routine and non-routine activities and activities of all persons 
having access to the work place whether provided by the organization or others. The 
certification requires periodic training of all staff from the level of the contractors to the 
Management of the company on the guidelines and processes. All site distribution offices 
have an HSE person in charge who conducts random checks for compliance. The 
compliance to ISO and OHSAS is also externally monitored every six months.  
 
The Sui Southern Gas Company (SSGC) has implemented ISO 14001:2004 and 
OHSAS 18001: 2007 and feels capable to undertake environmental assessments 
associated with the natural gas distribution system. However, where formal EIA is 
required, it contracts external consultants to supplement local capacity. Should the 
environmental and social screening of the Project require expertise not available with the 
company, it will obtain the services of external consultants. SSGC will need to plan for 
capacity building within the Company in the longer term.  
 
This project will mainly have environmental benefits in that it will reduce the amount of 
underground and overhead gas leakages and improve the efficiency of gas distribution 
and utilization.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Overall, the proposed Project is expected to have positive social impacts as it reduces 
safety risks associated with methane leakages and as it conserves energy resources and 
reduces utility costs. However, the time period needed for trenching, laying of new or 
repair of existing pipes, refilling of trench, and road restoration, may have limited social 
impacts related to short-term access for people to areas where these works are being 
carried out. A survey of people impacted by pipeline rehabilitation work, which also 
served as a consultation mechanism, was undertaken by SSGC in November 2010. 54 
people were interviewed in Frontier Colony (FC), Orangi Town, Karachi and Ittehad 
Town (IT), Baldia Town, Karachi. 89% of the respondents expressed satisfaction with 
SSGC's activities. 74% expressed satisfaction with the way SSGC handled emergency 
situations and 60% were aware of the complaint filing system of SSGC. With regards to 
Page  5
information disclosure, the respondents suggested that communication to the community 
should be done through distribution of handouts, announcement from local Mosque 
and/or placement of banners. The ESMF was disclosed in Environmental Protection 
Agency libraries in Sind and Balochistan and in relevant district libraries, in English and 
with a summary in local languages (Urdu and Sindhi). It was also disclosed in the library 
and on the website of gas company SSGC.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/05/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  6
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bjorn Hamso 
01/31/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Yuka Makino 
02/02/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
02/02/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/02/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
02/03/2011 
Comments:   
