Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/11/2011 
Report No.:  AC6146
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P114508 
Original Project Name: Third Partnership 
for Polio Eradication Project 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P125109 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Third Partnership for Polio Eradication Project 
Task Team Leader:  Kumari Vinodhani Navaratne 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASHN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Child health (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
41.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
61.40
61.40 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original project objective is to assist Pakistan in its efforts under its Polio Eradication 
Initiative (PEI) to eradicate polio in the country.   
 
3. Project Description 
The PEI has three components: (i) procurement, timely supply and effective use of the 
oral polio vaccine (OPV), (ii)supplemental immunization activities; and (iii) surveillance. 
The proposed Emergency Additional Financing will provide support for the first PEI 
component, i.e., procurement, supply and effective use of oral polio vaccines during the 
supplemental immunization period. The proposed AF will help meet urgent increased 
financing requirements for the procurement of the OPV necessary to meet the vaccine 
requirements from July 2011 to August 2012 in support of the National Emergency 
Action Plan 2011 for Polio Eradication in Pakistan. The financing gap which the AF will 
cover is a result of (i) an increased number of polio cases following the large scale floods 
of 2010 and the ongoing conflict leading to continuous population movements in 2010; 
and (ii) changed requirements for vaccination in line with recommendations of the Global 
Page  2
Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) and the introduction of new types of vaccine. The 
large scale floods of 2010 and the on-going conflict leading to continuous population 
movements into 23010 contributed to the increase in the total number of reported polio 
cases. This increase was seen mainly following floods with only 27 polio cases reported 
as of July and 142 by end December 2010. The GOP is requesting an additional US$41 
million to purchase most of the required OPV vaccines for the SIAs to be implemented 
during the period from July 2011 to August 2012. The proposed emergency AF is 
requested to finance the completion of the original project activities and address an 
unanticipated financing gap. The original project development objective project design 
and scope of TPPEP will remain intact under the proposed Emergency AF.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Pakistan nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None of the safeguard policies have been triggered.  
 
Environment: The proposed project involves the supply and use of OPV in small plastic 
vials which need to be disposed off. The disposal of the vials is undertaken in accordance 
with the WHO guidelines for immunization campaigns as being already practiced. No 
sharps such as needles or vial cutters are involved in the oral vaccination methods and the 
program produces no infected medical waste.  
 
Social: A Social Assessment was deemed not necessary as there are no potential 
negative social impacts anticipated. The proposed project aims to benefit under five 
children especially vulnerable and neglected groups by providing polio immunization. 
Quantitative studies have found low utilization rates at public health facilities catering to 
Page  3
the poor. The project will ensure to address these issues in respect of polio eradication by 
developing specific strategies and by using surveillance data to reach the poor 
households. The project aims to vaccinate very child in each round therefore it is unlikely 
girl child to be missed. The PEI program already has addressed issues of access to 
households by training and using female health workers to overcome social access 
barriers into the households.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environment: The project is not likely to cause any indirect or long term negative 
environmental impacts. Rather, implementation and following of WHO guidelines for 
immunization campaigns for waste disposal will facilitate development of safe waste 
disposal culture in the health sector.  
 
Social: There are no potential negative social impacts anticipated. However, some 
positive impacts are built into the project such as ensuring that all households are covered 
including poor households addressing issues of access to health care.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment: The Borrower PEI already employs use of WHO guidelines for safe 
disposal of small waste which is produced. The basic package of training of all staff 
employed in SIAs includes waste disposal and all staff are well trained in them.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
PEI has established a framework for on-going participation largely through national 
provincial and district level committees including members from: (i) key government 
ministries/departments; (ii) NGOs; (iii) community members and (iv) media experts. 
Before each campaign these committees meet to discuss issues and challenges and 
facilitate program implementation. PEI has achieved success for the last few years by 
placing high priority on mobilizing participation of the beneficiaries, communities and 
other stakeholders. Local politicians and religious leaders are regularly sensitized and 
contribute by mobilizing local communities. Non acceptance of vaccination is very low. 
The EPI holds consultations with partner NGOs and community groups which actively 
participate in social mobilization activities for SIA. Recently in security compromised 
areas the program is working closely with local leaders, tribal elders and community 
leaders to come up with solution to ensure access to each child.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Page  5
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kumari Vinodhani Navaratne 
03/09/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
03/10/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
03/10/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
03/11/2011 
Comments:  Cleared on understanding that original project activities will be contonued, ie. 
procurement of oral polio vaccine with no physical works. The orgininal project safeguards category 
C
is retained. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Julie McLaughlin 
03/11/2011 
Comments:  Approved 
