                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC6270


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/12/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Panama                              Project ID: P125343
Project Name: Panama - Strengthening the Performance of Basic Health Services
Task Team Leader: Maria Eugenia Bonilla-Chacin
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 4, 2011 Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2011
Managing Unit: LCSHH                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (90%);Public administration- Health (10%)
Theme: Health system performance (60%);Child health (30%);Nutrition and food
security (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):          80.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                       0.00
                                                                       0.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed Project Development Objectives are to: (i) increase utilization and quality of
prioritized health services for the beneficiary population; and (ii) strengthen the management of
the public health sector.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project will be financed through a Specific Investment Loan to support the Government of
Panama over a four-year period. This Specific Investment Loan will be for a total of US$ 80
million. To decrease the coverage gap of prioritized health services and improve institutional
capacity to provide these services, the Project proposes to finance the extension of the results-
based financing mechanism from the mobile health teams, financed by the Health Equity and
Performance Improvement Project (IBRD loan n. 7587-PA; P106445) and the Social Protection
Project (IBRD loan n. 7479-PA, P098328), to the entire primary health care network of the
Ministry of Health (MOH) in the beneficiary regions. The Project will support all Regional
Management Units of the MOH with exception of Panama Metro, Panama Norte and San
Miguelito, which correspond to Panama City and where a large share of the insured population
resides, and Ngäbe Buglé and Kuna Yala as another project financed by the IADB will support
these two RMUs. After the HEPI and Social Protection Projects close, the proposed operation
will finance the results-based financing scheme in mobile teams. The operation will focus on two
areas: (a) expanding coverage of quality primary health services through a results-based
mechanism; and (b) strengthening institutional capacity at central and regional levels of the
MOH and incentives at the regional and health facility levels. Among the activities aimed at
strengthening the capacity of the MOH to provide services and improve outcomes, the Project
will finance the development and implementation of a strategy to promote healthy lifestyles and
the development of a national emergency plan. The Project will also finance a demand-side
subsidy pilot to decrease the utilization gap of priority health services.

D. Project location (if known)
8.     The present project supports GOP efforts to improve access to quality primary health
services in provincial towns and rural areas of Panama including some indigenous communities.
The only regions where the project will not operate are Panama Centro and San Miguelito where
the majority of the population have health insurance, and the Comarca regions where a similar
Inter-American Development Bank project is operating.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The borrower has acquired considerable experience and capacity for safeguard policy
management through preparation and implementation of the previous World Bank Social
Protection (P098328) and Health Equity and Performance Improvement (P106445) projects.
Safeguard related activities are coordinated by a technical team of representatives from the
Planning, Promotion, Services Provision and General Directorates of the MOH.
  The Indigenous Peoples Plans for the previous projects supported MOH in the formulation of
its own Health and Indigenous Peoples Policy (Politica de Atención a los Pueblos Indigenas), by
means of a number of activities to strengthen health policies to better respond to the particular
needs and demands of the different ethnic groups of the country, inside and outside the
Comarcas. One of the main objectives of the IPP is to carry out the cultural adaptation of the
health care services to improve access and utilization by indigenous people.
  As this Project complements and expands work done under the previous projects, the MOH will
carry out additional consultations with RMU staff, civil society organizations and beneficiaries
(including indigenous peoples) and prepare action plans for enhancing the provision of
appropriate benefits and mitigating any potential adverse impacts.
  Finally, Panama has received SAT Safeguards training and showed that it has some institutional
capacity to carry out safeguards work. In addition, the implementing agency's institutional
capacity for safeguard policies will be strengthened under the project. In particular, staff will be
advised and trained in how to ensure compliance with environmental and social safeguard
policies. Capacity building related to safeguards will be initiated during preparation and
continued during project implementation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)
   Mr Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes          No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    No significant potential impacts are expected. Some impacts could be linked to potential
increases in production of health care waste from increased use of health services expected from
component 1 of the project. A brief environmental management plan (EMP) will be prepared
that indicates what aspects would need to be considered under the national law, programs, and
Bank/WHO standards with respect to health care waste management in the context of expanded
provision of services in the health sector. The EMP will also outline any capacity-building
measures that should be included under the relevant project component(s) in relation to the
Regional Management Units and the Ministry of Health to address these issues. Additionally,
the EMP will consider other ongoing efforts by the GoP on health care waste management as
part of due diligence.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
    The project will screen for the presence of Indigenous Peoples (IPs) in the project area.
Preliminary screening indicates that the project supported RMUs with considerable indigenous
populations located outside of recognized comarcas include Bocas del Toro, Chiriqui, Veraguas,
Panama Este and Darien. Following this, a Social Assessment (SA) will identify all relevant
social and cultural characteristics and vulnerabilities that affect IPs as beneficiaries of the
project. The SA will be developed in close consultation with IPs. On the basis of the social
assessment and consultations with IPs in the project area, the MOH will prepare an Indigenous
Peoples Plan (IPP) that sets out measures to ensure the appropriateness of the proposed health
services to be delivered.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                               X
    None of the proposed activities require any land acquisition or resettlement.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 08/01/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Maria Eugenia Bonilla-Chacin                                05/09/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Glenn S. Morgan                                             05/10/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Ms Joana Godinho                                               05/11/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
