Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/16/2011 
Report No.:  AC5738
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Panama 
Project ID:  P121492 
Project Name:  Enhanced Public Sector Efficiency Technical Assistance Loan 
Task Team Leader:  Pedro Arizti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 25, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 3, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSPS 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (75%);Managing for 
development results (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
55.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.13
5.13 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to assist public agencies of the Borrower in producing, 
using and disseminating timely and quality performance information, thereby allowing a 
more efficient, transparent and accountable use of the Borrower#s public budget funds.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed operation has been conceived partly as a continuation of the technical 
assistance loan closed in May 2010 that supported reforms in the area of procurement, 
financial management and production of relevant data and information for better policy-
making. The current operation will continue with support for some of these reforms and 
include further areas of support including improved, introduction of performance-based 
budget management and strengthened evaluation and strategic planning functions.  
 
The project will be implemented over a five-year period, one year beyond the current 
administration to leave room for transition with the new administration. The project will 
comprise the following four components:  
 
Page  2
Component/Part 1: Strengthening Performance-Based Budget Management and 
Evaluation (US$9 million). The provision of support to MEF, including, goods, IT 
equipment, operating costs, training and technical assistance for the carrying out of 
activities aimed at:  
 
a. improving the institutional and technical capacities of MEF for performance-based 
strategic planning and budgeting in order to create conditions for enhancing the quality of 
public spending, including, inter alia: (i) strengthening and harmonizing institutional 
planning and budgeting frameworks; (ii) organizational strengthening and re-designing of 
MEF and other sector planning and budgeting responsible units within the Borrower#s 
Central Government structure; (iii) introducing annual and multi-annual budget planning 
and programming tools; (iv) defining and institutionalizing methodologies for strategic 
planning and budgeting; and (v) developing technical, managerial and organizational 
capacities for result-based planning and budgeting; and  
 
b.supporting the development and institutionalization of monitoring and evaluation 
functions and systems at the national level and in pilot sectors, including, inter alia: (i) 
designing and implementing a national monitoring and evaluation system under MEF 
coordination and leadership; (ii) designing and implementing pilot monitoring and 
evaluation systems in Pilot Ministries; (iii) enhancing the production, quality, utilization 
and availability of performance information; (iv) developing technical, managerial and 
organizational capacities for the institutionalization of monitoring and evaluation 
functions and systems; and (v) producing and disseminating methodologies for the 
institutionalization of monitoring and evaluation functions and systems.  
 
Component/Part 2: New Financial Management Model: Strengthening Budget 
Execution, Treasury, Accounting and Control (US$30.5 million). The provision of 
support to MEF (only with respect to Part (a) below) and CGR, including goods, 
operating costs, training and technical assistance, for the modernization of the 
Borrower#s current financial management system, through the carrying out of activities 
aimed at:  
 
a. consolidating and integrating all core public financial management processes within 
the Borrower#s Central Government, focusing on interoperability and integration among 
selected MEF areas such as budgeting, accounting, treasury, payroll, public procurement, 
public investment and planning, including, inter alia: (i) conceptual and functional 
designing of a new financial management system to be used by all public sector agencies; 
(ii) defining an applicable technological framework (software requirements, IT security 
policies, software architecture design, server levels agreements for software, hardware 
and selected services); (iii) analyzing alternatives for implementing the new financial 
management model; (iv) customizing/constructing information technology systems 
compatible with the alternative selected under (iii) above; (v) reviewing and updating the 
normative framework supporting the new financial management model; and (vi) 
supporting the implementation of the new financial management model in all public 
sector agencies, including the provision of the relevant training to personnel working on 
such agencies;  
Page  3
b. modernizing control systems performed by CGR, through the strengthening of: (i) the 
Borrower#s financial management control framework; (ii) the internal control framework 
and internal audit functions in the public sector; (iii) CGR#s institutional support 
functions, including human resources, IT, and learning management; (iv) the promotion 
of public participation in the public financial management oversight, including the 
strengthening of the existing claims and allegations center concerning public financial 
mismanagement; and (v) the public accounting standards in coordination with MEF.; and  
 
c. supporting the Borrower#s statistical capacity, through: (i) the provision of technical 
assistance for the improvement of national accounts and survey data; (ii) the provision of 
training to enhance the capacities of the Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas y Censo 
(INEC#s; and (iii) the acquisition of the necessary software and hardware to upgrade 
INEC#s systems and capacity to produce, analyze and disseminate statistics.  
 
Component/Part 3: Strengthening public procurement and contracting capacity (US$15 
million). The provision of support to DGCP, including goods and IT equipment, training 
and technical assistance, for the reform of the Borrower#s public procurement process, 
through the carrying out of activities aimed at:  
 
a. supporting the institutional strengthening of DGCP, as well as building the capacity 
of public procurement officials, including, inter alia: (i) the development of a curriculum 
to support the professional development of procurement officials in line with the business 
needs of the different Government procurement organizations in partnership with the 
National Human Development Institute (INADEH); (ii) the development and 
implementation of an educational campaign for suppliers and civil society; (iii) the 
development of a business continuity model including all aspects related to the security 
and integrity of the system, along with a document management system; (iv) the creation 
of a supplier registry and the required management tools to ensure its efficient operation 
and connection with existing Government systems within the Borrower#s Central 
Government; and (v) the development of a demand-driven approach to carry out specific 
efficiency analysis to identify opportunities for savings and efficiency gains;  
 
b. supporting the ongoing legal and regulatory reforms to pursue the modernization of 
the Borrower#s public procurement system and processes, including inter alia: (i) the 
drafting of a new procurement law, the necessary regulations and manuals; (ii) the 
development of training and educational materials on the application of the new legal 
framework as well as the necessary training to build the capacity of legal and compliance 
teams throughout the public service; and (iii) the development of standard bidding 
documents.  
 
c. supporting the ongoing development of the Borrower#s e-procurement platform 
Panama Compra version2, including inter alia: (i) the development of modules to replace 
the existing electronic catalogs; (ii) the interface with the financial management system 
and other public sector management systems; (iii) the modernization of office and 
management systems, including the review and update of the security system, as well as 
Page  4
the implementation of new measures to strengthen the integrity of the system; and (iv) the 
development and implementation of a complaints management system for DGCP, 
together with the implementation of quality standards such as ISO and the Capability 
Maturity Model Integration (CMMI).  
 
d. developing a research center in the Borrower#s  
 
Procurement Administrative Tribunal, including, inter alia: (i) the provision of the 
necessary hardware and software for the set up of a virtual library that would compile 
best practices in public procurement, as well as relevant doctrine and jurisprudence; and 
(ii) the carrying out of capacity building activities for public officials, lawyers and civil 
society stakeholders involved in procurement processes.  
 
Component/Part 4: Creation and Support of Project Management Capacities (US$0.5 
million). The provision of support to MEF, CGR and DGCP including, inter alia, goods 
and IT equipment, training and technical assistance for the carrying out of adequate 
management, monitoring, reporting, auditing and evaluation of Project implementation 
activities, as well as the Borrower#s public sector efficiency reform agenda.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide (The project does not have a geographical footprint but rather is working to 
modernize management and building models).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Valerie Hickey (YPP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NONE   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pedro Arizti 
02/14/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/14/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Veronica E. Zavala Lombardi 
02/14/2011 
Comments:   
