Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5790 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/20/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Papua New Guinea 
Project ID: P119471 
Project Name: PNG Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Project II 
Task Team Leader: Demetrios Papathanasiou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 26, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASNS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (80%);Rural services and infrastructure 
(20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1
-
The proposed project would provide efficient, safe and reliable roads in the participating 
provinces through the: (i) rehabilitation and improvement of selected road segments and (ii) 
strengthening the institutional arrangements for road maintenance, including private sector and 
community participation.  
 
2
-
The project would aim to: (i) provide satisfactory physical condition and  road safety to 
parts of  appropriately selected national and provincial roads; (ii) improve the quality and 
sustainability of road maintenance through supporting institutional arrangements for efficient 
contracting of road maintenance to the private sector, strengthening of small and medium-sized 
contractors, and participation by local communities in routine maintenance of roads; (iii) 
improve the resilience of roads infrastructure to natural disasters through better mapping and 
understanding of potential hazards in selected provinces (Subject to available project co-
financing through the Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR)).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project will comprise four components:  
 
Component 1: Rehabilitation, Upgrading and Sealing of remaining sections of the Hiritano 
Highway and Maintenance. This would complete the sealing of the full length of the Hiritano 
Highway to an appropriate standard. The highway falls within the recently Cabinet approved 
Petroleum Resource Area Economic Corridor (PREAC), which was formed to assist in their 
medium and long term economic development plans of the Central and Gulf regions accessed by 
the highway. RMRP is currently financing the reconstruction of damaged sections along the 
highway that will reinstate the road transport connection between Kerema and Port Moresby 
(PNG#s capital).  However, due to funding limitations under the current RMRP, there are some 
sections of the Hiritano Highway (about 90 km in all) that have not been fully rehabilitated. 
Component 1 will accomplish the Hiritano Highway rehabilitation and establish a system for its 
sustainable longer term maintenance (see also Component 4 below). No new road openings will 
be done and the works will not involve widening of existing roads.  
 
Component 2: Rehabilitation, Upgrading and Maintenance of selected National Roads. This 
would rehabilitate and maintain various road segments of the national network.  It would also 
improve the planning and identification of secondary roads to be rehabilitated at selected areas 
and would finance initial works. GoPNG objective to extend infrastructure services and 
development opportunities to rural areas requires interventions to rehabilitate and upgrade 
secondary roads. The planning and setting of priorities for such roads is currently constrained by 
lack of data, inadequate planning tools and limited engagement by provincial governments. 
Furthermore, maintenance is constrained by lack of funding. The project would commence its 
engagement in the Central province along the Hiritano and Magi Highways, where initial pilot 
projects could take place. Additional provinces to be considered under this component may 
follow the current RMRP regional focus in East and West New Britain, Manus, Oro, Morobe, 
Gulf and Western. No new road openings will be done and the works will not involve widening 
of existing roads.  
 
Component 3: Project Management; Monitoring and Evaluation; Operating Costs. Recognizing 
the limited capacity in PNG and following the satisfactory arrangements of RMRP, technical 
assistance for an Employer#s Project Manager (EPM) would be provided. The EPM team would 
assist with the detailed engineering design and supervision, the project#s financial management 
and the preparation of procurement documentation. A program of activities for monitoring and 
evaluation of the various project components along with DoW and NRA#s incremental operating 
costs would also be financed under this component.  
 
Component 4: Technical Assistance for Roads Maintenance Capacity Building  to: (i) the 
National Roads Authority (NRA); and (ii) Small and Medium Local Contractors. This 
component would provide technical assistance to NRA to maintain selected regions where 
RMRP has previously supported rehabilitation works.  Following rehabilitation of roads carried 
out by DoW across the country, NRA is increasingly assuming the responsibility to maintain 
National Roads of PNG as prescribed under the NRA Act of 2003. Nevertheless, NRA is a 
relatively new institution that needs support with developing appropriate maintenance modalities 
(planning, specific contractual arrangements, etc). NRA also is keen to explore innovative 
approaches to road maintenance, such as longer-term performance-based contracting. In 
Page  3
addition, the project will work with DoW and NRA to provide technical assistance for the 
development of small and medium works contractors, so that they can undertake routine roads 
maintenance.  Lack of such capacity presents an additional challenge in maintaining the roads 
infrastructure in PNG. The project would aim to transfer the long-term maintenance of the 
Hiritano Highway to the NRA once rehabilitation works (Component 1) are completed.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The first year works under the project would take place on various sections of the Hiritano 
Highway, located in the Central and Gulf provinces of PNG.  
 
For subsequent years, the project will include provincial roads located within Gulf and Central 
Provinces which service the Hiritano and Magi Highways.  
 
Additional provinces to be considered for subsequent years may follow the current RMRP 
regional focus in East and West New Britain, Manus, Oro, Morobe, Central, Gulf and Western.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Based on the experience with RMRP, and the works being limited to rehabilitation (gravelling 
and re-gravelling, or chip sealing) and maintenance, the environmental and social risks for 
RMRP II are considered to be relatively low. The rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance of 
the local and national roads under the RMRP II project will neither change the alignment of these 
roads nor will the project involve widening of the roads, i.e. no additional lanes will be added 
and there will be no change in the formation width.  
 
The scale and design of the project indicate that the environmental impacts can be managed 
successfully if appropriate plans and implementation arrangements are put in place. The project 
will build on the experience of the current ongoing RMRP, where DoW has assigned an 
environmental specialist staff to oversee the implementation of the EMP. Most sections of roads 
to be upgraded in RMRP II would generally fall within the current RMRP geographical areas.  
 
The environmental impacts of roads reconstruction in PNG are predictable and can be 
effectively mitigated through careful design and project supervision. An Environmental and 
Social Impact Management Plan (ESIMP) was prepared in 2001 and used in the original project. 
An EMP based on ESIMP will be prepared for RMRP II and made more specific to the 1st year 
Program.  An updated Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) will also be 
prepared based on the original LARF included in the 2001ESIMP. The Department of Works 
(DOW) has found the RMRP EMP useful in the implementation of the mitigation measures and 
to guard safeguards provisions.  Given the ongoing RMRP and the new RMRP II the DOW will 
further strengthen its capacity to better supervise and better monitor the new RMRP II.  
 
In the first year of the project, the Hiritano Highway Component 1 will be implemented.  This 
would upgrade and double seal the existing road within the formation width and therefore no 
new land will need to be acquired nor is any resettlement expected. In the subsequent years, a 
similar situation is expected to apply for the rehabilitation and upgrading of the other national 
and district roads. However, since the roads are not selected, it is possible that some roads may 
require culvert upgrades, side drainage, safety upgrades or upgrades to meet the PNG road 
Page  4
standards. These issues, if necessary, will be addressed during the preparation and 
implementation of the new segments. An Environmental Management Plan will be drafted for 
the 1st year component. All subsequent road sub-projects prepared after year 1 will be covered 
by an Environmental Management Framework. All projects throughout the RMRP II 
implementation will be covered by the Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework in case of 
any unforeseen land impacts.  
 
Positive socioeconomic impacts of better road transportation in PNG have been identified and 
documented under RMRP.  Under RMRP ongoing social assessments have been taking place 
along the Hiritano Highway and in the seven provinces outlined in the project. This type of 
social analysis is due to continue under RMRP II. From the current analysis (2010) it is clear that 
the rehabilitation of roads are having an  important positive benefit in people#s lives by 
facilitating travel to markets. People#s incomes have also increased as a result of the road (as 
well as other factors) in particular roadside sellers who have greatly benefited from improved 
roads and increased traffic. This is particularly important for women as they are often the 
roadside sellers. In all the social analysis being undertaken shows that villages by the 
rehabilitated roads have better incomes and are less poor than the villages by the non-
rehabilitated roads.  
 
However, a smaller risk of adverse impacts e.g. accidents due to higher speeds, remains. The 
project is designed to minimize social risks by rehabilitating the existing roads within the right-
of-way and within the formation width, with adequate provisions for traffic signs, speed bumps, 
etc. This will be confirmed during public consultations to take place during project preparation. 
At this stage consultations will take place with villages along the Hiritano Highway to get their 
inputs into project preparation, inform them of the upcoming project and explain social, 
environment and grievance mechanisms in place.  
 
As with the current RMRP, specific HIV/AIDS clauses will be included in works contracts 
consistent with the Bank#s Standard Bidding Document clauses on HIV/AIDS awareness and the 
bank#s Toolkit for HIV/AIDS education in transport projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASNS) 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS) 
Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An updated EMP, based on the ESIMP for the RMRP, will be prepared by the Department of 
Works for Component 1 (Hiritano Highway Project) which will be implemented in Year 1 of the 
project.  The 1st year site for RMRP II has been visited by the Environmental Specialists of the 
Project to verify specific ground conditions.  The EMP will cover typical construction related 
impacts such as noise, dust, safety, etc. as well as impacts related to operation of construction 
camps, borrow pits, quarry sites, etc.  For the follow up projects (after Year 1), stand alone site 
specific EMPs will be prepared based on the Environmental Management Framework to cover 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the likely impacts and the mitigation measures.  
 
Social and Environmental Consultations and public disclosure of the EMP/Social Report 
will be carried out as part of the preparation of those documents.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous Peoples will be the overwhelming majority of direct project beneficiaries. 
However, a separate IPP is not required because the majority of project beneficiaries are 
considered IP and the complexity of the proposed project is low and the potential negative 
impacts expected to be minimal (as per OP 4.10 paragraph 7). The elements of an IPP, including 
mechanisms to ensure free prior and informed consultations, are included in the project design 
(and they have been included in the original RMRP). The PAD will explain how the project 
complies with the policy. The borrower will assess broad community support on the basis of the 
social impact assessments that have been, and will continue to be, carried out and the 
consultations with groups targeted by the project. A new Social Assessment will not be needed 
as ongoing Social Impact Assessments have been, and are being, carried out in the project area 
by the RMRP project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Because the proposed works are focusing on upgrading and rehabilitation of the existing 
roads within the formation width and right-of-way, land acquisition and/or resettlement issues 
are expected to be minor, if any. The current RMRP project has a suitable Land Acquisition 
Framework that has been in place since 2002 but has never had to be used. This LARF will be 
updated to include additional information, including proejct details and any changes to the 
relevant legislation, and will be the basis for any land acquisition issues that could arise during 
RMRP II implementation. The updated LARF will be disseminated along with the updated EMP 
in public consultations along the Hiritano Highway. Documents will be translated into Tok 
Piksin and available in English. In year 2 and 3, when project locations are known, similar 
consultations will take place and the documents will be made available at these locations. It is 
worth noting that communities in all seven provinces are already broadly aware of the RMRP 
project as social assessments have been ongoing in these areas.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/14/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Draft Environmental Management Plan and Environmental and Social Assessment 
Frameworks will be submitted to the Bank by January 10 2011 and final versions are 
expected to be ready by mid February 2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Demetrios Papathanasiou 
11/26/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/20/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
12/08/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
