Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/02/2011 
Report No.:  60090
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Papua New Guinea 
Project ID:  P119471 
Project Name:  PNG Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Project II 
Task Team Leader:  Demetrios Papathanasiou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASNS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (80%);Rural services and infrastructure 
(20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
37.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are to: (i) improve road transport to project areas 
through providing satisfactory physical condition and safety in selected roads; and (ii) 
strengthen institutional arrangements for road maintenance including the participation of 
the private sector and communities.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 - (US $40 million): Rehabilitation, Upgrade and/or Maintenance of Roads 
and Bridges.  
 
This component will cover the physical implementation of works on sections of roads 
and bridges selected for rehabilitation, upgrading and/or maintenance under the project. 
There are two sub-components: the first comprises a number of sub-projects on the 
Hiritano Highway in Central and Gulf provinces that are already identified as priority 
projects. The second sub-component consists of funding for sub-projects that will be 
identified and selected through annual prioritization and planning, commencing after the 
first year of project implementation.  
Page  2
The following activities will be carried out under Component 1:  
 
i) Rehabilitation & Upgrade to Seal of a section of the Hiritano Highway between 
Inawabui and Bereina - US$6.7 million; and upgrade to Seal of the Hiritano Highway 
between Kepamai and Kerema, including initial Routine Maintenance of the Hiritano 
Highway between Kepamai and Kerema - US$13.6 million. (Subtotal US$20.3 million). 
The Hiritano Highway, connecting the country's capital Port Moresby and the capital of 
the Gulf region Kerema, is considered a high priority national road as it falls within an 
economic corridor identified by the GoPNG to support the medium and long term 
economic development plans of the Central and Gulf provinces. During the last few 
years, a number of investments have rehabilitated various sections of this highway and-
with support from RMRP-it is expected that by November 2011 the previously 
impassable section of the highway in the Gulf province will be re-opened. 
Notwithstanding these improvements, a number of sections totalling approximately 80km  
remain unsealed, posing challenges for traffic flow and road maintenance. This sub-
component will complete the sealing of the Hiritano Highway from Port Moresby to 
Kerema.  
 
ii) Rehabilitation, Upgrade, and/or Maintenance of Selected National and National 
District Roads and Bridges - US$19.7 million. This sub-component will involve the 
rehabilitation, upgrade and/or maintenance of selected road sections and bridges from 
within ten The original eight RMRP provinces - East and West New Britain, Central, 
Gulf, Oro, Morobe, Manus, Western - with the possible addition of Medang and Milne 
Bay coastal or island provinces. Priorities for investments in specific roads will be 
outlined in the country's National Transport Plan, while detailed planning is carried out 
by the Department of Works (DoW) Asset Management Branch, the government agency 
responsible for operating the Roads and Bridge Asset Management Systems (RAMS & 
BAMS) databases, economic analysis, planning and prioritization tools.  
 
Component 2 - (US$7 million): Technical Assistance for Project Management, Design 
and Supervision Services, and Capacity Building.  
 
Following the experience of RMRP the project will include a component for technical 
assistance to support project implementation and to strengthen the country's capacity to 
manage and maintain effectively its road network.  
 
The following activities will be carried out under Component 2:  
 
i) Project Management, including detailed design and supervision services - US$5 
million.  To support effective project implementation and mitigate risks related to 
institutional capacity for project management, a consultancy will be employed to act as 
the Employers' Project Manager (EPM) and support: (a) overall coordination of project 
activities and project management; (b) financial management; (c) bid documentation and 
contract procurement; and (d) detailed design and supervision of road and bridge works.  
 
ii) Capacity Building and Technical Assistance for Road Sector Support - US$1 million. 
This sub-component will aim to strengthen the capacity to manage and maintain the road 
sector, following on from the work undertaken during the current RMRP. It will include 
Page  3
consulting services and training for: (a) strengthening of small and medium-sized 
contractors for road rehabilitation, upgrade and/or maintenance operations, (b) 
institutional strengthening of the National Roads Authority (NRA) for ensuring effective 
road maintenance is undertaken, and (c) carrying out monitoring and evaluation activities 
to improve the information database on road usage.  
 
iii) Incremental Operating Costs - US$1 million. This sub-component will fund 
incremental operational costs incurred by DoW for the implementation of the project and 
may include (a) maintenance and operation of equipment and vehicles procured or used 
for the management of the project; (b) salaries paid to staff hired for the purposes of the 
project; (c) travel costs and per diems; (d) consumable office supplies; (e) 
communication, printing and publications; (f) bank charges; and (g) other miscellaneous 
costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project location will be the original eight RMRP provinces - East and West New 
Britain, Central, Gulf, Oro, Morobe, Manus, Western - with the possible addition of 
Medang and Milne Bay.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASNS) 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS) 
Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The positive impact of improved roads on the community is comprehensive and 
multidimensional in scope. The improvement in commerce and the movement of goods 
and people is immediately evident. In general, the present baseline condition of the roads 
in the selected provinces of RMRP II, reveal a dire need for rehabilitation and repair. For 
example, some parts of the Hiritano Highway in the Central province, are totally 
Page  4
impassable. Poor road conditions lead to constrained and impeded economic growth and 
transportation. Better roads will influence the local economy, and improve the health and 
education of the community in the direct area of influence of these road projects.  
 
The negative environmental impacts of the project can be categorized in two general 
areas, construction related impacts and impacts from the operation of the highway. 
Construction related impacts are predictable, limited in scope and easily mitigated. These 
impacts are in the areas of earthworks, pavement works, drainage works, bitumen works, 
erosion protection and campsite management. The common impacts would be increased 
noise and dust, sedimentation of water bodies in the immediate area of works, air 
emissions from bitumen heating, spillages of bitumen, earth movement in borrow pits, 
vegetation buried under sidecast material and generation of solid waste and domestic 
waste from campsites.  
 
Since all works will focus on upgrading and rehabilitating existing roads within the 
formation width and right-of-way, land acquisition and/or resettlement issues are 
expected to be minor, if any. However these impacts should not be discarded and there is 
also the potential that trees or crops could be damaged during construction. For this 
reason a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) has been prepared and 
will be the basis for any land acquisition issues that could arise during RMRP II 
implementation. Consultations took place in January 2011 to disclose the LARF and 
EMP along the Hiritano Highway. The LARF and a summary of the EMP have been 
translated into the local language, Tok Piksin. These documents will be translated into 
other languages, as necessary, once subprojects have been identified.  
 
Indigenous Peoples will be the overwhelming majority of direct project beneficiaries. 
However, a separate IPP is not required because the majority of project beneficiaries are 
considered IP and the complexity of the proposed project is low and the potential 
negative impacts expected to be minimal (as per OP 4.10 paragraph 7). The elements of 
an IPP, including mechanisms to ensure free prior and informed consultations , are 
included in the project design (and they have been included in the original RMRP). 
Through ongoing consultations as part of the current RMRP project (including baseline 
social analysis along the Hiritano Highway) and the consultations that took place in 
January 2011, broad community support for the project has been established for the 
upgrading works along Hiritano. Similar activities will need to take place to assess broad 
community support in other areas, once subprojects have been identified.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The long term impacts of improved and rehabilitated roads in the project sites are 
generally positive.  Transportation and movement of people will be improved and made 
safer.  Without the roads, the local community travel by foot or by boat and are 
vulnerable to inherent dangers from these modes of travel.  Better access to basic social 
services such as schools and hospitals is expected to better the lives of the local 
community.  During the operation phase of these rehabilitated roads, the potential 
negative impacts are related to the increased speed of vehicles.  This can impact 
Page  5
communities who walk on the roadside specifically in communities where school 
children use the roads to get to and from their schools.  This can be managed by having 
effective road safety awareness sessions with communities and implementing needed 
safety measures (such as speed bumps and speed limits) in the project. There may be an 
increase in roadkill of fauna due to higher traffic, but the impact of this on the total 
population of wildlife will not be significant.  
 
It will be essential to have ongoing consultations with communities as the project is 
identified, prepared and implemented. This will aid in decreasing the potential for 
conflict or misunderstanding with communities regarding project implementation or the 
payment of compensation (when relevant).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The DoW has established an Environmental Management Unit to manage and oversee 
environmental concerns of the department.  This unit is responsible for the 
implementation and monitoring of safeguards in the RMRP II. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been drafted to guide the project in the 
required environmental safeguards measures.  This ESMF has a screening instrument 
which will be used to assess each proposed road project for any safeguards issues.  An 
EMP has been drafted for the first year project (Hiritano Highway). An EMP will be 
drafted for each of the future road projects in RMRP II. A Land Acquisition and 
Resettlement Framework (LARF) has been prepared, and it will form the basis for any 
land acquisition or livelihood impacts experienced as a result of the project. The LARF 
has been translated into the local language, Tok Piksin (and will be translated into 
additional languages depending on the needs of subprojects). When land acquisition, 
resettlement or livelihood impacts are experienced, Abbreviated Resettlement Plans 
(ARPs) will be prepared based on the LARF and will be translated into local language.  
 
The Environmental Management Unit of the DoW has done an assessment of the 
original RMRP project where it identified areas for improvement in the implementation 
of environmental safeguards. It specifically cited the lack of capacity in the DoW and the 
Contractors in the area of Environmental Management. The Environmental Unit of the 
DoW was established as a required by the original RMRP. This unit has been 
understaffed and remained essentially unfunded making it difficult to supervise and 
monitor the implementation of safeguards in the road projects. A series of training 
seminars on safeguards was carried out under RMRP.  These training seminars, in 
combination with the actual work experience during project implementation, has 
significantly increased the capacity of DoW. As a result of this assessment the DoW is set 
to increase the staffing complement of the Environmental Unit. Training and capacity 
building on safeguards implementation is part of the project under Component 2.  
Specific training on safeguards will be scheduled in the first year of project 
Page  6
implementation. The DoW has produced a comprehensive set of materials for safeguards 
training.  
 
Additional training  will be needed in DoW regarding the implementation and 
monitoring of social safeguards. This training will be in the areas of consultation, 
assessing broad community support, preparation of ARPs, implementation of ARPs and 
monitoring. This will enable DoW to appropriately monitor and advise on the work of 
subproject consultants, who will be responsible for conducting consultations and 
preparing and implementing ARPs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the project are the people in the ten provinces in PNG who will 
benefit from improved road infrastructure. Ongoing consultations have taken place along 
the Hiritano Highway, the known location of project works at this stage. These 
consultations were part of the current RMRP project, but are relevant to RMRP II. In 
addition, consultations took place in January 2011 along six sites in the Hiritano Highway 
to disclose the project, the EMP, the LARF and get communities# inputs regarding 
project design. These consultations have ascertained that there is broad community 
support for the project. Consultations will continue throughout project implementation 
with affected people and interested stakeholders. Similar efforts will be undertaken once 
other subprojects have been identified.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/24/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/24/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/24/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/24/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/24/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/24/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project triggers the Indigenous Peoples policy, but preparation of a separate 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework was not required.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  8
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Demetrios Papathanasiou 
02/24/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gerardo F. Parco 
02/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini 
02/16/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
02/25/2011 
Comments:   
