Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/17/2011 
Report No.:  AC5406
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Peru 
Project ID:  P117293 
Project Name:  Optimization of Lima Water and Sewerage Systems 
Task Team Leader:  Miguel Vargas-Ramirez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (50%);Sewerage (50%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (90%);Other public sector governance 
(10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
54.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.40
10.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve efficiency, continuity and 
reliability of water supply and sanitation services in the Northern Service Area of Lima.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. 
In order to improve the efficiency, continuity and quality of the services, 
SEDAPAL will follow a two-tier strategy. The first is to make more water available by 
reducing the physical losses in the system, and the second is to improve the operational 
and commercial management of the water and sanitation system by: (a) reducing 
commercial losses, and (b) optimizing the technical operation of the systems (pressure 
management, sectorization and valve control, automatization for the control systems and 
others). The proposed project will consist of three components, as follows:  
 
2. 
Component 1. Rehabilitation of water and sewerage networks in Northern Service 
Area of Lima (US$61.2 million, of which US$51.3 million will be financed by the Bank 
loan). This component will finance the rehabilitation of the water and sewerage networks 
in Northern Service area of Lima, directly benefiting more than 158,380 low income 
Page  2
people. The exact proportion of replacement and renovation will be determined during 
implementation based on a detailed hydraulic modeling of each subsector and an agreed 
methodology.  
 
3. 
To improve the appropriate management of the rehabilitated network and reduce 
losses the component will also finance: (i) rehabilitation of water reservoirs (concrete 
storage tanks) to increase storage capacity and pressure stabilization; (ii) replacement of 
household connections and installation of new domestic water meters; and (iii) 
installation of bulk water meters and valves to allow sectorization.  
 
4. 
Social interventions will complement these physical investments to maximize the 
Project's expected benefits by taking measures to facilitate the transition to a full 
pressure, continuous and metered service. These will include the provision of guidance to 
manage consumption in particular through the use of in-house water saving equipment.  
 
5. 
Component 2. Improving SEDAPAL's Efficiency (US$2.3 million, of which 
US$1.88 million will be financed by the Bank loan). This component will finance studies 
and consultant services to provide decision-making tools to SEDAPAL's management to 
improve the company's efficiency. The activities will be focused on the following four 
areas:  
 
(a) 
Support for the implementation of the GIS: including an evaluation of the cadastre 
to determine priority zones for updating and the identification of a process for regular 
updating, as well as support to the training and institutional arrangements needed within 
SEDAPAL to maximize the potential of the GIS;  
 
(b) 
SCADA information technology strategy and consolidation: including support to 
SEDAPAL in the preparation of a SCADA Master and Investment Plan to ensure the 
compatibility of current and future SCADA strategies;  
 
(c) 
Preparation of a strategy to efficiently meet user demand for water and sanitation 
services: including an evaluation of the exogenous and endogenous factors that affect 
demand for WSS services, an estimation of future demand trends backed by adequate 
sensitivity analysis, and identification of priority actions to meet such demand as 
efficiently as possible; and  
 
(d) 
Options for the development of a new organizational model: including the 
preparation of a strategic vision for SEDAPAL's management over the medium and long-
term incorporating new technologies, aligning human resources management with 
modern practices, exploring options for sustainable financing of capital investments and 
rearranging institutional structure along functional lines.  
 
Component 3. SEDAPAL Project Management (US$1.4 million, of which US$1.32 
million will be financed by the Bank loan). This component will finance the additional 
staff required for project management to establish a Monitoring and Evaluation System 
and undertake the required financial, physical, and procurement audits. Additionally, it 
will finance individual consultants to strengthen the team on procurement, financial 
management and communication, as well as the training for strategic planning, and 
selection of technical options to allow full compliance with the Investment Plan 2009-
Page  3
2013 and subsequent plans. This component will also support SEDAPAL's efforts to 
document the Project's process and results, and to mainstream lessons learned and good 
practices.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project is located in the northern zone of the Lima Metropolitan Area, in the 
Province of Lima. The area comprises the Northern Service Area of SEDAPAL, which 
comprises 16 districts (Ancón, Bellavista, Callao, Carabayllo, Carmen de la Legua, 
Comas, Independencia, La Perla, La Punta, Los Olivos, Puente Piedra, Rimac, San Juan 
de Lurigancho, San Martín de Porres, Santa Rosa and Ventanilla). It is envisaged that 
physical investments will largely benefit the districts of Los Olivos-San Martin de Porres 
(44,920 inhabitants), Independencia (66,516 inhabitants) and Comas-Los Olivos (10,994 
inhabitants), with a total beneficiary population of 158,380 in an area of approximately 
118 km2  
 
The area is completely urban, with a low population density due mostly to fast and 
unplanned horizontal growth. The geologic landscape is, as the rest of the Lima region, 
described as a maritime desert: rugged soil surrounded by hills comprised mostly of 
pebbles, clay, sandstone and mud, scarce vegetation, high humidity and mild 
temperatures (with the exception of 1997-1998 during El Niño, the highest temperature 
registered over the past 12 years has been 32.9ºC, and the lowest 11.9ºC). Rainfall is 
almost non-existent with the exception of very mild drizzles during the winter.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Elizabeth Dasso (LCSSO) 
Mr Raul Tolmos (LCSEN) 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental impacts of the proposed project are considered to be low since no 
significant and irreversible environmental damage is expected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed Project consists of rehabilitating or replacing existing pipes and associated 
construction works, mostly sewerage and water networks in the Northern Service Area in 
Lima. Minor environmental impacts, mostly nuisances (e.g., disposal of construction 
waste and replaced pipeline waste, disposal of liquid waste from machinery camps, 
odors, dust and noise, traffic and households restrictions, etc.) will be addressed by 
appropriate guidelines and measures that will be incorporated into the technical 
specifications of construction/rehabilitation contracts and have been identified as part of 
the Environmental Impact Assessment study that has been carried out by a single 
consulting firm for the whole Project in the Northern Service Area.  
 
SEDAPAL has prepared a social assessment for the Northern Service Area, which 
provided information on the characteristics of the population, map of stakeholders, social 
and economic issues of the beneficiaries and consultation with female leaders.  The report 
includes a directory of civil society organizations, NGOs and community based groups, 
for project implementation.  
 
The social assessment evidenced opportunities and risks in the Project. It identified as 
potential risks, the occurrence of conflicts for the installation of meters of water 
consumption, for the excessive duration of the works, and/or for the increasing of the 
costs of the works beyond the expected range.  
 
The process of Participation and Public consultation is a mechanism of management and 
governance, which needs resources for its appropriate implementation. It identifies 4 
elements for the success of the project: (i) commitment of the local actors for preventive 
group actions to avoid unwanted outcomes, (ii) state investment (Sedapal, Municipalities) 
to strengthen the mechanisms of social participation and water management; (iii) system 
of management by results; and (iv) transparency of results and regularity in the public 
accountability.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are two alternatives under consideration to avoid or minimize potential adverse 
impacts: (i) rehabilitation instead of replacement of pipes for both water and sewerage is 
being considered; and (ii) when replacement is necessary, the use of trenchless 
technologies to reduce and eliminate nuisances (e.g., disposal of construction waste and 
replaced pipelines waste, disposal of liquid waste from machinery camps, odors, dust and 
noise, traffic and households restrictions, etc.).  
Page  5
The fact that most of the large diameter network is made of asbestos-cement pipes 
points to an advantage of rehabilitation rather than replacement, because the disposal of 
old asbestos-cement pipes is a difficult environmental problem due to the toxic nature of 
such waste material. Even if asbestos-cement pipes are replaced, it would be advisable to 
leave the old pipes in their place and install new pipes in parallel. Several trenchless 
rehabilitation methods are in common use to date, however, choosing between an open 
cut or trenchless rehabilitation should also consider local labor and environmental 
conditions. An analysis to assess the optimal trade-off between potential labor savings 
and environmental considerations would be carried out during the field tests, and it would 
be greatly dependent on specific site conditions and pipe diameter and material. As to the 
sewerage collectors, it is advisable to use rehabilitation methods rather than replacement 
of pipes, however, information to make a final decision would only be available once the 
final designs are available.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental  
 
A
full review of the Borrower's capacity indicates extensive prior experience with 
environmental assessment and safeguard measures based on similar projects with the 
World Bank and other donors such as CAF, IADB, KfW and JICA. SEDAPAL has an 
11-person Environmental Management team (Equipo de Gestion Ambiental-EGAm) in 
charge of environmental aspects of water and sanitation projects. At EGAm 5 people are 
specialists in environmental impact assessments. SEDAPAL has also experience with the 
national licensing procedures as well as the EIAs review process.Currently SEDAPAL 
has internal procedures and standardized processes for environmental management in 
compliance with the Ministry of Housing, Construction and Sanitation's environmental 
management regulatory framework.  
 
SEDAPAL hired the consulting firm Nippon Koei to carry out the Project's 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). The World Bank reviewed the EIA and made 
comments and suggestions that determined the preparation of an Addendum to the 
original EIA report. The Bank is satisfied with the quality of the EIA. The detailed EIA  
includes: (i) potential positive and negative impacts including direct, indirect, and 
cumulative impacts as well as aspects related to overall water use and supply (surface and 
groundwater), and linkages to the wastewater collection system and any potential impact; 
(ii) baseline environmental and social aspects of the project area, (iii) review of the legal 
and institutional framework, especially as pertains to the requirements under the EIA 
requirements and licensing; (iv) assessment of institutional capacity regarding aspects 
needed for the Project's Environmental Management Plan (EMP) implementation and for 
overall strengthening of the institutional environmental procedures with potential for 
mainstreaming; and (v) an EMP was prepared for those works and activities that are 
under design. Specific programs were also designed to identify measures for solid and 
liquid waste disposal, conservation and restoration of vegetation, pollution prevention of 
aquifers and water systems, etc. The EMP  includes the aspects covered in the Bank's 
OP4.01 Annex C, including criteria for identifying sensitive areas, staffing and 
Page  6
institutional responsibilities regarding implementation of measures identified in 
environmental management programs as well as capacity-building needs and 
strengthening, and best-management practices for construction to minimize impacts 
associated with rehabilitation and replacement works.  
 
In terms of Physical Cultural Resources, Peru has a well-developed legislative and 
normative framework for management of physical cultural property, which is under the 
oversight of the National Institute of Culture. In accordance to local legislation and Bank 
requirements, the EIA report commissioned by SEDAPAL includes procedures for 
screening any known cultural property in the Project area and incorporate 'chance find' 
procedures in the event that culturally significant resources are discovered during 
implementation. Procedures for the identification and protection of physical cultural 
resources have been also included in the EMP.   
 
The EIA and the Addendum including the Bank's recommendations has been disclosed 
through consultations in the Project's area in October, 2010, is available in SEDAPAL's 
website (www.sedapal.com.pe), and is also in the Bank's InfoShop since December 21, 
2010.  
 
Social  
 
The outcomes and findings of the social assessment will be disseminated via 
SEDAPAL's website including a video of the consultation.  Among the relevant 
opportunities identified in the social assessment is that there is the potential for 
improvement of the capacities of the water management of the population at the 
household level, participation in the decisions, monitoring of works and surveillance of 
the system for its sustainability, and access to temporary employment in the works 
(estimate a hiring capability of 2600 people).  
 
The process of Participation and Public consultation is a mechanism of management and 
governance, which needs resources for its appropriate implementation. The participation 
and public consultation identifies 4 elements for the success of the project: (i) 
commitment of the local actors for preventive group actions to avoid undesirable 
outcomes, (ii) state social investment (SEDAPAL, Municipalities) to strengthen the 
mechanisms of social participation and water management at the household level; (iii) 
system of management by results; and (iv) transparency of results and regularity in the 
public accountability.  
 
The data of this Social Assessment served as baseline to measure the results of the 
Project in the aspects of social participation and consultation of the population. In the 
process of information developed with the housing organizations, it proposed the creation 
of a neighborhood watch group, who would contribute to the system of monitoring and 
feedback. The monitoring and feedback mechanisms are to be defined more specifically 
in the Project Operational Manual.  
 
In summary, the Social Assessments and the consultation resulted in valuable input for 
project design on each of the thematic areas: Information and consultation, Execution of 
Works, Training and Surveillance. For Information and Consultation, the need for the 
following actions were highlighted: (a) campaigns of diffusion of the Project in the 12 
Page  7
(18) Sectors of Distribution of Potable Water, (b) coordination instances between the 
housing organizations, municipalities and SEDAPAL for the prevention and/or resolution 
of conflicts and (c)  meetings and signing of agreements. In terms of Execution of Works, 
it was prioritized the following:  (a) inclusion in the bidding terms of reference of works 
the hiring of local unskilled labor, (b) pedestrian and vehicular vials must remain the 
same or in better conditions than before the project; (c) that the Environmental Mitigation 
Plan - PMA includes measurements that must be accomplished by the contractor's work. 
In terms of Training, it was seen as the most relevant the education to the population in 
the care, maintenance and control of the water and sewerage. For Surveillance, the 
Assessmente pointed out the need for organizing a system of reception and resolution of 
complaints, assuring the quality and precision in the purchase of meters of water 
consumption. These suggestions are to be incorporated in the Terms of Reference of the 
Social Intervention for Works for component 1, and PROMESAL, the executing unit,  
will receive training on their monitoring and implementation  
 
In addition, SEDAPAL manages a grievance mechanism called AGUAFONO, which is 
considered best practice in the public sector and is well-known by the population. This 
mechanism is another channel where the company can receive feedback from civil 
society. During Project preparation the team discussed the integration of the data system 
acquired by AGUAFONO and the technical department, with regards to pipe breakages 
and network issues, in order to have a comprehensive picture on the performance of its 
networks.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The social assessment was developed in September 2010. The report includes the 
identification of stakeholders by districts, role and functions, a map of actors, and by 
potential risks.  
 
A
public consultation on social and environmental issues was held in October 2010 with 
sector stakeholders and civil society to discuss the findings of social assessments, and 
present the EA report and mitigation measures contained in the EMP. Following there is 
a
list of the most prominent social organizations in the area:  
 
In Comas: Local Government Municipality of Comas, Asoc. Viv
.
II Sector, Comité de 
Obra y Saneamiento Físico Legal, Zona VIII, Año Nuevo Committee, JP Huaquillay II 
Etapa, AH Torres Bajo, AH Año Nuevo, Urb. Santa Luzmila IV Etapa II Sector, Urb El 
Retablo Parque Girasoles Sector VI, Urb, Santa Isolina Zona XI, Urb. El Álamo, and 
Coordinadora distrital de Clubes de Madres  
 
In Independencia: Local Government Municipality of Independencia, Comité de 
Gestión de Obras Generales de Agua y Alcantarillado del Esquema Tupac Amaru y 
Tahuantinsuyo, Unión de Pueblos de Independencia, AH José Gálvez, CP Calavera AH 
Calavera, Central Comedores San Pedro y San Pablo, Central distrital de Comedores 
Populares Autogestionarios de Independencia, CP Nueva Generación, CP José Carlos 
Mariátegui, CP Tahuantinsuyo, CP Virgen del Carmen, CP AH Bellavista, CP AH 1 de 
Page  8
Mayo, CP AH Villa Chilcas, CP Carmen Bajo, CP Valle Young, CP Valle Hermoso de 
Los Incas, CP Hermanos Ayar. AH Hermanos Ayar, CP AH Sol Naciente. Túpac Amaru, 
CP María Auxiliadora, CM Santo Tomás, CVL Las Américas II Etapa. Tahuantinsuyo, 
CVL AH Carmen Alto, CVL AH Sarita Colonia, CVL AH 25 de diciembre, OSB 
Micaela Bastidas, Mini Cuna Ardillitas. Túpac Amaru, and CP Victor Raul Haya de la 
Torre.  
 
In Los Olivos: Municipalidad distrital de Los Olivos, Comité de Parques Nº 3 Urb Pro 
Lima, and Comité de Vigilancia Urb. Pro Lima  
 
In San Martin de Porres: Municipalidad distrital San Martín de Porres, Asoc. Policial y 
Civil Santa Rosa de Lima, Comité de Obras de San Diego, Comité de Gestión de San 
Diego, AV Virgen del Carmen, and AVIPOL.  
 
In the Northern Area of Lima: FEMOCCPAAL, NGO  Alternativa, NGO Proceso 
Social, NGO Aurora Vivar, NGO Edaprospo, NGO Mujer y Sociedad, and NGO 
COPEME.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/09/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  9
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Miguel Vargas-Ramirez 
02/16/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Raul Tolmos 
02/16/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Elizabeth Dasso 
02/16/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Kimberly Vilar 
02/17/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Carlos E. Velez 
02/16/2011 
Comments:   
