Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/13/2011 
Report No.:  AC6009
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Peru 
Project ID:  P117864 
Project Name:  Second Rural Electrification Project 
Task Team Leader:  Susan V. Bogach 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 7, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (80%);Renewable energy (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
50.00
50.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project is to increase access to electricity in rural areas 
of Peru on an efficient and sustainable basis. It builds upon the experience of the Peru 
Rural Electrification Project (#First RE Project#) now under implementation with 
financing from IBRD and GEF.   
 
3. Project Description 
Lending Instrument. The second Project is proposed as a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) 
in the amount of a US$50 from IBRD.  
 
Components. The second Project is structured around the following two major 
components: (a) investment in rural electrification sub-projects by electric distribution 
companies to provide new electricity connections using both conventional grid electricity 
or individual renewable (mainly solar photovoltaic) systems that would serve dispersed 
or remote populations; and (b) technical assistance to build capacity for rural 
electrification, as well as promote productive uses of electricity and renewable energy.  It 
would also include financing for project management.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Rural Electrification Sub-projects (Total US$58.000 million, IBRD 
US$48.375 million).  Continuation of investment in establishment of infrastructure to 
provide electricity services to about 41,500 households, health centers, schools and 
community centers throughout Peru (benefiting about 185,000 people), using grid 
extension or individual renewable energy systems (mainly PV). As in the First RE 
Project, subprojects would be proposed by electricity service providers during the life of 
the Project, therefore the locations of the subprojects are not known in advance.  The 
same financing mechanisms would be used as in the First Rural Electrification Project.  
Subsidies would be provided to partially finance the capital costs of electricity access 
projects to be proposed and implemented by electricity service providers (distribution 
companies).  The company would need to finance part of the investment.  The subsidy 
provided would vary, and would be calculated for each grid extension subproject as the 
amount required to yield the permitted return on the company#s investment, at the current 
tariff.  Sub-projects to be financed would include electricity provision through grid 
extension and through individual household renewable energy systems, mainly solar 
photovoltaic systems. The division among technologies would depend on the proposals 
from the distribution companies.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance for Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy 
(Total US$2.1 million, IBRD US$1.5 million) would focus on TA for rural electrification 
and renewable energy promotion, that would complement and/or continue activities 
under the first RE Project, including activities such as: investigation of the adequacy and 
sustainability of rural tariffs given the rapid increase in rural customers; development of 
appropriate policies, regulations and incentives; support for the development of the 
capacity to develop, promote and manage rural electrification and renewable energy; 
promotion of productive uses of electricity; cost-sharing preparation of proposals and 
feasibility studies for renewable energy investment projects; and carrying out studies 
such as resource assessments.  
 
Project Management (Total US$4.8 million, IBRD$0 million) This activity would 
support the overall management of the proposed Project and would be financed by 
counterpart funds. It comprises three activities:  
 
a. 
Project management and administration (procurement and financial management);  
 
b.
Technical unit to evaluate investment sub-projects; and  
 
c. 
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) including safeguards.  
 
Implementation Arrangements. The Second Project will be developed and implemented 
by the same Project Unit (PU) within the Directorate General of Rural Electrification 
(DGER) of the Ministry of Mines and Energy (MEM) that is currently implementing the 
First RE Project.  Project implementation is expected to take four years.  
 
Summary of World Bank Financing for the Project:  
 
Table 1: Estimated Project Cost and Financing:  
 
-
Source: (US$ million)  
 
-
Borrower/Recipient: 6.925  
Page  3
-
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development: 50.000  
 
-
Others(Enterprises): 19.720  
 
-
TOTAL: 76.645  
 
REMARKS:  For more detailed information, please refer to "Table 1: Estimated Project 
Cost and Financing by Component" included in the signed version of this ISDS, which 
was submitted to InfoShop on January 11, 2011 for disclosure.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As in the first RE Project, the project geographical scope is national and the 
characteristics of the investments are similar to those of the First RE Project which has 
been in operation for more than four years.  Because the project is demand driven, the 
locations where it will be implemented will not be known before implementation begins.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Gabriela Arcos (LCSEN) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The second Project would implement a continuation of two components of the First RE 
Project, which was categorized as B with respect to safeguards. The safeguards rating of 
the Second Project is set at the Appraisal stage as B.  Environmental impacts of the 
Second Project are expected to be minimal given the type of interventions planned and 
the experience of the first Project. Also, there will be a reduction of emissions from the 
use of solar home systems within the Project.  
 
In the case that pre-feasibility or feasibility studies of future renewable energy projects 
would be included as a Project activity, these studies are being done as technical studies 
with no expectation that the World Bank Group would finance the facilities.  On this 
Page  4
basis, the Project team would ensure that the terms of reference for the feasibility work 
would include social and environmental aspects consistent with the World Bank 
safeguard policies, including consultations, studies and assessments.  To the extent that 
the studies will make recommendations or conclusions about potential projects, the 
recommendations will also include terms of reference for more detailed safeguard 
studies, where necessary.  
 
As in the case of the First RE Project, the second Project will have a net positive social 
impact, particularly for the rural poor, by making modern and efficient energy services 
available at a reasonable cost and in a sustainable manner to end-users. As stated in the 
main text, it is expected that increased access to electricity would: (i) significantly 
improve the quality of lighting and working conditions in the home, as well as disposable 
income of rural households, since cost of electricity would be less than alternatives 
(kerosene, candles, car batteries and dry cell batteries); (ii) provide increased 
opportunities for households to engage in income generating activities; (iii) allow 
household members to have more flexible working hours and work longer in the 
evenings; (iv) improve the access of the household to news, information and 
entertainment; (v) allow children to study and adults to read in the evening; (vi) enhance 
public safety through street lighting; and (vii) reduce indoor air pollution from use of 
candles and kerosene, which is reported to contribute substantially to respiratory diseases.  
 
All impacts both environmental and social are expected to be low given the small scale 
of the works, low sensitivity of the sites, and the nature of the investments.  The EA is 
expected to confirm low environmental and social impacts for the project investments. 
The sub-projects are subject to local government approval, licensing requirements of the 
Secretary of Environment.  Frameworks have been prepared for Environmental 
Management, Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples Policies.  Environmental 
and social management plans will be prepared under these Frameworks for each 
subproject to ensure that they comply with Bank and national safeguards standards.  
 
Component 1: Rural Electrification Sub-projects  
 
Sub-projects to be financed under this component would include the provision of access 
to electricity through extension of electricity distribution lines and through individual 
renewable household systems, e.g. solar or wind systems. No subprojects would involve 
construction of hydropower facilities. The division among technologies would depend on 
the proposals from the distribution companies.  All subprojects would conform to Bank 
and national standards for environmental and social considerations.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance for Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy  
 
This component would focus on technical assistance and capacity building and would 
not finance any construction.  As a result, positive social benefits are expected due to a 
better functioning enabling environment and no negative environmental effects are 
expected.  In the case that feasibility studies are carried out, TORs for the studies would 
include assessment of safeguard aspects consistent with the Safeguards requirements of 
the World Bank as well as national requirements.  Project management consists of 
Page  5
management and monitoring and evaluation efforts.  These activities will enhance the 
social and environmental benefits of the Project by ensuring that goals are met.  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01):  
 
Project interventions could trigger the environmental assessments safeguard policy (OP 
4.01), depending on the type of interventions proposed in the specific subprojects 
designs. The First Project developed an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) 
containing provisions to ensure that potential impacts, including induced and cumulative 
impacts, are assessed and mitigated in accordance with the Bank#s safeguard policies and 
the Peruvian legal framework.  Since the second Project will be supporting the same type 
of investments, the EMF has been assessed by the Bank and found it in accordance with 
the current safeguard policies of the Borrower and the Bank, therefore acceptable to be 
implemented under the proposed Project. The EMF includes environmental screening 
criteria, guidelines for the preparation of EAs and management plan, and guidelines for 
the supervision of the mitigation measures recommended under the management plans.  
The procedures established in the EMF will be applied to each type of project. The EMF 
will be disclosed on MEM#s website and the Bank#s InfoShop before appraisal.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04):  
 
As in the First Project, the second Project will extend the existing distribution lines 
relatively short distances, usually along roads or right of ways, to serve nearby population 
concentrations.  It unlikely that the Project would construct facilities in remote areas that 
have little human influence, however the potential impacts on Natural Habitats will be 
carefully assessed under the environmental screening framework and mitigation actions 
will be developed in the project#s management plans if needed. The EA Guidelines 
include procedures to evaluate these impacts and to develop adequate mitigation 
measures. One of the sub-projects eligibility criteria indicates that these should be located 
outside of reserve, protected or natural forest areas.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11):  
 
This policy is triggered and adequate standards, provisions and procedures have been 
incorporated into the environmental management framework. Given the country#s rich 
cultural background and the potential for the works to require movement of earth or 
excavations, provisions for chance-finds procedures have been included the Guidelines 
for developing EAs and EMPs, as well as for screening against projects that could 
potentially impact other physical cultural resources.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12):  
 
As in the First RE Project, the second Project could trigger two social safeguard policies 
(OP 4.10 and OP 4.12), depending on site characteristics and specific subprojects 
designs. In order to comply with these policies and to avoid unnecessary adverse impacts 
as well as to ensure that the most poor and vulnerable people benefit from project 
implementation, the Indigenous Peoples Development Framework and the Resettlement 
Policy Framework of the First Project have been revised and updated for the second 
Project to incorporate feedback from stakeholders and ensure consistency with current 
policies of the Borrower and the Bank and to incorporate lessons learned.  
Page  6
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37):  
 
The Project will not finance any investments that are associated with construction of 
hydropower facilities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term negative environmental and social impacts will ensue because of project 
activities while positive effects will be accrued from the support and strengthening of the 
government#s environmental and social technical capacities and improving access to the 
impoverished.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This is a project that continues the activities of the First RE Project and builds on the 
lessons learned, so no alternatives were considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Bank safeguards specialists have assessed the capacity of the First RE Project#s 
safeguard specialists as satisfactory and are working with the team to strengthen its 
capacity further.  Resources will be provided to ensure that the institutional capacity for 
Safeguard policies of the implementing agencies (Ministry of Energy and Mines) is 
maintained to meet national and Bank requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public Consultation and Disclosure in Designing the EIA, RP, IPP, and ESMF - including 
RPF and IPPF:  Since the second Project will continue implementation of activities under 
the First RE Project, using updated versions of the Environmental Management, 
Indigenous Peoples Development and Resettlement Policy Frameworks of the First 
Project, the Frameworks and Guidelines have been informed by feedback from key 
stakeholders such as government institutions, NGOs and consumers. Consultations were 
held on the Indigenous Peoples Development Framework in November 2010 with people 
fr
om
two Asháninka communities and two Quechua communities. All Frameworks will 
be disclosed on the website of MEM and in the Bank's InfoShop before appraisal.  
 
Consultation and Disclosure during Project Implementation: The EIA, RP, RPF and 
ESMF disclosure and consultation will be finalized following procedures which are 
consistent with the national regulations and the Operational Policies of the Bank.  
 
Given the number of current social conflicts between concessions and indigenous 
communities in Peru, the second RE Project will: (i) continue with measures to avoid 
social unrest and conflicts, through a consultation and participation strategy, especially 
with rural indigenous peoples and campesino communities; (ii) provide capacity building 
for monitoring the compliance with the Bank#s Operational policies at subproject level; 
Page  7
(iii) support a communication strategy to allow ongoing information flows during 
implementation; and (iv) ensure systematic documentation of any complaints together 
with the response.  
 
It should be noted that the Project is bringing a highly valued and desired service to 
rural populations.  Rather than having significant negative social impacts, it is expected 
to bring significant benefits to rural populations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/07/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/07/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/07/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  8
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
N/A 
Is a separate PMP required? 
N/A 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  9
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Susan V. Bogach 
01/11/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Gabriela Arcos 
12/13/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
11/01/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
01/11/2011 
Comments:   
