Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6046 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/25/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Peru 
Project ID: P122194 
Project Name: Higher Education Quality Assurance 
Task Team Leader: Marcelo Becerra 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 30, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: December 8, 2011 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall Project Development Objective would be to strengthen Peru's quality assurance 
system for higher education by increasing the number of accredited programs and institutions 
undertaking self and external institutional evaluations.  
 
Progress towards meeting these development objectives would be measured by a number of 
process, output and impact indicators, which will be further identified during project preparation. 
Impact indicators for the Project are expected to be: (i) percentage of institutions with accredited 
programs; (ii) percentage of HEIs that have completed self-evaluation and external institutional 
evaluation; (iii) the development of a functioning comprehensive higher education information 
system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1. Strengthening the implementation of the quality assurance system (estimated total 
cost: US$10 million; Bank: US$6 million). This component would strengthen the capacity of 
SINEACE and HEI's to handle their responsibilities within the quality assurance system. This 
component would include three subcomponents: (i) the first subcomponent would enhance 
Page  2
SINEACE's management, planning and evaluation capacities. It would support the development 
of standards, norms and procedures for evaluation and accreditation; (ii) the second 
subcomponent would develop self-evaluation and external evaluation capacities within HEIs. It 
would enhance the capacity of HEIs to carry out self-evaluation and to deal with evaluation 
processes. This would include activities such as teams' training at HEIs, creating coaching 
capacity within SINEACE, encouraging inter-institutional collaboration, synergies and technical 
assistance between HEIs through regional workshops, training, etc. It would also focus on the 
training and certification of peers and the promotion of EEFAs; (iii) the third subcomponent 
would support SINEACE in the execution of the Project.  
 
Component 2. Building an effective information system (estimated total cost: US$3 million; 
Bank: US$1.8 million). This component would develop and consolidate a comprehensive higher 
education-labor market information system. This system would be composed of two main parts: 
the first would consist in the establishment of an information system comprising statistical data 
on students, professors, institutions, careers and a Board of Command, including the main 
system output and outcome indicators. The second would support the development of a labor 
market observatory that would gather information on relative performance of graduates for each 
institution and type of careers and training in terms of job search and salary and disseminate it to 
students, parents and civil society. This part of the system would also include the publication of 
information on accreditation decisions. The development of this comprehensive information 
system, which would increase access to systemic information is expected to yield the following 
benefits: (i) enhance SINEACE's management and supervision capacity; (ii) improve decision 
making by HEIs in terms of management and investment, thus increasing the relevance and 
quality of programs offered; and (iii) improve decision making by parents and prospective 
students in terms of career decisions, leading to an improvement in employment opportunities 
and in the external efficiency of the higher education system.  
 
Component 3. Establishing an Incentive Fund to improve Quality and Relevance of Higher 
Education (estimated total cost: US$37 million; Bank: US$22.2 million). This component would 
promote accreditation and external evaluation by supporting the establishment of a Fund for 
Quality Improvement (FEC), designed to improve the quality and relevance of academic 
programs in higher education institutions.  
 
The FEC would create financial incentives to support quality improvement through two main 
windows:  
 
-
Window 1 would finance the process of external evaluation both at program and 
institutional levels. To access this fund, the programs/institutions would first need to complete a 
self-evaluation process. The financial support would be provided through a pre-defined standard 
subsidy, which may vary by program and size of institution.  
 
-
Window 2 would finance strategic improvement plans, both at the institutional level (Part 
A) and at the program level (Part B). Only institutions or programs that have completed an 
external evaluation process would be eligible to access FEC funding under Window 2. Part A 
#Institutional Improvement Plans# would be supported on a first come, first served basis. These 
plans must have established objectives, activities and indicators for medium term improvements, 
Page  3
addressing at the same time the weaknesses identified in self-evaluation and external evaluation. 
Part B would operate as a competitive fund that would select subprojects (based on "Program 
Improvement Plans") prepared and presented by public and private HEIs. Supported subprojects 
would focus on strengthening or reforming existing programs or establishing new programs. 
Special incentives would be established to favor those programs in high demand among 
employers. The eligible activities to be financed under Window 2 are expected to be: (i) 
technical assistance to improve programs, curricula, institutional strengthening, capacity 
building, development of learning materials etc; (ii) scholarships for professors to carry out post-
graduates, PhD. and post-doc studies; (iii) internships; (iv) visiting professors; (v) laboratory and 
learning equipment and (vi) minor upgrading of infrastructure to accommodate equipment.  
 
Specific and detailed criteria and procedures for both windows would be further defined during 
project preparation, including through the preparation of FEC Operational Manual. The goal 
would be to address in a differentiated manner, the needs of the different HEIs and to focus on 
the academic programs in priority areas that would increase the supply of professionals and 
technicians in strategic sectors of the Peruvian economy. In addition, the financing would 
discriminate between public institutions, which would be able to access up to 100 percent of the 
costs of their plans, and private institutions, which would be able to access a maximum of 65 
percent or 35 percent for non-profit and profit institutions respectively.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The implementing agency, SINEACE, is located in Lima. Project activities would be 
implemented throughout Peru's entire territory, since benefited higher education institutions are 
spread in urban areas all around the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency, SINEACE, does not have any experience on safeguards issues since it 
is a new institution, created in 2006 and administratively functioning since 2010.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01): The Project is expected to have a minor 
environmental impact since it will not be supporting any civil works. Therefore, the Project's 
environmental rating is a Category C. However, under subprojects in the framework of 
Component 3 (FEC), some minor upgrading of infrastructure to accommodate laboratory 
equipment may be necessary and supported by the Project. In these cases, appropriate national 
and Bank standards will be applied under all contracts pertaining to this Component and it will 
described in the FEC Operational Manual.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10): The Project's overall approach to strengthening the quality 
assurance system for higher education in Peru involves action at the level of systems, 
institutions, and accreditation and evaluation processes. At the same time, the strategy for 
ensuring that a wide range of social groups, including indigenous peoples and ethnic minorities, 
have a chance to benefit from the improved quality assurance system will need to be more 
formalized. Therefore OP 4.10 is triggered given that indigenous peoples are present in the 
project area (since the coverage of the project is nationwide), and that linguistic, cultural, and 
socio-economic differences have historically acted as barriers of access to higher education 
institutions and programs on the part of the indigenous.  
 
In order to ensure that indigenous interests and concerns are reflected in the programs, 
curricula, and didactic materials that are targeted for improvement under Window 2 of the FEC, 
a
social assessment will be conducted to look at potential benefits, risks, and opportunities for 
participation of indigenous peoples in relation to this process. In addition, the assessment will 
also analyze the concerns of other vulnerable groups such as Afro-Peruvians and women. An 
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) based on the results of this assessment will be prepared and 
disclosed prior to appraisal. The IPP will provide for the continuation of the free, prior, and 
informed consultations with indigenous peoples initiated during the social assessment process, 
and document that broad support on the part of indigenous leaders and representative indigenous 
organizations for the proposed activities exists.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/16/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marcelo Becerra 
02/24/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Francis V. Fragano 
02/24/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Janet K. Entwistle 
02/25/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
