                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information

Date prepared/updated: 03/22/11                                                   Report No.: 60453

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Poland                            Project ID: P117333
Project Name: Green Investment Scheme
Task Team Leader: Ahmad Slaibi
Estimated Appraisal Date: 12/21/10         Estimated Board Date: 05/15/11
Managing Unit: ECSSD                       Lending Instrument: Carbon Finance
Sector: Renewable energy and energy efficiency services (100%)
Theme: Climate change (P)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):           ~20.00
Other financing amounts by source (US$m.):
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                          20.00
        LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY                          00.00

Environmental Category: FI
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X]             Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)         Yes [ ]        No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The main objective of the proposed project is to reduce CO2 emissions and air pollutants
by providing support for investments that would improve energy efficiency in Poland.

C. Project Description
The proposed areas of support primarily include energy saving and energy efficiency
investments in the country's public sector. Subsidies would be provided to owners and
users for the implementation of the thermal modernization (improvement of energy
efficiency) of public buildings, including equipping the buildings with the highest,
economically justified and energy effective systems directly related to the thermal
modernization of buildings. The specific project activities will include: (a) Insulating the
building walls; (b) Replacing the windows; (c) Replacing external doors; (d) Conversion
of the heating system (together with replacement of the heat source); (e) Replacement of
ventilation and air-conditioning systems; (f) Energy management systems in the
buildings; (g) Using renewable energy sources (wind, solar, biomass); (h) Replacement
of internal lighting for energy-efficient one (as additional task performed simultaneously
with the thermal modernization of buildings); and (i) Drawing up technical specifications
for the project.


                                                                                             1
D. Project location

All of the projects to be supported by the GIS will be identified and analyzed during the
implementation stage. The project will be implemented countrywide in Poland based on
demand for proposed activities. As the project relates to public buildings, it will likely be
implemented mainly in urban centers, were public administration and infrastructure (e.g.
schools, hospitals, libraries) is located. No new construction is foreseen under the project
and projects will not be located in protected habitats or culturally/socially sensitive areas.
However, in the event that such issues do arise, in accordance with Polish law and the
project's Environmental Management Framework, these investments will be flagged and
a specific environmental review / assessment process will be triggered.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr. Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                       X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
According to the World Bank's OP/BP/GP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, the PL GIS
is classified as "FI" Category, which applies to all proposed projects that involve
investment of Bank funds through a financial intermediary (FI). As the potential project
activities relate mainly to rehabilitation measures the safeguards category of individual
the subprojects is expected to be C and B only, no category A subprojects will be
included in the project.

Investments in energy saving and energy efficiency investments in the country's public
sector are not expected to cause significant adverse environmental and social impacts as
they will relate exclusively to the upgrading and / or rehabilitation of existing buildings
and structures. The project will have a net positive environmental impact by saving
energy or using renewable sources, thereby conserving fossil fuels, reducing emissions of
greenhouse gases, noxious gases (e.g. SOx, NOx) and particles (soot). By its contributions


                                                                                            2
to reducing CO2 emissions the project will incrementally contribute to climate change
mitigation. Furthermore, the Project is expected to have positive social impacts: The
upgrading of public state buildings will improve quality of life for the population and
would contribute to reduction of air polluting emissions, especially SOx and PM10.

Potential adverse environmental impacts are expected to be mainly temporary (occurring
during the construction period) and minor, and might include: (a) dust and noise
generation due to construction activities; (b) generation and disposal of demolition and
construction wastes, accidental spillage of machine oil, lubricants, etc; (c) installations of
biomass burners might cause pressures on fuel wood or other biomass markets and put
strain on biomass sources (e.g. in extreme cases leading to deforestation). All these
potential environmental impacts were investigated within an environmental management
framework (EMF) and found to carry only minor risks, either due to a small magnitude of
the expected consequences, or due to a very low probability of their occurrence. Overall
they were found to be easily manageable and mitigeable during the project
implementation.

One notable feature about the Poland GIS project is that the preparation of safeguards
instruments and mitigation measures for the project follows a special path: During project
preparation it was recognized that the World Bank's environmental due diligence system
under OP4.01 and the Polish environmental management system (which is harmonized
with the relevant EU directives) are closely aligned. Thus under the PL GIS project the
two systems will be largely treated as compatible and environmental due diligence
instruments will be produced and applied following the Polish system. The produced
EMF analyzes the functionality of the Polish system and explains how environmental due
diligence as required by OP4.01 will be implemented in the project using Polish legal and
regulatory instruments. If there should be significant gaps between the safeguards
instruments required under Polish regulations versus the World Bank's requirements, the
AAU seller has agreed to produce the required documents to comply with the WB's
OP4.01, specifically either simplified or full EMPs.

The EMF describes the specific Polish instruments and mechanism for mainstreaming
environmental due diligence into the expected small scale construction projects (such as
project information charts [PIC], location permits, construction permits and
environmental permits) and the roles and responsibilities for project supervision and
monitoring, both from licensing and regulatory authorities and the NFEP&WM.

As no new construction is planned under the GIS project, and all activities will be carried
out in publicly owned buildings and on publicly owned land, no land acquisition or
involuntary displacement of people or businesses will occur. The EMF specifies that any
project which would require land acquisition or displacement of any person occupying
land or using it for economic purposes will be ineligible for funding under the GIS.




                                                                                            3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The expected long term and cumulative impacts of the activities proposed under the GIS
are mostly positive and include reduction of greenhouse gas and air pollutant emissions.
Any significant or long term impacts on the bio-fuel market or forest development in
Poland were found to be highly unlikely.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues:
Using the existing World Bank Safeguard Policies and Procedures for FI projects, an
Environmental Management Framework was prepared by the Client (the "Seller",
represented by NFEP&WM ­ National Fund of Environmental Protection and Water
Management of Poland). The Environment Management Framework outlines
environmental and social assessment procedures and mitigation requirements for the
subprojects which will be supported by the GIS. It provides details on procedures, criteria
and responsibilities for subproject screening, preparing, implementing and monitoring of
subproject specific EAs. It describes the assessment of potential impacts and generic
mitigation measures to be undertaken for identified subprojects in all stages - from
identification and selection, through the design and implementation phase, to the
monitoring and evaluation of results.

As the GIS would include the support of biomass boilers, the EMF includes key figures
on the Polish bio-fuel market (mainly firewood), which indicate that the small additional
demand potentially created by the project will not put any strain on the market or forest
ecology, and wood will be sourced in an environmentally sustainable manner. Polish
legislation imposes strict requirements that air emissions standards for the proposed
biomass boilers are met.

As described in Section A1 above under the PL GIS project the environmental
management systems of the Republic of Poland and the World Bank will be treated as
compatible and environmental due diligence instruments will be produced and applied
following the Polish system. The functionality of the Polish system was thoroughly
analyzed for all environmental aspects of the project, resulting in the confirmation that
environmental due diligence as required by OP4.01 will be fully implemented in the
project using Polish instruments.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
The key stakeholders are the NFEP&WM ­ National Fund of Environmental Protection
and Water Management of Poland, and the Department of Climate Change and
Atmosphere Protection of the Ministry of Environment. Secondary stakeholders will
include the public entities and authorities who will be participating in the GIS. As all
activities will be carried out based on applications for the funding of specific projects,



                                                                                         4
their informed consent to the measures is ensured. The EMF will be shared with all
applicants as part of the project rules and guidelines. Also, the EMF will be publicly
disclosed both in the Bank's info Shop and on the NFEP&WM's website no less than 30
days prior to signing of the AAU Purchase Agreement, in accordance with World Bank
guidelines1. A notice informing the public that the EMF is available for review and
comment through the website will be placed in major newspapers.

On sub-project level consultations will be carried out according to Polish regulations,
which require the notification of neighbors and other potentially affected parties when
construction works for rehabilitation and upgrading of buildings are carried out.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    12/06/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                03/21/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 01/20/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                     N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
In country disclosure will be done: An advanced draft of the Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) will be disclosed in country and the World Bank's InfoShop 30 days
prior to the targeted date for AAUPA signature; the seller will finalize the EMF prior to
AAUPA signature based on any comments received during the disclosure period..

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)
review and approve the EA report?                                                            Yes
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
credit/loan?                                                                                 Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's
Infoshop?                                                                                    Yes
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected

1
    World Bank: Application of Bank Safeguards Policies to Carbon Finance Transactions, 14 March, 2006.


                                                                                                          5
6
