Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/19/2011 
Report No.:  AC5775
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P122398 
Project Name:  Central African Backbone - APL3 - Republic of Congo 
Task Team Leader:  Jerome Bezzina 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  TWICT 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (40%);Regulation and competition policy (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is consistent with the PDO for the 
CAB Program: To contribute to increase geographical reach and usage of regional 
broadband network services and reduce their prices, in Congo.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will be executed over a five-year period with total financing of US$30 
million, including US$15 million contribution from the government. Annex 2 provides a 
detailed breakdown of financing between IDA and the Government. The main Project 
components will consist of:  
 
Component 1 - Enabling environment at the regional and national levels: This 
component will include the following activities : (i) Technical Assistance to strengthen 
the regulatory framework and capacity of key stakeholders to provide policy and 
regulatory capacity building; (ii) Technical Assistance to promote Open Access Regime 
&
PPP; (iii) Technical Assistance to design a strategic plan for Congo Telecom, and (iv) 
Page  2
Technical Assistance to design and Implementation of Management Policy for ".cg" 
Domain Name.  
 
Component 2 - Connectivity: This component will include the following activities: (i) 
CAB-related environmental and resettlements consultancies, (ii) financing some 
complementary and missing international links developed under the NCP (National 
Coverage Project) (including fiber-optic cables, terminal equipment, switches), 
guaranteeing the establishment of an open access network (open to all operators), 
leveraging private sector investment and ensuring interconnectivity among neighbouring 
countries: Gabon (link Dolisie - Mbinda), Cameroon  (Link Oyo - Ouesso), and DRC 
(Link Brazzaville - Kinshasa); (iii) financing the establishment of Internet Exchange 
Points (IXP) to minimize rerouting of domestic Internet traffic via international routes.  
 
Component 3 - Promotion of ICT sector: This component will build ICT skills and 
create new business opportunities for local ICT firms, consisting of three main activities: 
(i) Technical Assistance for the review, improvement and development of information 
laws, "cyber" legal framework; (ii) Promotion of ICT start-up firms through a business 
incubator approach; and (iii) Financing a study on the creation of IT parks.  
 
Component 4 - Project Management: This component will consist of support to finance 
management-related issues at the Project level, such as human resources support with 
management, procurement, financial management, M&E, internal and external audit, and 
communications expertise, operating expenses and equipment.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will complement the deployment of the national backbone infrastructure to be 
developed by the GoC under the NCP (National Coverage Project).  It will finance 
complementary and missing international links developed under the NCP including fiber-
optic cables, microwave equipments, terminal equipments, switches, to guarantee the 
establishment of an open access network (open to all operators), leveraging private sector 
investment and to ensure the interconnection with neighboring countries: Gabon (link 
Dolisie - Mbinda), Cameroon (link Oyo - Ouesso), and DRC (link Brazzaville - 
Kinshasa).  
 
Dolisie - Mbinda link: this segment is 338 km long and will consist of a 12 pair fiber 
optic cable. The link will be comprised of (i) 2 (two) repeaters and powered by solar 
solutions, (ii) 2 (two) SDH terminal stations located in Dolisie and Mbinda. The 
acquisition and installation cost of the cable is estimated to be US$2.4 million. The SDH 
and terminal stations cost is estimated to US$1.6 million. 
 The cost of the 2 (two) 
repeaters and their respective solar powered stations is estimated around US$1 million.   
 
Oyo - Ouesso link: this segment is 420 km long and will consist of 6 (six) microwave 
links. Each link will comprised 1 (one) repeater powered by solar solutions and 1 (one) 
SDH terminal station. The acquisition and installation cost of the six poles is estimated to 
be US$3 million. The SDH and terminal stations cost is estimated to US$3 million. The 
cost of the 6 (six) repeaters and their respective solar powered stations is estimated 
around US$3 million. The technical and management options identified for this segment 
are based on the successful experiences carried out in Nigeria and Iran. In these two 
Page  3
countries, the Government created an SPV with private operators to ensure infrastructure 
sharing through collocation of poles and hence reduce the number of poles installed. 
However, to ensure a minimum bandwidth of 2 Gb/s, the poles cannot be distant of more 
than 80 km. The component costing includes the installation of 6 poles between Oyo and 
Ouesso.  
 
Brazzaville - Kinshasa link: this segment is 10 km long and will consist of 2 (two) 
microwave links. Each link will comprised 1 (one) repeater powered by solar solutions 
and 1 (one) SDH terminal station. The acquisition and installation cost of the two poles is 
estimated to be US$0.3 million. The SDH and terminal stations cost is estimated to 
US$1.7 million.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
From an environmental and social safeguard standpoint, the Central African Backbone - 
APL3 - Republic of Congo (CAB CITCG) is a Category B project. That is, the 
environmental and social impacts of the project, for the most part, are expected to be 
minimal, site-specific and manageable to an accepted level. There are five Bank 
Safeguard policies triggered under the project. These include: Environmental Assessment 
(OP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Indigenous People Policy (OP 4.10); Physical 
Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and or long term impacts anticipated.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In line with the triggering of the five operational policies cited above and because of the 
lack of site-specific information about the environmental and social characteristics of 
future investments, the Project prepared two safeguards instruments, namely an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Plan 
Framework (RPF, and an Indigenous Protection Plan Framework (IPPF).   The details 
will be provided during the feasibilities studies, at which stage the project will prepare 
detailed environmental and social studies.  
 
The ESMF, RPF and IPPF set out standard methods and procedures, specifying how 
sub-projects, whose locations are unknown at this stage, will systematically address 
environmental and social issues at all stages.  These include: sub-project screening, 
categorization, sitting, design, implementation, operational, and maintenance. At the core 
of this approach are: (i) the systematic screening of all sub-projects; (ii) procedures for 
applying the environmental checklist or for conducting ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs - 
whichever or combination of which is deemed applicable - for all identified sub-projects, 
(iii) institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified 
impacts; (iv) typical environmental management planning process for addressing 
negative externalities in the course of project implementation; (v) a system for 
monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures;  (v) Environmental and social 
environmental clauses to be inserted in the bidding documents; and (vii) recommended 
capacity building measures for environmental planning and monitoring of project 
activities.  Guidelines and provisions for properly discussing and addressing impacts 
related to Natural Habitats and physical cultural resources in sub-project specific 
ESIAs/EMPs have been amply outlined in the ESMF.  
 
Like the ESMF, the RPF also outlines the principles and procedures for resettlement 
and/or compensation of subproject-affected people, and establishes standards for 
identifying, assessing and mitigating negative impacts of program supported activities.  
In addition, the RPF will guide the preparation and implementation of resettlement action 
plans (RAPs) for each individual sub project that triggers the involuntary resettlement 
policy.  Specific ESIAs and RAPs will be prepared for relevant activities before project 
implementation along with Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). To adequately 
address the project impacts on indigenous people, the project is set out to prepare an 
Indigenous People Protection Framework(IPPF).  All three safeguard documents have 
been reviewed and cleared by the Bank before appraisal and relevant provisions of the 
three safeguard documents have been included in the Project Manuel of Procedures.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF and the RPF for this operation have been prepared according to Bank and 
national safeguard policies, following a consultation framework, involving relevant 
stakeholder groups, both public and private, as well as in civil society and local 
Page  5
communities, consistent with the approach adopted at project inception.  This 
participatory approach will also be carried on in the context of the preparation of each 
sub-project specific ESIA/EMP or RAP, as well as throughout implementation, 
maintenance, supervision and evaluation of the project.  Prior to disclosure in-country 
and at Bank InfoShop, stakeholder workshops will be organized, involving relevant 
project stakeholder groups.  This approach is designed to foster ownership and seeking 
input from these stakeholders in order to improve quality and soundness of the 
instruments.  Recommendations from both the Bank and stakeholders' workshop will be 
reflected in the final safeguard reports, prior to disclosure.  The same approach will be 
applied to each sub-project specific ESIA/EMP, RAP, or IPDP.  
 
Key entities involved in the environmental function of the project include: the PCU who 
will be assisted by experts, as needed, to prepare detailed technical studies (i.e., 
feasibility studies, subproject-specific environmental and social safeguard instruments), 
Resident engineers, whose team will include expertise in environmental and social 
monitoring and reporting to ensure contractors implement proposed measures; (iii) the 
national environmental agency (NEA), who will carry out external monitoring the 
implementation of project safeguard  and ensure compliance with national and Bank 
policies. NEA will be assisted by the Directorates of Forestry, Hydraulics, and other 
institutions for technical backstopping in carrying out their mandate.  NEA will also 
review and comments on subprojects specific safeguard instruments and ensure they are 
disclosures at disclosure sites.  A "protocol d'accord" sanctioning this close partnership 
between NEA, assisted by other relevant technical divisions/directorates shall be issued 
and ratified by the project steering committees and Ministry of Environment. The 
attributions, modalities and cost of intervention, reporting schedules of NEA should be 
clearly outline in the protocol.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/22/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/22/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/02/2011 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/07/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  7
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jerome Bezzina 
04/18/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/19/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
04/18/2011 
Comments:   
