Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
RESTRUCTURING STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/18/2011 
Report No.:  AC6102
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Romania 
Project ID:  P100638 
Project Name:  Complementing EU Support for Agricultural Restructuring Project 
(CESAR) 
Task Team Leader:  Holger A. Kray 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: November 27, 2007 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (68%);Central government 
administration (20%);Sub-national government administration (12%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (29%);Rural policies and institutions (29%);Other rural 
development (14%);Rural services and infrastructure (14%);Land administration and 
management (14%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of this Project is to facilitate market-based farm restructuring through 
enhancing the ability of farmers, farm family members, and farm workers to manage their 
assets and income.   
 
3. Project Description 
Under this overarching objective, the Project will assist the Government of Romania 
(GOR) in completing the property title registration of land assets in rural areas to improve 
the security of land property rights and the functioning of rural land markets.  
 
Equally important, the Project will assist the GOR in improving the delivery of guidance 
services that enable the agricultural population to more sustainably manage its income 
and assets and thus contribute to the absorption of available national and EU support 
programs.   
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project is targeting 19 counties across Romania with agricultural production.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Keith W. McLean (ECSS4) 
Mr Cesar Niculescu (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project was originally classified as category B and OP 4.01 was triggered due to 
planned civil works under Component 1. An environmental management plan was 
prepared and disclosed during preparation. The civil works activities are being canceled 
under this restructuring and OP 4.01 is no longer triggered.  
 
OP 4.36 was originally triggered during Project preparation due to intended positive 
impacts of the Project on forests, however these are mostly indirect and therefore it is 
agreed not to trigger OP 4.36.  
 
OP4.12 is still not triggered as there are no civil works, and no land acquisition.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n/a   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
no disclosure as this is reducing the safeguards category.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
N/A 
Page  4
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Holger A. Kray 
02/16/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Cesar Niculescu 
02/16/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Keith W. McLean 
02/15/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
02/17/2011 
Comments:   
