Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/27/2011 
Report No.:  AC5706
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Romania 
Project ID:  P121673 
Project Name:  Social Assistance System Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Emil Daniel Tesliuc 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (80%);Public administration- Other social services (20%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (95%);Gender (5%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
628.70 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the overall performance of 
Romania's social assistance system by strengthening performance management, 
improving equity, improving administrative efficiency and reducing error and fraud.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project aims at improving the performance of Romania's social assistance 
system, with a focus on the Government's main programs for low-income households, the 
disabled, and families with children.  It is organized around four key results areas, each 
contributing to the PDO:  
 
-
Strengthened Performance Management: Romania's social assistance reform is 
implemented following a results-oriented strategy and action plan and is supported by a 
performance management M&E system;  
 
-
Improved Equity:  The share of social assistance funds going to the first poorest 
quintile of the population increases to 45 percent from 37.7 percent at baseline (in 2009);  
 
-
Improved Administrative Efficiency: Reduction in administrative and client costs for 
means-tested programs by 15 percent from baseline value; and  
 
-
Reduced Error and Fraud:  Programs for low-income households, disability benefits 
and family policy programs have strengthened information systems, and oversight and 
Page  2
control procedures including detection of error and fraud using risk-based investigation, 
data matching, data quality audits, and consolidated beneficiary registries.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Romania nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no known environmental issues relating to this project and none of the 
environmental safeguards have been triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The activities supported by the proposed Project are not likely to have significant effects 
on Romania's environment or natural resources.  The measures contemplated under the 
loan relate to improving the Government's Social Assistance System and are not expected 
to have any significant links to the environment, nor trigger any of the World Bank's 
environmental safeguards.  Moreover, Romania has adequate environmental controls in 
place.  Romania's environmental legislation and regulation is reinforced by EU 
environmental directives, including the EU's guidelines on adoption of environmental 
assessments at the planning and programming level (June 2001) and the EU's 
Environmental Liabilities Directive setting out liability for damage to properties and 
natural resources (April 2007).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N.A.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Ministries currently managing social assistance transfers 
and their staff in national and country agencies and townhalls nationwide.  Stakeholders 
also include all those who have been receiving benefits that will now be augmented (the 
poor) or reduced (the middle- and upper-classes).  Other important actors include 
opinion-formers, such as opposition politicians and Parliamentarians, union leaders etc. A 
public information program will be launched to inform the public about the rationale for 
the proposed reforms.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  4
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
There are no known environmental issues relating to this project and none of the 
environmental or social safeguards have been triggered.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Penelope Jane Aske Williams 
03/25/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Kathy A. Lindert 
03/24/2011 
Comments:   
