Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5893 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/11/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P122492 
Project Name: Russia Energy Efficiency Financing Project 
Task Team Leader: Yuriy Myroshnychenko 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P123692 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 13, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(25%);Small and medium enterprise support (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
22.73 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
312.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
30.50 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
4.00 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
170.00
516.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the efficiency of energy use in selected 
industries and regions via scaling-up commercial lending for energy efficiency improvements by 
Russian banks. The global environmental objective is to reduce greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
through the removal of barriers related to EE investments.  Proposed key project monitoring 
indicators include total energy savings and associated GHG emission reductions, and the total 
number of projects and related investment amounts.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will comprise a WB financial intermediary loan (FIL) to participating financial 
institutions (PFIs) and a GEF grant to address institutional, regulatory and market barriers facing 
commercial financing of EE projects. Gazprombank (GPB) has been identified as a PFI.  
Page  2
Participation of an additional bank in the FIL will be explored during the early stages of project 
preparation, as well as during implementation, in the form of additional financing.  
 
A
request for a US$22.73 million grant in support of the project (PIF) was submitted to GEF at 
the end of November. The GEF grant will aim to help GPB and other Russian banks develop EE 
lending business. Also, the grant will support REA in performing its EE mandate in relation to 
creating an environment which enables commercial financing for EE projects.  
 
The project is expected to have two main components:  
 
1.
EE investment lending  
 
2.
TA in support of investment lending  
 
Each component is elaborated below.  
 
Component 1:  Energy Efficiency Investment Lending (Estimated cost: US$802.5 million; 
proposed financing: WB Loan US$300 million, GPB US$300 million, project owners/energy 
service companies (ESCOs) and regions/municipalities US$160 million, other banks US$40 
million, GEF US$2.5 million).  
 
The component includes a US$300 million IBRD loan to GPB in support of GPB lending for 
EE investment projects.  GPB will leverage these funds with its own on at least a 1:1 ratio, so it 
will manage an EE credit line to the amount of US$600 million. GPB#s borrowers under the 
credit line - project owners/ESCOs, regions, and municipalities are expected to co-finance the 
GPB credit line at about 25% or US$160 million. It was tentatively agreed to direct about 70% of 
the GPB credit line to EE investments in industry, with the balance of 30% going to support EE 
investments at the regional and municipal level. However, the allocation of funds among sectors 
within the credit line will be fine-tuned, based on the outcomes of the EE market study that GPB 
is to complete by the end of February 2011, and a subsequent investment plan.  Sub-project 
selection criteria, including a list of eligible sectors, project type and size, energy savings 
requirements, as well as monitoring and reporting requirements will be fully defined in a Project 
Operational Manual.  
 
To motivate regions and municipalities to implement their respective EE action plans and make 
PFI lending more attractive, the GPB lending will be blended with GEF grant funds. 
Specifically, it is proposed that ~US$250,000-500,000 in grant funds will be allocated to each of 
the initial regions or cities that agree to undertake measures within their pilot EE action plans, 
successfully complete them, and mobilize financing for implementation.  
 
If an additional PFI for participating in the FIL is identified at the early stages for project 
preparation and thus joins the project, the WB FIL and the co-financing amounts will be 
increased correspondingly. However, if another bank is to join the project it will need to 
demonstrate a high level commitment to the project and dedicate sufficient resources to perform 
on time its project preparation duties, including conducting an EE market study and preparing a 
Project Operational Manual.  
 
Page  3
Also, it is expected that the project will involve other banks in EE lending. As the dissemination 
of best practice and lessons learned by the PFIs proceeds, REA will begin recruiting new 
banking partners to the project.  To ensure leverage and assess commitment, banks will be 
required to provide a specific investment plan of at least US$10-20 million in order to be eligible 
for a customized TA on EE lending from the GEF grant.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance in Support of Investment Lending (Estimated cost: 
US$36.7 million; proposed financing: GEF grant US$20.2 million, GPB US$12 million, REA 
US$4 million, regions/municipalities US$0.5 million).  
 
The main objective of this component is to ensure the successful implementation of component 
1
and to disseminate its results in order to scale-up commercial financing of EE projects across 
Russia. This component will also finance project management.  
 
It consists of the following three sub-components.  
 
a) 
Project development, project appraisal and monitoring for the industrial sector.   Under 
this component, efforts will be taken to help ensure successful implementation of the credit line 
and GPB#s EE business development.  Activities to be undertaken include: (i) pipeline 
development; (ii) development of modified project appraisal assessments to take into account EE 
project risks and cash flows; (iii) technical due diligence for early EE projects; (iv) development 
of special EE project financing products or schemes; and (v) developing enhanced systems for 
monitoring energy savings after the projects have been financed and implemented.  
 
b) 
Development of EE Action Plan framework, pilot plans and financing schemes at the 
regional and municipal level.  REA will help selected pilot regions and cities to further develop 
their EE Action Plans.  Financing of these pilot Action Plans will be considered under 
component 1 and then disseminated for replication.  
 
c) 
Market development, policy dialogue, and information dissemination.  This component 
seeks to help prime the market for EE financing through various market development efforts, 
ongoing policy dialogue to remove barriers to EE financing, share experiences from GPB#s EE 
credit line, and recruit new banks into the EE lending market.  
 
GPB will be expected to establish a Project Coordinating Unit to ensure effective 
implementation of the EE credit line. REA will set up a Project Implementation Unit to manage 
the activities funded from the GEF grant.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All the sub-projects will be located in industrial areas of some coastal and economically 
relatively developed regions.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
GPB does not currently have in-house capacity for environmental and social safeguard issues 
and relies mainly on OVOS statements. In order to enhance corporate  capacity for the purposes 
of this operation and to comply with World Bank safeguard policies,  GPB will establish  a  
Page  4
secretariat / safeguards unit (SU) to ensure effective screening and categorization of loans,  the 
preparation of Environmental and, if necessary Social Assessments and  management plans 
required  for effective monitoring and management of safeguard issues. If GPB has interest to 
build its safeguards capacity beyond the project scope and timeline, a TA sub-component, 
possibly funded from the GEF grant, would be designed.  Detailed TORs of these TA activities 
will be reviewed by the World Bank's environmental and social development specialists during 
the implementation of the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Alexei Slenzak (ECSS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
GPB will prepare an Environmental Management Framework (hereafter #EMF#) which will 
serve to guide the preparation of sub-project -specific Environmental Assessments and 
Management Plans (EMP). The EMF will contain all environmental requirements and 
procedures and set out appropriate arrangements for monitoring, and management of 
environmental impacts.  The EMF will outline the environmental mitigation and management 
measures to be followed by contractors working on each of the sub-project sites when 
implementing interventions under the Project. The EMF constitutes integral part of the 
Operations Manual (OP). GPB will commit to use these procedures in reviewing and appraising 
sub-projects so that they are implemented in an environmentally and socially sound manner.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/31/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard-related studies, as appropriate, will be undertaken as part of sub-project 
preparation at a later stage.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yuriy Myroshnychenko 
12/08/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
12/15/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
12/15/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
