Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5980 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/06/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P125305 
Project Name: Russia - Financial Sector Development and Strengthening Project 
Task Team Leader: John Daniel Pollner 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Capital markets (63%);Banking (15%);Public administration- Finance 
(10%);Non-compulsory pensions, insurance and contractual savings (7%);Payment 
systems, securities clearance and settlement (5%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (90%);Debt management and fiscal 
sustainability (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
110.00
110.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The PDO of the project is to (a) achieve an orderly financial market expansion to better serve the 
needs for corporate finance, (b) enhance financial market stability through a modernized state-of-
the-art regulatory framework and the implementation of robust supervisory and enforcement 
mechanisms, and (c) reach global best practice standards in the market infrastructure and 
regulation, in order to achieve a broader international reach as a center of financing.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project involves the implementation of the following components:  (i) upgrading Russia#s 
legal and regulatory framework for the financial markets in line with global G20 regulatory 
reforms, (ii) enhancing the supervisory capacity and tools for overseeing and enforcing 
regulations and management of risks within and across financial sub-sectors, and (iii) increasing 
the depth of financial services and tradability of Russia's financial markets, both domestically 
and internationally, through a modernized legal framework, improved market trading 
Page  2
infrastructure, incentives for the development of institutional investors, and improved public debt 
management.  
 
The main project components are:  
 
a.  Supporting the Ministry of Finance in the development and implementation of the 
Government#s policy in the banking sector, in line with G20 reforms and the Russian Banking 
Sector Development Strategy until 2015.  
 
b.
Strengthening of the legal, supervisory, regulatory, and institutional framework for the 
capital market.  
 
c.  Promoting the development of the securities market, by strengthening the regulatory 
environment, improving the trading & settlement infrastructure, developing the organized 
commodity market, and attracting retail investors and enhancing the investment attractiveness of 
the Russian financial market.  
 
d.
Institutionalizing the Debt Management and Sovereign Wealth Asset Management Function.  
 
e.  Project management Unit and project administration.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Moscow, Russian Federation   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Adequate, but not applicable for this type of project and sector.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/19/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard related studies are foreseen as the project activities do not anticipate the 
triggering or any safeguard issues. The project will not have any works or construction 
activities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Daniel Pollner 
01/04/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/06/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sophie Sirtaine 
01/06/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
