Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6182 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/06/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P125905 
Project Name: RUSSIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE 
Task Team Leader: Vickram Cuttaree 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 5, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (40%);General energy sector (30%);General water, 
sanitation and flood protection sector (30%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Other financial and 
private sector development (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
500.00
500.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to (i) increase VEB capacity to identify, 
appraise, monitor and evaluate infrastructure investment and PPP and (ii) enable VEB to provide 
long-term financing to infrastructure sub-projects and PPP.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would be a financial intermediary loan (FIL)  to the Russian Development 
Bank of about $500 million. The project would use VEB#s existing business processes; these 
would however be complemented by enhanced selection criteria for investments to be funded 
through the FIL. Additional measures would be applied to ensure that the investment to be 
funded through the FIL are economically sound, financially viable, and socially and 
environmentally sustainable.  
 
The proposed project design and implementation arrangements would also incorporate 
Operational Policy (OP) 8.3 to ensure, among others, that VEB has appropriate risk management 
and credit review policies, and the capacity to apply those policies adequately. The project 
Page  2
design would incorporate lessons from similar operations and risk mitigation measures.  A 
thorough FI assessment will be conducted during preparation and training sessions will be 
organized for VEB to understand fully World Bank requirements in several areas (including 
safeguards). An operational manual, which will include environmental and social safeguards, 
will be prepared by VEB prior to appraisal. The framework documents, to be incorporated in the 
FI Operations Manual, will clearly define how individual sub-projects would fall under the 
various categories.The project design would incorporate lessons from similar operations.  During 
project preparation the World Bank team will undertake a thorough assessment of VEB to ensure 
that it meets OP 8.3 and will put strong emphasis on ensuring that VEB has a pipeline of 
potential investments that are suitable for funding from the proposed loan.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Russian Federation (urban and rural)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
VEB has reasonable institutional capacity for risk management as a commercial bank. However, 
a
preliminary assessment has shown that current corporate systems for management of social and 
environmental safeguards will need strengthening for the purposes of this investment. Specific 
actions to enhance corporate management of social and environmental safeguards for the 
purposes of this operation and to comply with World Bank safeguard policies will be designed 
and put in place during project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (ECSS4) 
Mr Alexei Slenzak (ECSS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Category: FI (Financial Intermediary) with "A" and "B" category 
subproject(s). The framework documents, to be incorporated in the FI Operations Manual, will 
clearly define how individual sub-projects are categorized to ensure consistency with OP 4.01.  
Environmental and Social management Framework (ESMF) document will be used for screening 
and management of Environmental and Social impacts. It will be prepared and incorporated into 
the FI's Operations Manual and applied to all sub-project investments. The ESMF document will 
provide guidance on the identification and management of any impact s which may trigger other 
safeguard policies, shown below as TBD. It will include procedures consistent with both the 
Russian Federation and World Bank policies for addressing social and environmental impacts of 
sub-projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
TBD   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
TBD   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
TBD   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
TBD   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
OP 4.10 is indicated as TBD because of the possibility that some infrastructure would be 
financed in areas of Siberia with indigenous populations.   This possibility, and the possible need 
for an Indigenous Peoples Plan, will be explored during project preparation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The above-referenced ESMF will include a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which 
will be incorporated in the Operations Manual. The RPF will set out impact management 
procedures and standards to be used in the event that involuntary land acquisition is unavoidable 
and is needed for sub-projects.  The RPF will include measures and procedures which meet the 
standards of both the Russian Federation and the World Bank policy on involuntary resettlement.  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
TBD   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
TBD   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
TBD   
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/27/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EMF and RPF will be prepared and disclosed and consultations completed prior to Appraisal.  
EMF summary will be submitted to the Board, at least 120 days prior to the date of Board 
presentation. If any sub-projects are identified before appraisal, the EIA/EA and RAP (if 
necessary) will be disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop before appraisal for the identified 
sub projects.  
 
If during preparatino it is determined that an Indigenous Peoples' Plan is needed,it will be 
prepared (including disclosure and consultations) prior to Appraisal.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
EIAs for Category A sub-projects will be disclosed in-country and sent to the Infoshop; an 
EIA summary will go to Board when prepared during implementation before work starts.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Vickram Cuttaree 
03/29/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
04/05/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
04/06/2011 
Comments:   
