Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5865 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/10/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P095554 
Project Name: Microfinance Project 
Task Team Leader: Pierre Olivier Colleye 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 24, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: August 4, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (50%);Other financial and private sector 
development (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
21.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
29.00
29.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Objective of the proposed Project would be to establish a proper legal, regulatory and 
supervisory framework to ensure safe and sound growth of the microfinance and credit 
cooperative sectors, and develop the industry's capacity to meet the responsibilities and 
opportunities presented by this new regulatory framework.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Legal, Regulatory, and Supervisory Framework.  This component would support 
the creation of an enabling legal and regulatory environment and build the capacity of the 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) to regulate and supervise the sector. The project would finance 
technical assistance to draft and build consensus on the accompanying regulations and to modify 
a
number of related laws (bankruptcy, tax, banking and civil code) which affect the sector.  It 
would conduct a review of the two existing laws and recommend amendments. It would also 
finance the dissemination and training on these new regulations to the sector. Second, the Project 
would finance, through technical assistance, training, study tours and IT support, the design and 
setting up of the supervision system and supervisory authority (planned to be within MoF).  It 
would help develop the methodology for supervision, and design and roll out the technical and 
Page  2
IT tools to conduct direct supervision of the largest financial cooperatives, the microfinance 
institutions, the Self Regulated Organizations (SROs) and Second-Tier institutions (for more 
information, see component 2). The Project would also finance assistance in developing 
supervision manuals, internal, policies and procedures for MoF and SROs, as well as the training 
of government officials in charge of regulation and supervision and SROs responsible for 
supervising their members.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Architecture.  The new law calls for SROs, 2nd Tier cooperatives 
and associations or unions of cooperatives to play a critical role in a wide range of tasks 
including developing the sector, monitoring it under the overarching supervision of MoF, 
handling excess liquidity, facilitating relationships with outside organizations and providing 
technical advice to the sector. Membership to at least one of these organizations is compulsory, 
yet these supporting institutions have little experience and have few resources to make the initial 
investments necessary. The project would therefore help establish and strengthen the institutional 
arrangements for the multi-tiered cooperative system and its supervision. This Component would 
also include a consensus building/dissemination sub-component which would include the 
development and financing of a communication strategy, organization of conferences and study 
tours. Coordination with the World Bank-financed Financial Literacy Project will also be sought.  
 
Component 3: Industry Capacity Building and IT Development. The project would support the 
transition of the financial cooperative system to meet the requirements of the new legislation.  
Russia has a large number of fragmented training programs, and the project would combine 
Russian and international experience to design and deliver a national training program to the 
sector through a number of (primarily existing) Training Centers. Also, MoF has extremely 
limited information on the sector and its performance. Therefore, the project would finance the 
preparation, testing and roll-out of a common IT platform which would be made available for the 
sector to report to its supervisory authority. It would also design a basic modular IT management 
tool, based on the legal framework, which credit cooperatives and microfinance institutions can 
use for the management of their operations, as many smaller institutions are struggling to 
develop or purchase their own IT platforms.  
 
Component 4: Standards and Infrastructure. Under this component, the project would help the 
industry and its regulator develop industry standards, such as governance, accounting, reporting 
or performance standards, in line with international best practice. It would also help develop 
standard internal documents and procedures for Credit Cooperatives (CCs) and microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) (by-laws, sample contracts, internal regulations, internal audits, etc.), help 
disseminate them, and train CCs and MFIs on their use. The project would also bring best 
practice to the creation or scaling up of supporting institutions to strengthen the sector by 
reducing risk, increasing transparency and enhancing the capacity of the sector to attract funding. 
Such institutions may include specialized auditing firms, specialized Rating Agencies, and 
review mechanisms to ensure that CCs and MFIs are able to manage their risks, including 
through appropriate insurance mechanisms. It would also provide support to the industry in 
developing new financial instruments and services to members/clients and disseminate best 
practice. Finally, a sub-component would help the Government establish minimum requirements 
on consumer protection and transparency and would provide support to both the regulator and 
the industry in implementing these requirements.  
Page  3
Component 5: Project Management. This component would finance the project management 
function, as well as periodic monitoring and evaluation. This would be undertaken by a Project 
Management Unit (PMU) selected by MoF. An Inter-Agency Working Group would be 
established to oversee project implementation. Further implementation arrangements would need 
to be discussed to ensure that the views of the cooperative system are reflected in project design 
and implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
It is planned so far that the Project would be implemented nationwide, starting with areas with 
well-developed cooperative systems.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower, through the establishment of a project management unit, has adequate capacity 
for the implementation of a project of this type. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) has been 
designated as the counterpart for this Project.  The Project will not finance any credit line nor 
does it anticipate the financing of any work other than possibly minor rehabilitation or 
installation of equipment which would not require substantial excavation or generation of large 
quantities of debris requiring disposal.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Nicolas Perrin (ECSS4) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/30/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre Olivier Colleye 
12/21/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/03/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sophie Sirtaine 
03/07/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
