Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6226 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/03/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P123923 
Project Name: RUSSIA FOREST FIRE RESPONSE PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Angela G. Armstrong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 12, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (50%);Sub-national government administration (35%);Public 
administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (15%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (35%);Other public sector governance (35%);Other environment 
and natural resources management (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
80.00
80.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve forest fire prevention and 
management and to enhance sustainable forest management.  Furthermore, the project will 
contribute to raising public awareness and education standards in forestry issues in general, with 
specific reference to forest fires prevention/control and forest governance issues.  Given that the 
bulk of fires are of human origin, the latter is as important as suppression of fires underway.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project has three components:  (1) enhancing forest fire prevention, management and 
control; (2) building forestry management capacity; and (3) project management.  There will be 
two implementing agencies for the project:  the Federal Forestry Agency (FFA), which covers 
the extensive forest area, and the Ministry of Natural Resources and Ecology (MNRE), which 
will implement the project in Protected Areas.  
 
Page  2
Component 1:  Enhancing Forest Fire Prevention, Management and Control.  This component 
aims to improve the effectiveness of forest fire prevention and management by (i) strengthening 
the capacity of early detection and quick response to fight forest fires and (ii) reducing the 
number of fires of human origin through awareness raising and environmental education 
programs.  Early fire detection is recognized as a key element in improving protection of forest 
from fires.  Management of fires requires clear coordination across the various agencies.  The 
project will therefore support the establishment of Inter-regional Forest Fire Centers (IFFCs) to 
improve detection and coordination across the various agencies. Fire prevention and 
environmental education will be focused on children and youth as a means to encourage long-
term behavior change.  In particular, this component will provide technical assistance to (i) 
develop fire preparedness master plans at the forest district level to determine the optimum 
location of different forest fire interventions; (ii) review and upgrade regional fire danger rating 
and fire hazard indices; (iii) improve the capacity of the early fire detection system; and (iv) 
develop public awareness and media/education campaigns to decrease the incidence of forest 
fires of human origin.  In addition, investments will be made to improve fire fighting and 
preparedness systems and establish IFFCs.  
 
Component 2:  Building Forestry Management Capacity.  Forest policy, legislation, institutions 
and silvicultural systems clearly have an impact on how forest is managed which in turn has 
multiple effects on the environment, including the likelihood, extent and severity of forest fires.  
This component will increase forest management capacity through (i) provision of technical 
assistance to help identify and address key policy and legislative issues and the institutional 
framework (by supporting the clear demarcation of mandates among federal and regional forest 
management institutions); (ii) targeted investments to improve forest regeneration and 
restoration, establish integrated forest management information systems, and develop model 
forests; and (iii) improved training opportunities for both professionals already in service and 
new forestry expertise.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management.  A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will work with 
FFA, MNRE, and each of the participating Inter-regional Forest Fire Centers to ensure effective 
and continuous communication with project stakeholders.  This PIU will coordinate all project 
activities, procure works, goods, and consultants services for project implementation, supervise 
and monitor project activities, and report regularly to FFA and MNRE.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
While the exact project locations are not yet defined, it is expected that the physical interventions 
will focus on 3-5 priority areas (pilot regions), which will be defined by geographic, economic, 
and environmental criteria. It may be assumed that the project's geographical focus would be on 
forests with high environmental or economic value which may be situated close to settlements or 
infrastructure, and where fires would carry the risk of human life loss, severe human health 
impacts, substantial damage to infrastructure or substantial loss of economic assets or valuable 
ecological resources (e.g., national parks).  
 
The project will finance hardware, equipment and fire-fighting infrastructure, focusing on 
ground-based activities, and will not involve significant or large scale physical interventions or 
major civil works. The project's funds will be used for the installation of observation towers, and 
Page  3
refurbishment of fire stations and warehouses for equipment and machinery. Such activities will 
be carried out in areas, regions or other administrative units where some fire-fighting capacity 
already exists, which can be enhanced and improved by the project's activities. These civil works 
are expected to have localized, minor and reversible environmental impacts, which are of a 
routine nature and will require only simple environmental management instruments.  
 
The project will not finance the construction of new access or service roads, which could 
potentially carry the risk of induced impacts by improved accessibility of forests. Moreover, the 
project will not finance airborne fire fighting, thus potential impacts from chemical agents 
commonly added to water dropped from fixed wing aircraft and helicopters are not expected. 
(Such agents commonly include retardants, which slow down water evaporation and thus 
increase its activity in a fire, and foam agents, which work in a similar manner and also have a 
smothering effect.)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
FFA is the primary institution responsible for the management of the country's forests as an 
economic resource. The Agency, however, does not play a significant role in the environmental 
management of forest areas. FFA does not have an environmental department or staff responsible 
for environmental due diligence.  While environmental safeguards capacities are weak in FFA, 
they are strong in MNRE, which is responsible for protected areas / protected forests, natural 
reserves and national parks, and for general environmental oversight, including environmental 
assessments, licensing and supervision. MNRE will thus be the key partner for preparing and 
implementing the required safeguards instruments.  
 
The project is expected to strengthen coordination and cooperation between FFA and MNRE.  
Both institutions have requested Bank assistance in defining their strategies in terms of fire 
prevention and preparedness, fire fighting, forest regeneration and public awareness raising and 
education. As both institutions would be involved in the project as key stakeholders, it can be 
expected that there will be a cross fertilization of approaches and practices, including an increase 
of environmental awareness on the part of FFA.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Nicolas Perrin (ECSS4) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project's funds will be used for the installation of observation towers, and refurbishment 
of fire stations and warehouses for equipment and machinery. Such activities will be carried out 
in areas, regions or other administrative units where some fire-fighting capacity already exists, 
which can be enhanced and improved by the project's activities. These civil works are expected 
to have localized, minor and reversible environmental impacts, which are of a routine nature and 
will require only simple environmental management instruments.  In the case of infrastructure to 
be built inside Protected Areas (PAs), it is necessary to confirm that it is consistent with the 
existing PA Management Plan.  Also, in such cases the Checklist EMP might not be sufficient 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
because there could be particular site-specific sensitivities to be addressed (or, Checklist could be 
used but some additional issue/mitigation items might need to be added).  
 
The planned activities on the development policy, legal framework and institutional 
capacities are expected to result in a general strengthening of on the ground enforcement of laws 
and regulations by augmenting the rights and responsibilities of forest inspectors and rangers. 
This will improve overall control of the authorities and reduce illegal activities, including 
negligent behavior or willful setting of fires.  
 
In this context, the project also aims to reduce the frequency of fires caused by arson, which 
appears to play a significant role in triggering forest fires. New regulations will target the 
currently existing perverse incentives to set fire to forests intentionally to secure income from 
salvage logging, avoiding the complicated red tape associated with acquiring normal logging 
licenses legally. The project's activities aimed at building forest management, education and 
training will include measures to improve outreach of forest authorities to the general public, 
increase awareness of the ecological and economic value of forests and build / strengthen the 
sense of ownership of the population living close to forest resources.  
 
The exact project locations are not yet defined. It is expected that the physical interventions 
will focus on 3-5 priority areas, which will be defined by geographic, economic, and 
environmental criteria. Therefore, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will be 
prepared before project appraisal and specific EMP/EMP checklist (as applicable) will be 
prepared and disclosed before beginning of works (during project implementation).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The Natural Habitats policy is triggered as project activities are in natural habitat areas.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The Forests policy is triggered as project activities are in forest areas.  However, the project 
will not finance the construction of new access or service roads.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
In the planned afforestation activities, the use of herbicides to repress broad leaved plants in 
newly planted areas, and potentially pesticides to protect forest from insects, may be envisaged. 
The borrower will for such project activities prepare a pest management plan (PMP) in 
accordance with the World Bank's OP4.09 that supports an integrated pest management (IPM) 
approach. In addition, the following criteria will apply to the selection and use of pesticide and 
herbicide products under the project: (a) They must have negligible adverse human health 
effects; (b) They must be shown to be effective against the target species; (c) They must have 
minimal effect on non-target species and the natural environment. The methods, timing, and 
frequency of pesticide application are aimed to minimize damage to natural enemies. Pesticides 
must be demonstrated to be safe for forest users and animals in the treated areas, as well as for 
personnel applying them; (d) Their use must take into account the need to prevent the 
development of resistance in pests; and (e) The Bank requires that any pesticides it finances be 
manufactured, packaged, labeled, handled, stored, disposed of, and applied according to 
standards acceptable to the Bank.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
The project is unlikely to trigger OP 4.10 (on Indigenous Peoples) given that the likely 
locations of forest areas will be distant from indigenous communities, most of which are found in 
the northern circumpolar regions of Russia. However, a decision on the applicability of this 
policy will be made prior to Appraisal once the actual forest areas to be covered under the 
project have been identified and these areas have been checked for the presence of indigenous 
communities.  
 
The likely project beneficiaries are the communities living close to forest resources that 
could be affected by fires.  The Social Assessment will include an analysis of the different 
population groups dependent on the forest sector, as well as the local and federal administrations, 
industry representatives and NGOs, and will assess the possible social benefits and risks of the 
project. At the federal level stakeholders include the federal government agencies, academic 
community and national and international non-government organizations (NGOs). At the 
regional and local level they include the Regional Administrations, regional research institutes, 
the forest enterprises and their employees, local governments, local communities and NGOs. 
They also include town and city dwellers who use the forests for recreation.  All of these groups 
have a long term interest in sustainable forest management, but for several there may be conflicts 
between this objective and short-term revenue maximizing.  
 
There are 40 nations classified as small indigenous nations,  totaling approximately 240,000 
people residing in 28 regions of the Russian Federation; primarily in the North, Siberia, and the 
Far East regions of Russia.  A final decision on the regions to be supported under project has not 
yet been made.  Given the relatively sparse distribution of the indigenous population in Russia's 
circumpolar regions and the scope of the project investment (forest fire protection), it is unlikely 
the project will affect indigenous people.  However, once the pilot regions are identified, and 
before the project begins, a Social Assessment will be conducted for each region. The social 
assessments will carry out ethnic profiles to determine if indigenous people, as defined in OP 
4.10 are to be found in the area of influence of the project. The ethnic profiles will describe the 
following: (i) the locations and populations of the ethnic minorities; (ii) different sub-groups, 
specific language types and levels of literacy; and (iii) possible issues related to social or 
economic vulnerability.  If applicable and when necessary, the borrower will engage in free, 
prior, and informed consultation with the affected Indigenous Peoples' communities, Indigenous 
Peoples Organizations (IPOs) if any, and other local civil society organizations (CSOs) identified 
by the affected Indigenous Peoples' communities. The borrower will use consultation methods 
appropriate to the social and cultural values of the affected Indigenous Peoples to provide them 
with all relevant information about the project and its impacts, and develop Indigenous Peoples 
Plans as needed to ensure that indigenous people share in the project's benefits.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Initial pre-screening of the project indicates that some interventions on the ground may 
possibly trigger the Bank's OP 4.12 (on Involuntary Resettlement).  
 
The project is unlikely to necessitate any land acquisition and no involuntary physical 
relocation is envisaged.  The project will finance refurbishment of existing regional fire stations 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and possibly on an exceptional basis, installation of new centers.  Most works will be carried out 
in isolated forest areas and are not expected to disrupt local populations. In the unlikely event 
that project impacts affect local populations land use or access to resources, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared as part of the Social Assessment before Appraisal, 
setting out clear measures and processes for mitigating and managing impacts from involuntary 
land acquisition. The RPF will include a process framework to facilitate preparation of 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/23/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The consultant selection process for the Social and Environmental Assessment is underway, 
with consultants expected to be selected by mid May 2011.  Once consultants are contracted 
for these assessments, their assignments are expected to be completed within two to three 
months.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Angela G. Armstrong 
05/02/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
05/02/2011 
Comments:  cleared on behalf of Agi Kiss 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John V. Kellenberg 
05/03/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
