Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/02/2011 
Report No.:  AC6000
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Rwanda 
Project ID:  P118101 
Project Name:  Skills Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Margo A. Hoftijzer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (40%);Secondary education (30%);Tertiary education (30%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Improve access to quality and demand-responsive vocational training.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1- Delivery of Quality and Relevant Vocational Training:  
 
This component will strengthen the TVET system through interventions aimed at 
improving quality and relevance of training delivery. The component will finance 
comprehensive interventions in a select number of sectors (hospitality/tourism and 
construction) and occupations. The targeted training institutions are located in the 
Western, Eastern and Northern Provinces. The targeted occupations in the 
hospitality/tourism sector are cook, waiter, housekeeper, and receptionist, and in the 
construction sector they are plumber, electrician, mason, and carpenter.  
 
Component 2- TVET System Strengthening:  
 
This component will (a) Monitor and evaluate training delivery, in particular the 
implementation and performance of the SDP; (b) Inform strategic policy decisions and 
policy reforms by providing sound analyses concerning key aspects of the training 
system; and (c) build capacity for monitoring and evaluation and for conducting relevant 
Page  2
research within the Workforce Development Authority (WDA) and other relevant 
stakeholders.  
 
Component 3- Rapid Skills Delivery:  
 
Promote rapid delivery of critical skills in the labor market through small competitive 
grants to initiatives that promote the provision of training with a high relevance to the 
private sector.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project activities will involve rehabilitation and construction of training centers 
nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is not expected to have adverse environmental impacts on human populations 
or environmentally important areas.  
 
As the project finances the rehabilitation and construction of training facilities, to 
provide the basis to assess specific project sites through a screening mechanism, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework has been prepared.  Once sites have 
been identified as meeting project eligibility and environmental and social screening 
criteria, Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be developed. 
Measures required to prevent, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for adverse impacts and 
improve environmental performance will be included in the bidding and contract 
documents to ensure that good engineering, environmental management, and 
Occupational Health and Safety practices will be applied during construction/ 
rehabilitation. The contractors will be made aware of this obligation and their safeguard 
Page  3
performance during construction/rehabilitation will be closely supervised and monitored 
by the Project Team with close supervision of the Project Supervision Consultants.  
 
In the construction/rehabilitation phase, adverse effects on the environment will include 
increased noise, vibration, and air pollution (dust) levels due to construction, and to a 
lesser extent soil erosion, water flows obstruction, impairment of non-critical natural 
habitat, and minimal water pollution due to construction-related activities.  No major 
contamination of soil or surface water is envisaged. The site-specific ESMPs will, where 
relevant, develop measures to safely remove and dispose of asbestos on existing 
buildings, and a clause governing asbestos removal will be included in the bidding 
documents.  The bidding documents will also include chance finds procedures for any 
physical cultural artifacts that may be found during construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No direct or indirect long-term negative impacts are anticipated from the implementation 
of the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since there are no long term direct or indirect impacts anticipated from the project 
activities, alternatives to the proposed approach were not considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower capacity for both environmental and social safeguards implementation is 
moderately effective. While some weaknesses exist in both the Rwanda Environmental 
Management Agency (REMA) and district level environmental staff with regard to 
implementation experience and technical training for complex projects (for example, in 
the fields of energy and infrastructure) existing capacity is sufficient to effectively 
monitor and enforce the simple environmental safeguards required for the rehabilitation 
of training facilities.  
 
To further enhance the capacity at the local level and based on the planned project 
activities, technical staff and school authorities involved in the implementation of SDP 
Component 1 will be provided with training on the use of the applicable environmental 
management tools. The experience of the MINEDUC in implementation of various 
development programs can be tapped.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for this project are those involved in providing and receiving the 
vocational training. For each of the selected training centers a site-specific Environmental 
and Social Management Plan will be developed, which will be disclosed locally in 
English, Kinyarwanda, or French. Each ESMP will outline a plan of action to be 
Page  4
instituted by the project to ensure that environmental quality is maintained and improved 
throughout the life of the project.  
 
A
public consultation for stakeholders will be held in February 2011 to discuss the 
contents of the overall project ESMF and the proposed ESMF format to explain the 
project activities and solicit feedback. The ESMF has been disclosed in country by the 
Borrower and at the Bank#s InfoShop on February 2, 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  5
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Margo A. Hoftijzer 
02/02/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Noreen Beg 
02/02/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Noreen Beg 
02/02/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michel J. Welmond 
02/02/2011 
Comments:   
