Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/31/2011 
Report No.:  AC6144
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P079414 
Original Project Name: Transport Sector 
Development 
Country:  Rwanda 
Project ID:  P119901 
Project Name:  Rwanda Transport Sector Support Project Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mitiku 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (70%);Ports, waterways and shipping (20%);General 
transportation sector (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (60%);Trade facilitation and market access 
(15%);Other public sector governance (15%);Other urban development (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
11.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives are to improve the quality of Rwanda's paved road 
network and to generate sustained employment in rural areas through road maintenance 
works. The original Project Development Objectives and outcomes remain unchanged.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project supports the above objectives through its four components:  (i) Paved Roads 
Rehabilitation and Maintenance, (ii) Sector Governance and Policy support, (iii) Sector 
Analysis and Planning; and (iv) Project and Program Management support. The 
Additional Financing will support the rehabilitation of the Kigali - Ruhengeri road and 
preparation of Road and Bridges design standard and specification manuals under 
component 1 and 3, respectively.  
 
Component 1: Paved Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance (US$72.4 million)  
Page  2
This component is designed to support the rehabilitation of 83 km of the Kigali - 
Ruhengeri road and maintenance of approximately 50% of the paved trunk road network 
of 1,100 km, including sections of the Gatuna-Bugarama, the Gitarama-Kibuye, and 
Rusumo - Gisenyi corridors, and supervision of the said rehabilitation and maintenance 
works.  
 
Specifically, the Additional Financing under component 1 will provide support to close 
the financing gap due to cost overrun of the contract for the rehabilitation of the Kigali-
Ruhengeri road, realized during submission of tender.  
 
Component 2:  Sector Governance and Policy Support (US$2.1 million)  
 
This component supports Sector Governance Improvement and Transport Policy 
Implementation, through provision of technical assistance to the transport sector agencies 
and local community associations, development and implementation of strategies and 
standards in selected critical areas and capacity building.  
 
Component 3:  Sector Analysis and Planning Support (US$3.2 million)  
 
This component is designed to support: (i) strengthening of transport planning functions 
and monitoring and evaluation Systems, through provision of technical assistance to 
Planning, Policies and Capacity Building Unit , establishment of transport database and 
data management system, establishment of monitoring and evaluation systems, and 
preparation of design standards and customization of road management tools; and (ii) 
Capacity Building efforts through financing of  provision of long-term in-country training 
to some 100 professional staff of the road agencies, local entrepreneurs, and unemployed 
graduates in the areas of Road Engineering and Management (REM), and Transport 
Economics and Planning (TEP).  
 
Specifically, the Additional Financing under component 3 will support the preparation 
of Roads and Bridges design manuals and customization of road management tools that 
will enhance sector governance and institutional development aspects by instilling 
effectiveness and efficiency in the use of resources allocated for the development and 
maintenance of Rwanda's road network.  
 
Component 4:  Project and Program Management Support (US$1.7 million)  
 
This component finances: (i) Operating Costs of the Planning, Policies and Capacity 
Building Unit, the Transport Projects Management Unit, and the Road Transport 
Development Agency, and (ii) provision of technical assistance to the same units and the 
Road Maintenance Fund in support of Project and Program technical audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Kigali-Ruhengeri road, whose rehabilitation makes up this component, starts at the 
Western end of Kigali town as a right-hand junction to Ruhengeri (PK 0+000, h=1,375m) 
from the international trunk road to Gitarama and Bujumbura/Burundi. After a steep 
mountainous section of 5,2km with predominantly open woodland and forests, the road 
follows generally the hill ridges, climbing from h=1,740m up to 1,760m at PK 16+000. 
Page  3
The road passes mainly through agricultural fields and banana plantations, arriving at the 
village of Shyorongi.  
 
The following section up to PK 25+500 (h=2,130m) is characterized by a small 
longitudinal road slope and steep descending hillside slopes on both sides of the road, 
which are mainly covered by trees and open forests. The descending mountainous road 
section leads down to the valley of Kwisumo River (PK 30+000, h=1,820m). Following 
the left bank of the river, numerous creeks, water courses, and gullies arrive at the 
roadside, draining a hilly zone, which is purely under agricultural use. Overexploitation 
and poorly managed agricultural production systems lead to intensive erosion processes. 
At PK 44+000 (h=1,930m), the road crosses with two bridges permanent rivers (Bahimba 
River and Base River). The road follows the Base River valley, crossing the river at 
around PK 51+500 (h=1.750m). The road passes through Gakenke Village at PK 56+200 
(h=1,670m). Gakenke is the major centre for market, transport, education, and health 
facilities for an extended region. An earth road branches out from here reaching the 
hospital and several school centers after 1.2 km (h=1,690m). The earth road is not part of 
the project, although it was included in the design study. The mountainous and ascending 
ro ad section culminates at PK 67+500 (h=2.110m). The valley of Mukungwa River is 
reached at PK 72+000 (h=1,680m). The road follows the river course on its left bank up 
to the bridge over the Mukungwa River at PK 83+003 (h=1,647m). The bridge marks the 
end of the road under rehabilitation, and the beginning of the section to Gisenyi, on the 
DRC border, rehabilitated concurrently under the European Union financing.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The safeguards impacts identified during the original project preparation are not expected 
to have any long term or cumulative impacts. Potential negative impacts of project 
Page  4
implementation include: soil erosion; temporary loss of strips of farmland along the road 
alignment; disturbances in the water quality, and noise and dust during road civil work.  
 
The AF is to cover the cost over-run of an ongoing road rehabilitation project and to 
prepare design standard manuals for roads and bridges.  The road rehabilitation and 
maintenance works are the same as appraised and are not expected to have significant 
environmental impacts. The widening of the road pavement from 6.2 to 7 meters will be 
contained within the existing road width and right of way, and is not expected to entail 
changes to the original Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA). The 
rehabilitation and maintenance works will be carried out along existing road alignment 
and no major social and environment impacts are expected, nor does this Additional 
Financing involve land acquisition/involuntary resettlement (as is the case in the original 
project). No change to the current environmental category (B) is anticipated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term negative impacts are expected. The project will neither finance the 
construction of new roads nor upgrade existing roads. Impact on soil erosion will be 
negligible, likewise, impact on stability of slopes or on sedimentation/siltation of rivers. 
Instead, the rehabilitation of the road will decrease erosion along the road alignment, by 
stabilizing slopes and providing proper drainage. The maintenance works to be carried 
out in the future, after completion of the rehabilitation, is not expected to induce negative 
impacts, rather will help to control slope stability and soil erosion. The maintenance 
works are expected to use the same borrow sites for sourcing materials and will not 
demand the opening- up of new borrow pits. Field inspections carried out during the 
preparation of the ESIA revealed that landslides/rockslides from the top of the hills will 
remain a potential problem as a result of the geo-technical nature of the areas through 
which the roads pass. Emphasis should be on timely post-project maintenance activities.  
The implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plans(ESMPs) 
prepared for the rehabilitation will continue. Future maintenance works will help control 
road side siltation to be caused by the anticipated continued agricultural activities in the 
project area.  
 
Rehabilitation/Maintenance works will not either adversely affect water resources or 
water quality along the road routes. In addition, the project roads cross a few perennial 
rivers only, and which are far apart. Adverse impacts on natural vegetation which, 
normally are associated with the operation of quarries, borrow areas and the construction 
of detours and access roads, will be very limited as only existing borrow/quarry sites, will 
be used; and ESMPs will be implemented.  
 
Wildlife and wildlife habitat are reported in the project areas, but, project operations 
will not impact any ecologically sensitive areas, parks and nature reserves; such as, the 
national park at Nyungwe (along Butare-Cyangugu road) and Volcanoes national park at 
Ruhengeri.  
 
Page  5
The potentially adverse impacts of project operations upon cultural, religious and 
historical sites were assessed in the ESIA. There are no sites to be negatively impacted by 
the road rehabilitation and/or maintenance works.  
 
At appraisal, a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) was conducted in conjunction with the 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). The findings of the SIA concluded that project 
operations will have minor adverse social impacts in terms of social safeguards. The 
project may, however, induce the dislocation of social values resulting in the spread of 
HIV/AIDS. To help the project address the HIV/AIDS threat, HIV/AIDS prevention 
clauses are incorporated in the contract documents and HIV/AIDS awareness was 
conducted during the training of Local Community Associations (LCAs). Further, an 
HIV/AIDS prevention strategy and action plan for the road sector will be prepared and 
will be implemented during and after project implementation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Specialist position was added to the project management team, within 
the implementing institution to monitor potentially adverse environmental and social 
impacts of project operations. The specialist is deployed and is monitoring environmental 
and social safeguards compliance for all road investments operations in the sector. In 
addition to overseeing the implementation of the ESMP for the project, the specialist is 
coordinating cross-sectoral environmental and social issues and ensuring their 
incorporation into the environmental progress process.  
 
OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) is being triggered for the Project; the 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)/Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) for the Kigali - Ruhengeri road has been updated to ensure that the civil works 
carefully avoid existing cultural assets, such as burial and archeological sites.  
 
Guidelines for #chance finds# procedure will be integrated into the contracts for 
construction and road maintenance consultants. These include development of a cultural 
property management plan if physical cultural resources are found, in accordance with 
the government of Rwanda#s policies and guidelines."   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultations were held throughout the EIA and SIA processes in communities 
along the selected road. The results of the consultations confirmed solid support for the 
project. Both local governments, civil society, NGOs, CBOs, CBFs and groups such as 
women, youth, the handicap and the elderly are in favor of the project. To further 
improve stakeholders# participation, the following actions were carried out: (i) local 
communities will take part in road maintenance; (ii)women#s associations will take part 
Page  6
in seminars organized under the project on transport policy and regulation, regional trade 
and road safety.  In addition, the project includes provisions for consultations with local 
populations in the context of the road maintenance component. The objective of these 
consultations, which will be conducted in the local language by NGOs, is to establish 
strategic partnerships with local communities in order to ensure maintenance and 
ownership of the rehabilitated roads at the local community level. The project will 
provide income generating opportunities under the fee for service maintenance contracts 
with local communities. The safeguards document prepared (ESIA), was disclosed in-
country and at the InfoShop in January 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/15/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/30/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mitiku 
03/28/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa 
03/28/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
03/28/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/28/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Emmanuel A. James 
03/28/2011 
Comments:   
