Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4501 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/19/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Samoa 
Project ID: P115351 
Project Name: Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project 
Task Team Leader: Mona Sur 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 7, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 11, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASNS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Agricultural extension and 
research (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Rural policies and institutions 
(25%);Small and medium enterprise support (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.22 
 Financing 
Gap 
3.78
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective would be that fruit and vegetable growers and livestock 
producers improve productivity and take greater advantage of market opportunities.  
 
This would be achieved through facilitation of industry dialogue and coordination; adoption of 
improved agricultural husbandry practices; organization of farmers and their closer integration 
into agro-food supply chains; and targeted investments to improve farm and livestock 
productivity and remove critical market access constraints. At the institutional level, the project, 
in collaboration with other programs would foster the transition of the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Fisheries (MAF) and other agriculture sector institutions towards greater market orientation. 
The project would foster stakeholder coordination and strengthen local level organizations 
(farmer groups) as an important factor in sustaining the performance of selected supply chains.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project would be financed by an IDA Specific Investment Credit equivalent to US$ 8 
million and a US$ 5 million grant from the Food Price Crisis Response Core Multidonor Trust 
Fund managed by the World Bank.  
 
The project would be implemented over a period of five years, on both Upolu and Savaii 
islands, with targeted farming and livestock enterprises promoted in those areas of the islands 
where they are considered by MAF and producer associations to have some comparative 
advantage. Household participation in the project would be demand-driven, with focus not only 
those households wanting to adopt a more commercial approach to farming and livestock 
production, but also those households who want to produce more, but at the same time prefer to 
remain operating at a subsistence level.  
 
Project activities would be grouped into three components: (A) Livestock Production and 
Marketing; (B) Fruit and Vegetable Production and Marketing; and (C) Institutional 
Strengthening.  
 
(A) Livestock Production and Marketing  
 
The objective of this component would be to encourage interested livestock producers to 
upgrade livestock, improve husbandry practices and stock management, make productivity 
enhancing on-farm investments, and improve the quality meat sold in the local market. The 
component would comprise a number of activities, including:  
 
a. 
improving farmer access to superior breeding stock for cattle, pigs, sheep and poultry;  
 
b.
financing eligible farm enterprise investments to improve stock handling and livestock 
housing and provide start-up working capital, through a combination of demand-driven matching 
grants and bank loans;  
 
c. 
providing technical advice on breed selection and breeding management, nutrition, 
animal health and improved husbandry practices;  
 
d.
improving livestock nutrition by fostering locally grown feedstuffs and upgrading 
pastures for cattle and sheep;  
 
e. 
improving meat quality and hygiene through construction of an abattoir on Upolu and 
initiation of a field slaughter service on Upolu and Savaii, with associated cold chains.  
 
f. 
improving market access through spot improvements of unsealed rural access roads in 
collaboration with the Land Transport Authority.  
 
(B)  Fruit and Vegetable Production and Marketing  
 
The objective of this component would be to enable interested fruit and vegetable growers to 
have access to new, higher yielding varieties, adopt improved technology and production 
techniques, make productivity enhancing investments, and organize themselves to strengthen 
their presence in the market and meet the demands of local retailers and foodservice operators 
for year-round supplies of fresh fruits and vegetables. The component would be comprised of a 
number of interrelated activities, including:  
 
a. 
enhancing farmer access to planting material of a broad range of improved fruit and 
vegetable varieties, shown in local trials to be suitable for Samoan conditions;  
 
b.
financing eligible farm enterprise investments to facilitate land preparation, address 
problems with seasonal rainfall excesses and shortfalls, increase mechanization and provide 
Page  3
start-up working capital - through a combination of demand-driven matching grants and bank 
loans;  
 
c. 
providing technical advice on variety selection, crop nutrition, improved husbandry 
practices, and post harvest handling;  
 
d.
facilitating the formation of business-oriented  farmer marketing groups through a variety 
of operational models to improve access to technical and market knowledge and facilitate 
aggregation of product for more efficient marketing;  
 
e. 
promoting the growth of organic products through assistance in market development and 
arrangements for certification;  
 
f. 
supporting studies undertaken by interested grower groups to assess the export market for 
fruits and vegetables and the associated need for more High Temperature Forced Air (HTFA) 
capacity; and  
 
g. 
improving market access through spot improvements of unsealed rural access roads in 
collaboration with the Land Transport Authority.  
 
(C)  Institutional Strengthening  
 
The objective of this component would be to improve (a) the effectiveness of agricultural 
institutions (Government and non-government) providing extension and adaptive research 
services to Samoan farmers; and (b) the ability of these same institutions working individually or 
in collaboration with each other to implement and monitor the project effectively. This would be 
done by:  
 
a. 
enhancing institutional technical and management capacity to address identified skill-
gaps in staff and the operational procedures of implementing agencies, through (i) short-term 
local and overseas training, secondments and exposure visits for agency staff; (ii) targeted short-
term technical assistance, sourced locally whenever this is available;  
 
b.
providing incremental staff needed to coordinate and administer the project effectively - 
specifically project coordination, procurement, financial management, environment/social 
screening, monitoring and evaluation, and beneficiary loan facilitation and monitoring;  
 
c. 
improving work facilities and providing adequate vehicles, equipment and  operating 
expenditure to maximize operational effectiveness; and  
 
d.
designing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation system which is integrated into 
the existing Management Information System (MIS) of MAF.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be implemented in the two main islands of Upolu and Savai'i. The project 
activities would only be implemented on land already used for agricultural production activities. 
Small civil works (access roads spot improvements) would consist of upgrades of the existing 
network.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of Samoa has extensive experience with World Bank Safeguards policies and 
its track record is good. Experience and good practices have been developed at country level in 
particular on the application and implementation of OP/BP4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and 
OP/BP4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).  In addition, Samoa has also a well-developed and 
modern environmental assessment and monitoring procedures for road works, coastal protection, 
Page  4
drainage, quarry development and operations and construction of communications facilities, 
among others, that are published in the Samoa Codes of Environmental Practice (COEPs). The 
COEPs were developed with the assistance of consultants and have been adopted by Samoa 
under the Bank's SIAM-2 covering: Road Planning, Design and Construction (COEP 2); 
Consultation (COEP 3); Construction Camps (COEP 5); Road Construction Erosion Control 
(COEP 6); Slope Stability (COEP 7); Quarry Development and Operations (COEP 8); Gravel 
Extraction (COEP 9); Coastal Protection (COEP 10); Drainage (COEP 11); Traffic Control 
During Construction (COEP 12); Earthworks (COEP 13).  
 
The Samoan Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment and Meteorology (MNREM) is 
considered to be a strong and well-organized agency with substantial experience with 
environmental impact assessments and environmental management plans. MNREM is an 
implementing agency under the Bank-financed SIAM II Project and is familiar with Bank 
environmental safeguards.  
 
Government has been successful in addressing social safeguards aspects in other Bank-financed 
programs. Government's policies and programs are usually developed in a consultative manner 
and with due consideration for equity and inclusiveness. Government has had some success in 
encouraging grass-roots participation in project planning.  The Codes of Environmental Practice 
(COEP) includes detailed guidance on community consultation (COEP # 3).  These procedures 
were developed as a result of Bank support to the Infrastructure Asset Management Program.  
The COEP is applied to all works undertaken by the Government of Samoa.  
 
In the agriculture sector however, there is a need to ensure that policies and programs are 
indeed inclusive and accessible to all and do not discriminate against vulnerable groups (such as 
smaller farmers, women and youth) who have traditionally less access to village resources and 
less voice in decision-making.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASPS) 
Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment is triggered.  
 
The client will prepare an ESMF during project preparation which will be disclosed locally 
and in the Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal. The ESMF will include Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs) or Codes of Environmental Practice (COEPs), where relevant, for 
each type of subproject to be supported under the project such as the upgrading of plantation 
access roads, laboratory, livestock production facilities, slaughterhouse, agriculture activities, 
etc. IFC's EHS will be referred to, where relevant, in the preparation of the EMPs/COEPs. The 
ESMF will also include a chapter on Pest Management that focuses on Integrated Pest 
Management. The ESMF will also include institutional arrangements, capacity building, training 
plans, monitoring and reporting arrangements etc, required to ensure effective implementation of 
COEPs/EMPs.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Natural Habitats is not triggered.  
 
The project will not finance any activities that significantly convert or degrade any 
protected areas or natural habitats as the screening procedures in the ESMF will exclude all 
subprojects with these impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Forests is not triggered.  
 
The policy is not triggered because the project will not finance activities involving 
significant conversion or degradation of critical forest areas. No action is required under this 
policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Pest Management is triggered. The client will develop an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
as part of ESMF following the standards and requirements set forth in OP4.09. The project will 
include measures to strengthen the institutional capacity for implementing IPM in project areas.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources is not triggered. The project will not finance any activities that 
will have impacts on physical cultural resources; screening procedures in the ESMF will exclude 
all subprojects with these impacts. Chance find procedures will be included in the project#s 
ESMF.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples is not triggered. The ethnic structure in Samoa is predominantly ethnic 
Samoan (92.6%) with a minority of Europeans and biracial European/Polynesian.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
At present, no involuntary land acquisition is expected under the project. However, this will 
be confirmed during project preparation as the project design is further developed. If there is a 
need or possibility of land acquisition then the policy will be triggered and appropriate 
safeguards instruments (RPF or RAP) will be prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this 
policy. No action is required under this policy.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The policy is not triggered because the project does not impact or relate to any known 
international waterways as defined under the policy.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The policy is not triggered because the project is not located in any known disputed areas as 
defined under the policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/12/2010 
 
Page  6
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
draft of the ESMF is expected in January 2011.  The final ESMF is expected by March, 
2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mona Sur 
01/11/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
01/19/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
01/12/2011 
Comments:  As noted by the TTL, the GoS is considering shifting the location of the proposed abattoir; 
if so, OP4.12 will be triggered and will be reflected in the appraisal stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
