Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2011 
Report No.:  AC6159
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sao Tome and Principe 
Project ID:  P111669 
Project Name:  Sao Tome - Adaptation to Climate Change 
Task Team Leader:  Sofia U. Bettencourt 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 12, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (80%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme:  Climate change (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.15 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to increase the adaptive capacity of vulnerable 
coastal communities in Sao Tome and Principe to the adverse impacts of climate 
variability and change.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has two investment components and a project management component, as 
follows:  
 
Component 1.  Coastal Early Warning and Safety at Sea.  This component would 
address Priorities 1, 2 and 15 of the NAPA:  
 
(a) 
Establishment of an early warning system for coastal communities and near-shore 
fisheries.  This would include (i) acquisition and installation of early warning system 
equipment; and (ii) strengthening interagency coordination and capacity for producing 12 
hour coastal weather forecasts and providing early warnings.  
 
Page  2
(b) 
Improvement on safety at sea for artisanal fishers to include (i) acquiring and 
installing safety, search and rescue,  and communications equipment; (ii) providing safety 
at sea training to about 485 artisanal fishers; (iii) improving the availability and 
utilization of safety at sea equipment, including distribution of essential equipment to 
trained fishers; (iv) community outreach and disaster preparedness and response training 
for about 12 highly vulnerable coastal fishing communities; and (v) technical assistance.  
 
Component 2.  Coastal Protection for Vulnerable Communities .  This component would 
address Priorities 3, 9 and 10 of the NAPA, and have the following sub-components:  
 
(a) 
Community Preparedness, to include (i) participatory climate-resilient 
development plans; and (ii) studies and engineering design for flood-and landfall 
reduction measures in 4 pilot communities (Ribeira Afonso, Sta. Catarina, and Malanza 
in São Tomé and Sundy in Príncipe).  
 
(b) 
Coastal Protection for Vulnerable Communities to finance the implementation of 
urgent medium-scale coastal adaptation activities; and (ii) building commitment and 
awareness towards climate resilience through small, community-executed adaptation 
works in the above 4 pilot communities.  
 
(c) 
Coastal Resilient Policies to fund (i) exchange and dissemination of lessons 
learned; and (ii) developing a climate-resilient coastal spatial planning and resource 
management policy and legal framework.  
 
Component 3. Project Management, to support project implementation, monitoring, and 
evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Under the First Component, Early Warning and Safety at Sea, the project will be 
implemented nationally.  
 
Under the Second Component, Coastal Protection for Vulnerable Communities, the 
project will be implemented in four pilot coastal communities  - Ribeira Afonso, Malanza 
and Sta Catarina (in S. Tome) and Sundy (in Principe). Combined, these pilot 
communities have a population of 9,300 people. The communities of Malanza and Sundy 
are located, respectively, within the buffer areas of the Natural Parks of Ôbo of São Tomé 
and of Príncipe. Thus, the project triggers OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats).  
 
Project activities under the second component will be phased, starting first in Ribeira 
Afonso and Sta Catarina, and proceeding to Malanza and Sundy only after conclusion of 
the geomorphology study and participatory planning at those locations. The two sets of 
communities are therefore expected to be separated in phasing by about a year.  
 
Page  3
The project targets two vulnerable groups of stakeholders : artisanal fishers under 
Component 1, and coastal communities under Component 2.  Project interventions for 
artisanal fishers will provide both more accurate and more timely weather information 
and needed safety equipment, so that fewer boats and fewer fishers are lost at sea.  These 
interventions are not expected to have significant environmental or social adverse 
impacts.  One Doppler weather radar and one maritime meteorological station will be 
provided under the project, but these are expected to be installed in secured (i.e. 
unoccupied) Government land.   However, the provisions of the  Resettlement 
Management Framework (RMF) would apply for the unlikely case that any of the early 
warning system equipment # in particular a micro-wave link between Santa Catarina and 
Neves  - would require any involuntary land acquisition.  
 
For historical reasons, coastal communities in STP settled in the most vulnerable areas 
of the islands, frequently near floodable river deltas.  Their vulnerability to floods has 
increased in recent times due to climate variability and the permanency of the 
settlements.  The proposed adaptation investments on the land (including beach and river 
revetments) will reduce the frequency and severity of this flooding.  Interventions are 
likely to include beach restoration, beach revetments and other sore/offshore protection 
structures, river bed dredging and embankments, river bank revetments, drainage 
reconstruction, house elevation, and construction of platforms, feeder drainage, and 
community awareness campaigns to manage riverine and coastal flooding.  In addition, 
up to 10 canoe sheds may be built in communities that lack adequate beach areas for 
storing them safely. The Government has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework, including an Environmental Management Plan, which includes 
environmental criteria and procedures for the evaluation of activities and practical 
methods for determining impacts during construction.  
 
In the unlikely event that these works would require removal of any residences, and/or 
that they would be damaged by construction, or that they would have to be removed for 
the construction of river levees or drainage, or (as a final case) that channelization of the 
rivers would increase localized flooding to some areas, requiring residents to move for 
their own security, the Resettlement Management Framework developed under the 
project would apply.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTOS) 
Mr Flavio Chaves (AFTEN) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will involve (a) a set of non-structural activities (mostly related to 
Component 1), involving the the early warning and safety at sea system, as well as 
reinforcement of capacities of the Government, fishers and coastal communities; and (b) 
structural investments involving small-sized works and adaptation interventions aimed at 
reducing river flooding and storm action. The structural interventions will take place in 
four pilot communities, namely Malanza (South São Tomé, District of Caué), Ribeira 
Afonso (East São Tomé, District of Cantagalo) Santa Catarina (Northwest São Tomé, 
District of Lembá) and Sundy in Príncipe Island. Structural interventions fall into three 
major categories: (a) river flood protection works (including river bed dredging, 
embankment, revetments, revegetation, and drainage reconstruction); (b) coastal 
protection (including beach restoration and/or revegetation, revetments, offshore 
breakwaters) and (c) local flood protection measures (secondary drainage works and 
maintenance).   
 
Environmental impacts are likely to be modest, short-term, site-specific, non-sensitive 
or reversible, and, mitigation measures can be adequately designed to reduce negative 
impacts.  
 
As a whole, the project is expected to yield significant positive environmental impacts, 
including (a) reducing flood risks; (b) reducing vulnerability to natural disasters; (c) 
improving the general environmental conditions and quality of life of pilot communities 
(by diminishing their exposure to floods).  Expected negative impacts during the project 
include (a) temporary impacts on quality of life for households living in the vicinity of 
the works (caused by increased levels of noise, dust, traffic, access restrictions); (b) 
minor interference with existing municipal infrastructure; (c) removal of vegetation; (d) 
sedimentation; (e) generation of debris; (f) risk of accidents; and (g) unmet expectations 
and insecurity amongst the population. These are summarized in an Environmental and 
Page  5
Social Management Framework (ESMF) which the Government has completed in 
February 2011.  
 
The risk of maldaptation must always be considered in projects that deal with sensitive 
coastal and hydrological systems. However, this is being minimized by a careful 
geomorphology and hydrological study (to be completed in June 2011) the results of 
which will guide the detailed investments.  
 
Even though none of the project areas falls within the legal limits of a conservation 
areas, two communities # Malanza and Sundy are within the buffer zone of Natural Parks 
of Obô of São Tomé, and of Príncipe, respectively, triggering OP/BP 4.04 (Natural 
Habitats).  However, the Government has provided assurances that the activities proposed 
under the project are fully compatible with those authorized in the buffer areas. The 
impact studies on the buffer area have the same rigor as those carried out in other parts of 
the national territory of São Tomé and Príncipe, as required when they have the potential 
to modify local ecosystems. As such, they are subject to a public consultation, evaluated 
by a national technical commission with a view to verify whether the measures of 
mitigation of the negative impacts proposed are compatible with the local ecosystems.  
After approval, the Directorate General of Environment emits an environmental license 
which authorizes the investment and creates a team to monitor the process of 
implementation to ensure that the measures of mitigation proposed are being carried out. 
As such, the Directorate General of Environment has provided assurances that the ESMF 
and RFP prepared under the project reflect fully the social and environmental 
requirements of the Government, including those applicable to the buffer areas.  
 
Social Impacts.  In general, the project is expected to have positive social impacts, by 
(a) diminishing the risk of loss of lives of fishermen, and resulting impact on their 
dependents; (b) diminishing loss of assets (particularly canoes) to floods; (c) 
strengthening community mobilization; and (d) have a moderate impact on livelihoods 
(by diminishing the number of flood days and therefore allowing people to return to work 
more rapidly after an event).   In general, the project interventions will protect fishers at 
sea and their coastal communities along the coast from the (generally) negative impacts 
of further climate change, variability and sea level rise.  
 
Nonetheless, involuntary resettlement may be needed under three potential situations:  
 
(a) 
Some houses on the seaside may have to be relocated farther from the water if a 
seawall is built or raised.  Such relocation would require the Government to forcibly 
relocate some residences for the safety of the occupants.  
 
(b) 
Some houses or outlying structures may be built on or over strategic drains that 
are now no longer functional or that need to be restored. Rehabilitating these drains 
would require the removal of the houses and associated structures, and relocation to 
immediately neighbouring areas.  Also, there may be the possibility that houses near the 
river could be damaged during construction of protective works.  
 
(c) 
Three, should protective sheds be built for community fishing canoes, a raised 
platform, or to host the Doppler Radar, they will require land.  Unoccupied State or 
Page  6
community lands will be used wherever possible.  However, in cases where this may not 
be possible, the Government may have to forcibly acquire the land.  
 
It is not possible at this time to identify the precise areas or structures that may require 
involuntary resettlement, since the geomorphological studies are not yet completed.  For 
this reason, the Government of STP has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RFP) in February 2011 to define the principles that will guide the development of any 
potential Resettlement Action Plans that may be required under the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main anticipated indirect and/or long term impact of the project is that the pilot 
communities may start to expand towards lower risk (higher ground) areas, in the 
immediate vicinty of the village.  This is considered a positive trend over the long term, 
as it will diminish their exposure to storms and periodic flooding.  It may, however, 
require some progressive adjustment in livelihoods towards more intensive agriculture 
and commerce and less dependency on fisheries. This is considered a positive long-term 
trend, given that coastal fisheries are currently over-exploited and that fishers remain 
amongst the poorest of the poor.   This gradual (and voluntary) expansion of the 
communities towards higher ground may also require some upgrading of household 
sanitation (which is currently largely managed by tidal and flood waters.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The NAPA earlier contemplated relocating to higher ground entire neighborhoods that 
were regularly flooded by sea surges and/or river overflow.  It was subsequently 
recognized that, while low-lying coastal neighborhoods are located in sub-optimal areas 
that flood periodically, many residents have managed to adapt to floods by raising their 
houses (although they continue to suffer important livelihood losses) and that relocating 
communities would be highly disruptive to their socio, cultural and economic patterns.  
For this reason, the project will provide protective seaside and riverside works, but leave 
communities in their present location. At the same time, as an urgent and immediate 
adaptation action, the project will support local land-use planning activities that identify 
and develop suitable residential areas for community expansion. The aim here will be to 
foster the development of  #poles of attraction#, new neighborhood areas that offer basic 
public facilities (e.g. school, market, utilities) eventually attracting residents towards 
lower risk areas.  It is expected that, over time, people will opt to relocate on their own to 
these newer higher-ground areas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Due diligence was conducted to identify any potential environmental and social liability 
of the protective works in the pilot project communities, including any physically 
connected projects and other potential corporate reputational risks.  This review  - carried 
out at pre-appraisal -  confirmed that the Government of STP has acceptable 
environmental, health and safety policies in place, with no potential environmental and 
Page  7
social liabilities identified in the participating communities.  They are also in compliance 
with relevant national and social regulations and policies. The Government has 
completed an ESMF (including an EMP) and RMF which are satisfactory to the Bank.  
 
Environmental impacts will be mitigated according to the measures proposed in the 
EMP, which include (a) close involvement of communities in awareness and 
participatory planning to manage their expectations; (b) supervision and appropriate 
engineering design of the works to ensure that environmental standards are followed 
(particularly for revegetation, control of sedimentation, and disposal of de debris);  (c) 
correct planning and supervision to ensure adherence to workers# safety standards; (d) 
coordination with service providers within the communities to insure minimum 
interference with existing infrastructure.    The EMP includes an Environmental and 
Social Screening Checklist, a template for a simplified Environmental Assessment and 
the environmental regulations to be followed for each structural investment funded under 
the project.  
 
Social impacts will be mitigated by avoiding disruption to people#s lives and 
livelihoods to the maximum extent possible and avoiding taking land in the first place.  
The community, with assistance from project officers, will explore all possible 
configurations of the project and its possible location in order to avoid the need to taking 
any land or at least to minimize its extent.  Where land acquisition is unavoidable, a 
Resettlement Action Plan following the principles of the RFP and OP 4.12 will be 
required, to at least restore, and preferably improve, the standards of living of project-
affected people.  
 
The Project Management Unit and the Directorate General of Environment will be 
responsible for ensuring that the proposed sub-projects follow the EMP and RFP.The 
PMU will first review the technical designs of the proposed works, and propose, if 
needed, any adjustments in the technical and environmental specifications.  DGE will 
then ensure that the sub-projects follow the requisite environmental and social screening 
procedures.  Sub-projects that which trigger positive (Yes) responses to the checklists 
would be subject to further environmental assessments, satisfactory to the Bank.  In 
addition, DGE would ensure that any RAP prepared under the project would be reviewed 
by the Bank.  To familiarize themselves further with Bank safeguard procedures, staff 
from both DGE and PMU would participate in regional safeguard training sessions led by 
the World Bank in lusophone countries (Angola, Mozambique, Cape Verde or Brazil).  In 
addition, Component 2 will support the consolidation of technical, social, and 
environmental information into a database, which will facilitate safeguards monitoring.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include (a) the approximately 2000 artisanal fishers that would benefit 
from the early warning and safety at sea component; (b) the 9,300 inhabitants of the pilot 
coastal communities; and (c) the agencies and NGOs involved in the project.  
 
Page  8
The project has followed an extensive process of public consultation. In addition to the 
community consultation process followed by the National Adaptation Program of Action, 
a
social assessment and physical geomorphology assessment were carried out in Ribeira 
Afonso and Santa Catarina on January 22-26, 2011, followed by consultations with key 
community stakeholders in Malanza, Ribeira Afonso and Santa Catarina on February 8-
10, 2011.  The social assessment identified the main organizational and social structure of 
the communities, people#s perceptions of the problems and solutions, other project#s 
impacts, and their ideas for participation. The second round of consultations (in February 
2011) focused on verifying the problems identified, the typologies of interventions 
proposed (and whether they were adequate to the local context), local support for their 
intervention and mitigation measures proposed. This was concluded with a national 
workshop on the 14th of February in the city of São Tomé, involving all key 
stakeholders. The EMP and RFP were officially approved by the Directorate General of 
Environment on March 25, 2011, and have been disclosed at the Téla Nón web site, São 
Tomé and Príncipe Digital newspaper, on March 29, 2011, and have been made available 
for public consultation at DGA.  They were also disclosed at the Bank#s InfoShop on 
March 29, 2011. All technical designs of the activities as well as simplified 
environmental analyses and RAPs, will be subject to further public consultation and 
disclosure with the beneficiary communities and interested agencies prior to their 
approval and execution.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/29/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/29/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/29/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  9
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sofia U. Bettencourt 
03/29/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Flavio Chaves 
03/29/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Gordon Appleby 
03/29/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Cheikh A. T. Sagna 
03/29/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/29/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
03/29/2011 
Comments:   
