Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5756 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/10/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P123673 
Project Name: Senegal Tertiary Education Governance and Financing For Results 
Task Team Leader: Atou Seck 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTED 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (70%);Public administration- Education (30%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
25.00
25.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to enhance the efficiency and the governance of the higher 
education system and the accountability of the institutions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project supports the Government's sector program/strategy/policy and integrates 
the implementation of policy reforms into its design.  The project will support policy reforms 
that will:  (i) improve the Government's capacity to diversify and improve financing mechanisms 
to tertiary institutions as a means to create incentives to promote a culture of quality and 
innovation in tertiary institutions;(ii) improve the efficiency and the effectiveness in the 
utilization of the government investment and recurrent budgets; and (iii) strengthen the 
management and efficacy of the sector by aligning the roles, missions and responsibilities of 
various governance bodies to the new strategy objectives.  In terms of expected results, the 
project would increase the efficiency of public higher education institutions; improve the budget 
management; diversify the resource base of state universities and link government financing 
mechanisms to quality incentives. The project components are summarized below.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening the governance of the tertiary education system.  
Page  2
Sub-component 1.1: This sub-component would support sub-sector wide initiatives that are 
directed towards improving the overall governance and management of the higher education 
environment.  The project will finance TA, equipment and training to: (i) strengthen the 
governance of higher education in the context of a rapidly expanding system notably by 
supporting the implementation of two higher education governance bodies: the Chancellerie and 
the National Quality Assurance Authority; (ii) to update the mapping for an expansion of 
community college system throughout the country and to develop the legal and regulatory 
framework.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Project implementation, management, and M&E.  As well as funding the 
effective management and monitoring of the project, this sub-component will help improve data 
collection and analysis, and finance specific studies to: (i) make the link between community 
colleges and the labor market; and(ii) prepare feasibility studies for the implementation of the 
community college networks including the bidding documents and the legal framework.  
 
Component 2: Improvement of the effectiveness of the tertiary education institutions.  
 
Sub component 2.1: Performance based contracts to improve accountability and efficiency in 
resource management. Sub-component 2.1 will create incentives to improve the effectiveness 
and efficiency of HEIs in the utilization of public resources. It would finance performance-based 
contracts between Tertiary Institutions and the Government. Universities have already prepared 
strategic plans from which they will derive priority development plans.  The Government will 
support these plans with performance agreements that would build on the following 
arrangements: (i) each Higher Education Institute(HEI) will prepare a detailed action plan and 
budget covering outputs and outcomes to be achieved in a three-year period. The agreements 
would be multi-year and contain (a) funding commitments for the first year by costing proposed 
activities and objectives; (b) funding projections for subsequent years of the agreement; (c) 
agreed targets; and (d) indicators to monitor progress.  Adjustment will be made yearly based on 
the achievement of targets.  (ii) The Government would negotiate with each HEIs and  will 
provide financial support to each plan. (iii) A focus would be on long term capacity building 
with the use of local procedures for  financial management and M&E. World Bank procedures 
will be used for procurement.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Diversifying and increasing the access to short term tertiary education.  
 
This sub-component aims at improving the efficiency of the tertiary education system by 
reducing the overall number of years to get a degree with the increase of short term tertiary 
education and the development of alternative ways to access to tertiary education.  The project 
would finance the: (i) the construction of a Vocational Tertiary Institute (ISEP) in Thies 
University for a provision of two year tertiary education programs linked with the economic 
needs, and (ii) establishment of an ICT-facilitated network to support distance learning.  
 
Sub-component 2.3: Improving the learning environment.  
 
Page  3
The sub-component will finance: (i) the rehabilitation and expansion and equipment at Thies, 
Bambey, and Ziguinchor universities and the rehabilitation and equipment at Dakar and Saint-
Louis universities; and (ii) the improvement of access to internet in all campuses.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located at Dakar, Saint-Louis, Bambey, Ziguinchor, and Thies universities.  
 
Specifically, the Vocational Tertiary Institute (ISEP) will be built in government property 
(property number TF-2913) assigned for the Polytechnic School in Thies University. Although 
the architectural design for the ISEP has not started yet, it is expected that the following 
infrastructure will be built and equipped: 1 auditorium, 4 amphitheatres, 30 classrooms, 15 
multimedia classrooms, 1 library, 5 workshops, and the administration facilities. These are likely 
to be housed in a total of three new buildings.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has a strong capacity in managing safeguards policies. The higher education sector 
is part of the Senegal ten-year development program for which an environmental and social 
assessment has been carried out. Under the current Senegal Quality Education for all project and 
the Education For All Fast Track Initiative (EFA FTI) projects, an ESMF and a RPF have been 
prepared and are being implemented by the Ministry of Education.  
 
Senegalese higher education institutions are the main beneficiaries and implementation entities 
of the project. They already have Environmental departments with highly qualified staff and 
equipment. However, they have no experience implementing Bank projects with safeguards 
requirements. These departments will be in charge of the safeguards aspects for the project, 
which will provide capacity building and funding.  
 
The Ministry of Higher Education will oversee the overall implementation of the environmental 
and social management plan of the project, and will be particularly in charge of implementing 
the proposed mitigation measures with respect to Component 2.  As in the IDA and FTI projects, 
the Ministry of Environment, in its capacity as the Government entity in charge of enforcement 
of environmental regulation, will review and approve the environmental and social management 
plan, and monitor its implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Demba Balde (AFTCS) 
Ms Almudena Mateos Merino (YPP) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Prior to appraisal, the recipient will prepare and disclose an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that presents the potential environmental and social impacts 
and proposed mitigation measures for this type of project. The ESMF will contain a template for 
the Environmental Management Plans (EMP) to be developed once the specific rehabilitation 
and expansion activities to be carried out in the selected universities are known. Contractors will 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
be contractually bound to those EMPs, which will have to be acceptable to the Bank, as well as, 
abide by and reflect national environmental legislation and guidelines.  
 
In the case of the tertiary institutions, the recipient will prepare and disclose an EMP prior 
to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The triggering of OP/BP 4.11 will allow to integrate any mitigation measures in case cultural 
resources are impacted with a standard procedure of chance find.If need be, the formulation of a 
Plan to protect cultural resources will be required.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
All new infrastructures will be located inside enclosed universities premises. While no land 
acquisition/involuntary resettlement is expected, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has 
been prepared in case there are land acquisition issues or the project activities result in lack of 
access to resources or livelihoods. The recipient will prepare the RPF prior to appraisal as part of 
the ESMF.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
03/17/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
ESMF and RPF will be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to appraisal, in the country 
and at the Bank's InfoShop.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Atou Seck 
03/10/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/10/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter Nicolas Materu 
03/10/2011 
Comments:  Acting Sector Manager 
