Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/06/2011 
Report No.:  AC6196
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Senegal 
Project ID:  P123673 
Project Name:  Senegal Tertiary Education Governance and Financing For Results 
Task Team Leader:  Atou Seck 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 8, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (70%);Public administration- Education (30%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
25.00
25.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to enhance the efficiency and quality of the higher 
education system and the oversight and accountability of targeted Higher Education 
Institutions (HEIs).   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Strengthening the governance of the tertiary education system.  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Operationalizing governance bodies.  
 
This sub-component would support sub-sector wide initiatives that are directed towards 
improving the overall governance and management of the higher education environment.  
At the system level, the project will finance equipment, training, and technical assistance 
to strengthen the governance of higher education in the context of a rapidly expanding 
system notably by supporting the development of two higher education governance 
bodies: the GDHE and the NQAA.  At the institutional level, the sub-component will 
finance: training and capacity building of university governance bodies, notably the 
Board of Directors (Conseil d'Administration) and university management teams.  
 
Page  2
Sub-component 1.2: Project implementation and management.  
 
This subcomponent will support the implementation of the project. It will finance the 
equipment, training of staff, the preparation of monitoring reports and technical 
assistance to the DAGE (Directorate of General Administration and Equipment), the 
GDHE (General Directorate of Higher Education) universities, and the ISEP (Higher 
Institute of Professional Studies) for the effective management and monitoring of the 
project. It will support also the implementation of the environmental action plan.  
 
Sub-component 1.3: Development of a Monitoring and Evaluation system.  
 
This sub-component will help build a monitoring and evaluation system both at the 
sector level and for individual institutions. The adequate implementation of this sub-
component is critical for the project, notably to have consistent data to monitor indicators 
and to easily follow the execution of the performance-based contracts mechanism for 
each institution. This sub-component will finance the external evaluations of each annual 
PBC (Performance Based Contract) which will be used for decision-making for financing 
of each subsequent PBC.  Under the sub-component, the project will also finance: data 
collection and analysis, technical assistance, studies, computers, servers, software and 
informatics infrastructure and training.  
 
Sub-component 1.4: Sector Knowledge Development Generation.  
 
This sub-component will finance specific studies to generate knowledge to inform 
decision-making and to improve the performance of the system.  The following studies 
will be financed: (i) evaluation of the Centres des Oeuvres Universities de Dakar, and 
Saint-Louis (COUD and CROUS) to review their effectiveness and the service delivery 
quality; (ii) evaluation of the Senegalese research system and management; (iii) 
evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness of bursaries allocation and management 
system; (iv) feasibility studies for the implementation of the ISEP network and a second 
tertiary institution in Dakar including the biding documents and the legal framework; (v) 
evaluation of university financial, procurement and information systems for the mid-term 
review; (vi) an annual public expenditure and financing review of the higher education 
sector; and (vii) specific surveys and assessments for student satisfaction, LMD 
(Bachelor, Master, PHD) implementation and other quality related issues.  
 
Component 2: Improvement of the effectiveness of the tertiary education institutions.  
 
Sub component 2.1: Performance based contracts to improve accountability and 
efficiency in resource management.  
 
This sub-component will create incentives to improve the effectiveness, efficiency and 
accountability of HEIs in the utilization of public resources. It would finance 
performance-based contracts between Tertiary Institutions and the Government. In this 
contract, the Government agrees to pay a pre-determined amount of money representing a 
portion of the institutional budget. In return, the institution commits itself to improve its 
Page  3
performances in certain fields of its activities. Universities have already prepared 
strategic plans from which they will derive priority development plans.  The Government 
will support these plans with performance agreements that would build on the following 
arrangements: (i) each HEIs will prepare a detailed action plan and budget covering 
outputs and outcomes to be achieved in a three-year period. The agreements would be 
multi-year and contain (a) funding commitments for the first year by costing proposed 
activities and objectives; (b) funding projections for subsequent years of the agreement; 
(c) agreed targets; and (d) indicators to monitor progress.  Adjustment will be made 
yearly based on the achievement of targets. (ii) the Government would negotiate with 
each HEIs and will provide financial support to each plan; and (iii) the focus would be on 
long term capacity building with the use of local procedures for financial management 
and Monitoring and Evaluation.World Bank procedures will be used for procurement.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Diversifying and increasing the access to short term tertiary 
education.  
 
This sub-component aims at improving the efficiency of the tertiary education system 
by reducing the overall number of year to get a degree with the increase of short term 
tertiary education and the development of alternative ways to access tertiary education. 
The project will finance:  
 
(i) The building of the ISEP (Higher Institute of Professional Studies) in Thies to 
provide two-year tertiary education programs linked with the economic needs. The ISEP 
will be designed to accommodate a total of 7,000 students, 3,500 each year. The sub-
component will finance training, feasibility studies, and the infrastructures and equipment 
of the ISEP. It will also finance the necessary technical assistance notably the cost related 
to the support of a similar and well performing international tertiary education institution 
to accompany the development and the implementation of the ISEP. This Institution will 
be selected on a competitive basis.  
 
(ii) The establishment of an ICT-facilitated network.  The sub-component will finance:  
(a) the extension and improvement of the campus networks in UGB (Université Gaston 
Berger) and University Cheikh Anta Diop (UCAD) and the interconnection; (b) the 
implementation of a campus network in Bambey, Thies and Ziguinchor and the 
interconnection to the DLRN (Distance Learning and Research Network); (c) training 
and capacity building for the staff managing networks and (equipment; technical 
assistance and feasibility studies to upgrade the technical center and facilities).  
 
Sub-component 2.3: Improving the learning environment.  
 
This sub-component aims at improving the quality of the facilities for a better learning 
environment. Priority will be given to regional universities that are struggling with an 
acute lack of facilities. The sub-component will finance: (i) the rehabilitation and 
expansion facilities and purchase of equipment for the Universities of Thies, Bambey, 
Ziguinchor and Saint-Louis and the rehabilitation of facilities and purchase of equipment 
for UCAD; and (ii) extension of access to internet in all campuses.   
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Tertiary Institute at Thies (ISEP) (subcomponent 2.2) will be built in Government#s 
property (property no. TF-2913) allocated for the Polytechnic School and Thies 
University.  
 
The works to be carried out under sub-component 2.3 will be located in the universities 
of Dakar, Thies, St-Louis, Ziguincor and Bambey. All new buildings (e.g. classrooms, 
amphitheaters, etc.) will be located within the current property of the universities.  
 
The main works to be carried out in each one of the project sites, as specified in the 
ESMF, are listed below:  
 
*
UGB St-
Louis: construction of new UFR (Unité de Formation et de Recherche) of 
Education Sciences and Sports: classrooms, amphitheaters, administrative facilities, 
installation of equipment;  
 
*
Bambey: construction of a 200-people capacity amphitheater, 10 classrooms, 4 rooms 
for IT, 10 offices for teachers and 2 laboratories;  
 
*
Thies: construction of Board of Education offices; finalization of construction of 
convention center; construction of technological center, with 3 amphitheaters and 15 
classrooms; UFR of Health, construction of 1 amphitheater 5 teaching rooms, and an 
administrative block; and installation of IT equipment for remote teaching;  
 
*
Ziguinchor: construction and equipment of two blocks for a UFR for 500 people; 
construction and equipment of a 500-people capacity amphitheater; construction and 
equipment of one block for the IT Resources Center;  
 
*
Dakar: rehabilitation of 5 amphitheaters, the Baccalaureate Office and the Board of 
Education building;  
 
*
ISEP: 1 auditorium, 4 amphitheaters, 30 classrooms, 15 multimedia classrooms, 1 
library, 5 workshops and the administration equipment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Demba Balde (AFTCS) 
Ms Almudena Mateos Merino (YPP) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Environmental Category assigned to the project is Category B-Partial Assessment, 
predicated on the fact that environmental risks and social impacts are expected to be 
limited and manageable and, in most cases, reversible.  
 
The expected impacts associated with the preparation and construction works can be 
managed through mitigation measures and actions as proposed in the Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the project. The ESMF also includes a list of 
contractual environmental requirements to be incorporated in the bidding documents, 
including compliance with specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for the 
universities (prepared for Bambey, Thies and Ziguinchor and once investments are better 
defined for St-Louis and Dakar). EMPs, also contractually binding, will be prepared for 
UGB Saint-Louis and ISEP once feasibility and architectural studies are completed. 
Potential impacts in this phase include: pollution from waste generated during the works, 
degradation of air quality, pollution and degradation of soils, pressure on water resources, 
reduction of vegetation cover, negative reaction from local communities if local labor is 
not employed, social conflicts related to occupation of public or private land, health risks, 
risk to cultural property, and disruptions to current service providers.  
 
It is expected that the potential adverse social impacts will be small-scale and site-
specific typical of Category B projects. Moreover, the project is expected to generate 
significant social benefits through increased security within campuses, better access to 
water and sanitation services for students and workers, better working and hygiene 
conditions and contribute positively to livelihood conditions with employment 
opportunities.  
 
OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered because in some of the sites, 
specifically at the new ISEP and Bambey University, project activities could impact, 
either temporarily or permanently, the livelihoods of farmers who cultivate or raise 
poultry within the potential areas identified for sitting the new infrastructure.  
Page  6
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared. Since the potential impacts 
on livelihoods are expected to be limited (i.e. small number of farmers and lands 
affected), Resettlement Action Plans (ARPs) will be prepared as needed once the specific 
location of the proposed infrastructure is known.  
 
In the case that the Physical Cultural Resources OP 4.11 is triggered during construction 
of infrastructure, and based on this policy, mitigation measures to prevent adverse 
impacts and protect the sites as sources of valuable scientific and historical information, 
as assets for economic and social development, and as integral part of the local cultural 
identity will be implemented.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential impacts associated to the functioning phase of the new educational 
infrastructure to be built under the project could be related to: nuisances associated to 
malfunctioning toilets, absence of gender considerations in the construction of the toilets, 
degradation of the environment as a result of waste mismanagement, deterioration of 
water points, insecurity and risk of accidents resulting from faulty infrastructure, and 
marginalization of handicapped students.  
 
These potential impacts will also be avoided or mitigated through the application of the 
measures already identified in the ESMF, including targeted capacity building and 
sensitization of students and personnel.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The ESMF identifies two potential sites for the construction of the ISEP in Thies, both of 
them within the same Government property (TF-2913), with a total area of 100 ha. 
Biophysical and socioeconomic characteristics are equivalent in the two sites, both of 
them being vulnerable to hydric erosion and hosting agricultural activities. The final 
choice will be made based on a more complete environmental and social analysis, which 
will also include further consultations with the people who would be potentially affected 
by each of the alternatives. The EMP for the ISEP will include all the relevant 
information on site selection.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The national legal framework for environmental management in Senegal spells out the 
roles and responsibilities of different government ministries, departments and agencies as 
well as other stakeholders. Substantial progress in planning and implementation of 
safeguard measures has also been made over the years in a number of Bank-funded 
operations, including the previous education sector operations. Notwithstanding this 
progress, significant institutional and technical capacity for environmental management 
still needs to be provided at all levels.  Capacity building requirements are addressed in 
detail in the ESMF and budgets provided for under the project to implement the 
recommended improvement measures both for environment and social aspects.  
Page  7
The PIU (Project Implementation Unit) at the Ministry of Higher Education and 
Scientific Research (MOHESR) will be responsible for overall coordination during 
project preparation, implementation and supervision, whereas the Focal Point for 
Environmental and Social Safeguards (FPESS) will be at the Directorate for Construction 
of Public Buildings (DGCBEP), within the Ministry of Habitat, Construction and 
Hydraulics. DGCBEP will be in charge of the technical execution of project activities, 
while the FPESS will coordinate with the PIU to carry out the local monitoring of social 
and environmental issues during construction works. The Bureaux d'Etude et Contrôle 
will be responsible, under the oversight of DGCBEP, for the regular control and 
supervision of works, including social and environmental issues. Finally, the office of 
monitoring and impact evaluation of the Directorate of Environment (DREEC) will take 
the lead for external monitoring and oversight of safeguard aspects. For all construction 
activities, DREEC will validate both the screening process, including the consultation 
process, and the Social and Environmental Impact Assessments (ESIAs) when these are 
required. Finally, and as for other project activities, the Bank will also provide regular 
implementation support on safeguard issues.  
 
DGCBEP have limited experience in management of social and environmental aspects 
of projects, which will require the project to allocate resources to strengthen their 
institutional and technical capacity through specific training and the hiring of additional 
support staff or temporary consultants as needed. In addition, the project will include a 
budget provision for DGCBEP to hire a consultant, on a need basis, to provide support in 
overseeing the implementation of appropriate environmental management and 
environmental mitigation measures by the contractors during the construction and 
rehabilitation of infrastructure in the universities and during the construction of ISEP.  
The terms of references for the recruitment of the Bureaux de Contrôle will include the 
requirement to include a safeguards specialist in the team. Their reports will include a 
safeguard section.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key project stakeholders include: the tertiary and secondary education students, the 
academic and administrative staff of universities and tertiary education institutions, 
managers in public and private tertiary education institution, the Senegalese society, 
private sector and entrepreneurs that will benefit from the improvement in the quality of 
the trained youth.  
 
Consultation and participation is expected to be a continuous process during 
implementation through different media to meet the needs of identified stakeholders and 
partners at different stages of the project. There will be support to governance issues like 
transparency and accountability from both demand and supply side through participatory 
mechanisms and social accountability tools. The ESMF indicates specific procedures to 
carry out consultations in the context of project implementation.  
 
Specific consultations on the ESMF were carried out in the universities of St-Louis, 
Thies, Bambey, Ziguinchor and Dakar. Limited consultations were also carried out on the 
Page  8
ISEP. Stakeholders consulted include university presidents (recteurs), deans, directors, 
professors, student representatives, representatives from the institutions' environmental 
services departments, city councils, and the General Directorate for Construction of 
Public Buildings (DGCBEP). The project and the ESMF are positively regarded since 
they are expected to contribute to the improvement of both the teaching and living 
conditions in the different institutions. Main areas of concern include: lack of appropriate 
teaching infrastructure (equipment, human resources, etc.), student living conditions 
(water supply and sanitation problems, electricity, housing, transportation, safety, 
hygiene), waste management, better integration of the students in the development plans 
(e.g. gender and handicapped issues), management of green spaces, choice of adequate 
contractors, and reinforcement of the environmental capacity at DGCBEP and at the 
institutions' environmental services departments. Many of these issues will be 
intrinsically addressed by the development plans to be supported by project investments 
and also through the capacity building activities specified in the ESMF and future EMPs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/27/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/27/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Atou Seck 
04/06/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Almudena Mateos Merino 
04/05/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Demba Balde 
04/05/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/06/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter Nicolas Materu 
04/06/2011 
Comments:  Acting Sector Manager 
