Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/03/2011 
Report No.:  AC6066
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P099357 
Original Project Name: Sierra Leone 
Mineral Sector Technical Assistance 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P124633 
Project Name:  Sierra Leone Extractive Industries Technical Assistance - Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Ekaterina Mikhaylova 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 22, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SEGOM 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (60%);Public administration- Energy and mining 
(40%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The updated project development objective for the additional financing project is to build 
the capacity of the government to improve management and regulation of the extractive 
industries sector.  The project name will also be changed to align with the updated PDO 
to Extractive Industries Technical Assistance Project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing project will maintain the same components structure as the 
original MTAP and will consist of three components:  
 
Part A: Extractive Industries Sector Regulatory Frameworks  
 
1.
Provision of capacity building to the Recipient to improve the regulation of the 
extractive industries sector through the updating, or preparation of where applicable, and 
the carrying out of related consultations on, new or revised regulatory instruments 
Page  2
including inter alia: (a) the Mines and Minerals Act and supporting mining regulations,  
(b) development of a regulatory framework for the Recipient#s National Minerals 
Agency (NMA) including operating procedures; and (c) the Petroleum Act and 
supporting petroleum and gas regulations.  
 
2.
Support to the Recipient in establishing and managing the policy level dialogue and 
strategy formulation for the environmental and social aspects of the oil and gas sector 
development.  
 
3.
Cover cost overrun for preparation of mining sector environmental and social 
regulations, regulations for underground mining and regulations for mineral trading 
licenses, supported under the original project.  
 
Part B: Institutional Strengthening  
 
1.
Support governance of the extractive industries sector through:  
 
(a) Strengthening the technical, institutional, and management capacity of the Ministry 
of Mineral Resources (MMR) and, upon its establishment, NMA including, inter alia, 
collection and management of geological and geochemical data for selected sites, 
carrying out targeted geochemical surveying,  mineral resource assessment and mapping 
of selected sites, and carrying out investment promotion activities,  
 
(b) Strengthening regulatory enforcement capacity of the MMR;  
 
(c) Provision of transitional salary support to MMR and, upon its establishment, NMA 
for selected civil service staff for carrying out geological, data management, and 
monitoring and evaluation of mining operations functions;  
 
(d) Developing a secure geodata management and information system in MMR and, 
upon its establishment NMA, including web-based tools and promotion materials;  
 
(e) Strengthening the procurement, financial management, project management and 
monitoring capacity of the MMR to manage donor-financed projects;  
 
(f) Developing and strengthening a monitoring and evaluation and reporting system for 
the extractive industries sector;  
 
(g) Supporting the Government#s Diamond Office through training, advisory services 
and capacity building;  
 
(h) Providing capacity building to MMR, and, upon its establishment, NMA, and 
Ministry of Environment, Sierra Leone Environmental Protection Agency and Civil 
Society Organizations on implementation of environmental and social regulations for the 
extractive industries sector, including monitoring and evaluation tools, reporting, and 
consultation processes; and  
 
2.
Strengthening the institutional and management capacities of the MMR, Strategy and 
Policy Unit and the Recipients# Negotiations Committee for extractive industries 
contracts negotiations, including financial and economic modeling, review of technical 
and feasibility reports, updating model agreements for specific commodities, and 
developing negotiations strategies.  
 
3.
Provision of capacity building to the Petroleum Resources Unit, through:  (a) 
purchases of software licenses and hardware to allow PRU to store and analyze 
geological and geophysical data; (b) financing the international advisor who will deliver 
hands-on training to PRU staff, establish capacity to perform core functions relating to 
licensing and exploration, and advise the PRU, the Petroleum Task Force and other 
officials on policy decisions as needed; and (c) workshops, training and study tours.  
Page  3
4. Covering cost overrun of the original project for carrying out targeted geochemical 
surveying.  
 
Part C. 
 
Project Management  
 
Provision of technical and financial support to MMR for the management, procurement, 
financial management, monitoring and evaluation and audit of the Project, all through 
provision of technical advisory services, Training and Operating Costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented by the Government of Sierra Leone NMA. As a TA 
project, the activities will be undertaken mostly in Freetown, the capital city, and there 
are no anticipated physical infrastructure or construction.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS) 
Mr Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will scale up capacity building activities to line ministry and inspectors to 
assist in capacity strengthening for monitoring environmental and social compliance of 
the operations in both the mining and oil sectors. For this purpose, the project will 
develop an Oil sector Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA).  The 
timing for the proposed Oil SESA is very opportune as this is a new sector in Sierra 
Leone and its frameworks are still being defined and the Oil SESA can become an 
important element to inform policy level decisions related to future sector development 
and optimal legal/ regulatory and institutional set-up for oil sector management and 
supervision going forward.  
 
The project provides technical assistance, and as designed, there are only moderate 
environmental impacts expected to be generated. The focus of this project is to assist with 
Page  4
setting up appropriate frameworks and capacity of the Government of Sierra Leone to 
manage extractive industries sector activities to be carried out by the private sector which 
are happening outside of this project scope.The potential negative impact of the future 
sector activities, which will happen with or without the project, has a risk of being more 
severe if the government does not undertake appropriate reforms, part of which are 
supported by this project.  
 
The project does not support any land-use planning and does not involve any 
resettlement nor cover any areas occupied by indigenous peoples. As a technical 
assistance project, it is noted that management of social level impacts of extractive 
industries operations would be improved as a result of this project through preparation of 
modern sector regulations and consultation and participatory frameworks.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
mining sector Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for Sierra 
Leone was prepared in 2007 and its core recommendations were incorporated into the 
original MTAP.  In 2010, as part of preparation of the regional mining project, the Bank 
financed preparation of a West Africa Minerals Sector Strategic Assessment 
(WAMSSA).  While most of the recommendations of WAMSSA target regional level 
reforms, the scaled-up MTAP will, inter alia, contribute to the goals of (i) strengthening 
environmental governance; and (ii) improving social accountability and mineral sector 
governance.  
 
The additional financing project will remain within the same parameters and as such the 
same approach will apply.  The additional financing will (i) scale-up capacity building 
activities to MMR, Ministry of Environment, and CSOs to monitor environmental and 
social compliance of the operations in both mining and oil sectors; and (ii) undertake a 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment for oil and gas sector to identify the 
priority actions that Government can take to foster the environmentally sustainable and 
socially equitable development of Sierra Leone#s oil and gas sector.  
 
The Terms of Reference for preparation of environmental and social regulations for 
mining sector and related capacity building that were disclosed prior to the original 
project appraisal (October 2009) remain valid, but will be updated to reflect progress to-
date as well as new activities.  The updated ToRs will be disclosed prior to appraisal.  
The activity which will require additional attention is the oil sector SESA that will be 
prepared during project implementation.  It was agreed that preparation of full Terms of 
Page  5
Reference for Oil and Gas SESA will require extensive consultations to get a full buy-in 
within the government prior to commencement of this work.  Therefore, implementation 
of SESA in accordance with the Terms of Reference acceptable to the Bank will be 
included as dated covenant in the Financing Agreement.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As with the original project, the main stakeholders related to this project are the GoSL 
agencies, whose capacities will be enhanced for environmental and social impacts 
monitoring, and as a result, local communities benefitting from or impacted by the 
mineral and oil sectors activities, mining industry, oil industry, and government agency 
staff related to the mineral and oil sectors.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/25/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is an additional financing project; no updates of the safeguards document are 
required(for this project -- the ToRs for environmental and social regulations that were 
disclosed in October 2009 for the original project remain valid).   
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ekaterina Mikhaylova 
02/17/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Joseph Ese Akpokodje 
02/03/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Concepcion J. Cruz 
02/03/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
02/03/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
02/17/2011 
Comments:   
