Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/03/2011 
Report No.:  AC6059
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P121514 
Project Name:  Sierra Leone - Financial Sector Support  TA Project 
Task Team Leader:  Thomas Losse-Mueller 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 10, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTFW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (80%);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to strengthen the capacity of the Bank Sierra Leone 
and contribute to improving efficiency in financial intermediation, safeguarding financial 
sector stability, reducing transaction costs and expanding access to financial services.  
 
The proposed PDO derives directly from the objective of the Financial Sector 
Development Plan (FSDP).   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance two major components, aimed at: 1) Enhancing access to 
financial services; and 2) Building financial sector reform and oversight capacity of the 
Bank of Sierra Leone. The activities under these components derive directly from the 
priorities of the Sierra Leone Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) and the 
activities outlined in the corresponding project implementation plan.  
 
Component 1:  
Enhancing access to financial services (US$ 1.6 million)  
 
Page  2
1. 
This component will support activities that improve efficiency in financial 
intermediation, reducing transaction costs of money transfer and expand access to 
financial services.  It complements technical assistance and financial support to the 
microfinance sector provided by the Sierra Leone Microfinance Investment and 
Technical Assistance Facility (MITAF) funded by KfW, UNCDF, UNDP, CORDAID 
and the Bank of Sierra Leone, the IFC Doing Business Reform Action Plan, IFC 
technical assistance on leasing and secured lending to support MSME finance, 
Investment Climate Facility technical assistance as well as the African Development 
Bank WAMZ payment system support project.  
 
2. 
Specific activities include:  
 
i. 
Credit information infrastructure: This activity will include two phases: the first 
phase of the project will support the development of a basic bad debtor database operated 
by the Bank of Sierra Leone, which utilizes non-performing loan information reported by 
Sierra Leone banks. In the second phase, the development of a comprehensive credit 
information bureau including negative and positive credit information funded either 
entirely by the private sector or in a public-private partnership model including negative 
and positive credit information, adequate regulation and capacity development for BSL 
oversight will be supported.  
 
ii. 
Implementation of payment systems and remittances policy framework: Activities 
will support the (i) drafting of required payment systems regulation and policies, (ii) 
training, technical assistance and capacity development for payment system and mobile 
payment supervision, and (iii) the drafting of mobile payment regulation and design 
adequate oversight mechanisms  
 
iii. 
SME / value chain finance capacity development of commercial banks: This 
activity will include the (i) analysis of product development needs and enabling 
environment constraints to support MSME finance and agricultural finance, (ii) 
development of sector policies and support for sector dialogue on enhancing access to 
financial services, (iii) pilot product development in cooperation with selected 
commercial banks (secured lending, leasing, value chain finance) and capacity 
development for selected commercial banks, (iv) drafting of secured lending law and 
regulation to support MSME finance.  
 
Component 2:  Building financial sector reform and oversight capacity of the Bank of  
 
Sierra Leone (US$ 2.4 million)  
 
3. 
This component will strengthen the Bank of Sierra Leone#s capacity to supervise 
the growing financial sector effectively, lead the financial sector reform process and 
develop its organizational capacity to undertake its key functions within the Sierra Leone 
financial sector. It complements technical assistance support from Gesellschaft for 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) on banking supervision and reform capacity, IMF 
technical assistance on banking supervision, legal framework and organizational 
development as well as the African Development Bank WAMZ payment system support 
project. The component will focus on the implementation of the Institutional 
Page  3
Development Plan of the Bank of Sierra Leone, including banking supervision, 
strengthening the legal environment of the financial sector and build BSL capacity to lead 
implementation of the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP).  
 
4. 
The component will include the following specific activities:  
 
i. 
Financial Sector Legal Environment: This activity will (i) review and update the 
financial sector legal framework, including the Other Financial Services (Amendment) 
Act, Banking Act and Bank of Sierra Leone Act (ii) support the drafting, amending and 
implementation of revised sector legislation, including potentially a Microfinance Law, 
and (iii) fund training and capacity development for the BSL legal department.  
 
ii. 
Implementation of Institutional Development Plan: This activity will support the  
implementation of the BSL institutional development plan, including (i) review of HR 
policies and practice and drafting of new HR policy, (ii) staff capacity development: 
assessment of staff capacity needs, skills/capacity assessment of existing staff and 
preparation of a staff capacity development plan as a framework for broad-based training 
and capacity development program, (iii) broad-based training program for BSL staff, (iv) 
review of functional and business process and support for business and functional process 
re-engineering,  (v) review and development of IT strategy and implementation plan, 
purchase of IT equipment with a focus on banking supervision, (vi) complement 
technical assistance support for the implementation of the AML/CFT framework, and 
(vii) design and implement efficient supervisory processes, including the supervision of 
the microfinance sector.  
 
iii. 
Support to the FSDP Secretariat: This activity will support (i) project 
management, M&E and implementation capacity to enable the FSDP Secretariat to 
coordinate financial sector reforms under the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP), 
the (ii) development of financial management and procurement capacity, and the (iii) 
purchase of select equipment for FSDP Secretariat.  
 
iv. 
Strategy and analytical support for BSL: This activity will support BSL in further 
developing financial sector development strategies, including but not limited to the 
microfinance policy framework and long-term finance, through long-term technical 
assistance by an international financial sector consultant firm.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Freetown, Sierra Leone   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is a technical assistance operation financing consultants, equipment and 
training.  No safeguard related risks have been identified based on available information.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is a technical assistance operation financing consultants, equipment and 
training.  No safeguard related risks have been identified based on available information.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  5
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Thomas Losse-Mueller 
03/04/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paul Noumba Um 
03/04/2011 
Comments:   
