Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/28/2011 
Report No.:  AC5772
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P115836 
Project Name:  Wetlands Conservation Project 
Task Team Leader:  John W. Fraser Stewart 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 10, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
1.80 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project's Development Objective (PDO) / Global Environmental Objective (GEO) is 
to improve strategic and operational conservation management of wetland areas in Sierra 
Leone.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project has 3 components and will pilot activities in two wetland areas 
namely: the Sierra Leone River Estuary (coastal wetland) and the Mamunta Mayosso 
complex (inland, wetland).  
 
Component 1: Strategic Planning for Wetland Conservation: This component will 
provide technical assistance to support: (i) reviewing and updating as appropriate of the 
existing policy and strategy for wetland conservation in Sierra Leone; (ii) updating the 
inventory and prioritizing conservation needs of key wetland ecosystems throughout 
Sierra Leone; and (iii) preparing a prioritized and phased strategic plan for wetland 
conservation nationwide.  
 
Page  2
Component 2: Wetland Conservation Site Planning and Management: The project will 
provide services to support: planning and management; goods (e.g. motorbikes, small 
boats, global positioning systems (GPS), radios, lap tops); minor infrastructure 
improvements; training, including workshops and study tours; and some operational costs 
in order to develop and implement effective conservation management at the selected 
priority wetland conservation sites.  Best practice will be shared with managers and 
stakeholders at other wetland sites around the country in the context of implementing a 
national strategic plan for wetland conservation.  The component will include three sub-
components:  
 
2.1. Pilot Site Management Planning and Implementation, which will entail: (i) 
establishing conservation management teams (CSMTs) at each of the selected sites, and 
building partnerships among government, non-government organizations, community-
based organizations, traditional village leaders and the private sector; (ii) developing site 
specific conservation management plans (CMPs) that are endorsed by traditional and 
local authorities; (iii) implementing conservation management plans (including minor 
infrastructure improvements for staff and visitors such as observation posts, water supply, 
road access, research facilities, trails and camp sites); boundary demarcation; working 
with local communities to improve resources management, implementing monitoring 
systems, exploring financing options; and (iv) building capacity of field staff and key 
stakeholders to undertake conservation planning, management, and enforcement through 
joint training programs.  
 
2.2 Community Mobilization and Outreach and Conservation-linked Development, 
which will entail provision of consultant services, goods, and training for: (i) community 
outreach and awareness through strategic local and national communication programs 
that will include contributing to schools curricula, preparing information materials, 
extension by field staff, and developing nature clubs; and (ii) conservation-linked 
community development through the preparation and implementation of Community 
Action Plans (CAPs), which will, jointly with local stakeholders, identify priority threats 
to conservation in each site and explore options for addressing them.  Activities under the 
CAPs may include: (a) providing training for developing income-generating activities; 
(b) supporting potential small-scale entrepreneurs to develop business plans and 
partnerships in support of conservation-linked investment initiatives; (c) supporting local 
practices for sustainable land use; (d) strengthening linkages with government programs 
and service providers (such as Farmer Field Schools); and (e) possible introduction of 
energy-saving technologies to reduce unsustainable dependency on natural resources.  
 
2.3. Mainstreaming Conservation in District Development Planning, which will entail 
supporting the Government#s decentralization process by training conservation staff and 
local officials to work with District Councils and Ward Development Committees to 
ensure that conservation and sustainable natural resource management is incorporated in 
district and regional planning for development and service delivery.  
 
Component 3: Project Management: The Project will primarily finance services and 
some goods to support the existing BCP Project Management Team (PMT) within the 
Page  3
Forestry Division of MAFFS, to ensure that the team has the necessary resources to 
effectively expand the scope of work to include the wetland sites and wetland 
conservation strategy development.  Activities will include: (i) ongoing operation of the 
National Steering Committee (NSC) and Project Management Team, (ii) developing and 
supervising annual and quarterly work plans and budgets, (iii) overseeing procurement 
and financial management and conducting annual audits, and (iv) establishing baselines, 
and developing planning, monitoring and evaluation systems for wetlands in the context 
of the national conservation program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
On the ground activities on conservation planning and management will be implemented 
in two priority wetland sites, including: (i) Sierra Leone River Estuary (coastal wetland, 
259,000 ha.) and (ii) Mamunta Mayosso (inland wetland, 2076 ha.).  The exact 
boundaries of these conservation sites will be confirmed and demarcated during project 
implementation phase.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTEN) 
Ms Mi Hyun Bae Mbayo (LCSSO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).  The project is classified as Category B, as the 
potential adverse effects are few, and site specific.  The Project, and its related 
Biodiversity Conservation Project approved by the World Bank in January 2010, is 
expected to have an overall positive environmental impact by conserving wetlands and 
biodiversity and improving natural resource use.  
 
GoSL prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which 
details measures and plans for addressing potential threats, including guidelines for 
Page  4
screening projects and activities, and identifying mitigation measures when necessary.  
The ESMF was disclosed in-country on January 7-8, 2011, and at the World Bank's 
InfoShop on January 3, 2011.  Disclosure workshop dates were published in local 
newspapers including The Citizen and The Premier newspapers. Disclosure workshops 
were held between January 7 and 8, 2011, at both the Sierra Leone River Estuary and 
Mamunta Mayosso. Records of the workshops carried out (including list of participants) 
have been included in the updated ESMF.  As described in the ESMF, the Project will 
carry out small infrastructure rehabilitation or development of basic facilities such as 
interpretation and educational facilities. Additionally, the project will support community 
level initiatives for improved conservation management effectiveness and build efforts 
for conservation through awareness of benefits while catalyzing conservation linked 
development.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04).  Consistent with OP 4.04, the project will help to 
conserve natural habitats and ensure that specific project activities avoid habitat 
degradation. The project will not adversely affect critical habitats, but the project triggers 
this policy to ensure project activities are carried out in accordance with it.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  The project may entail: (i) limited land 
acquisition following final delineation of the conservation sites' boundaries as well as 
small community infrastructure works; (ii) relocation of a small number of human 
settlements located inside any of the conservation sites as determined during project 
implementation; and (iii) restriction of access of local communities to natural resources in 
the  conservation sites.  Overall impacts are yet to be determined as boundaries need to be 
re-demarcated and the status of villages inside and outside of the conservation sites needs 
to be assessed. Therefore, consistent with OP 4.12, a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) and a Process Framework (PF) have been prepared, approved and disclosed by 
GoSL (as described above).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is expected to generate positive long-term impacts, through improved 
management of conservation areas, with particular focus on training in new techniques, 
and inclusion of local communities in decision making and support for sustainable 
alternative economic opportunities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are no feasible alternatives to the Project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been carried out, 
which includes a draft Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EMP will be 
finalized once specific investments and sites are identified. A Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) and a Process Framework (PF) have been prepared. The RPF will 
Page  5
guide the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), if necessary, for addressing 
any land acquisition, relocation of human settlements located inside any of the 
conservation sites during planning and implementation of the project.  The RAP(s) will 
be reviewed and approved by the Bank and thereafter disclosed in country and in the 
Infoshop. A budget allocation for the cost of implementing the RAPs has been created 
under Component 2.  The PF will address any restriction of access of local communities 
to natural resources in the conservation sites and establishes the process for how to 
involve potentially affected communities in planning and implementation of the project 
while identifying how affected communities will be assisted in restoring their livelihood, 
as a consequence of lost access to traditional natural resources.  
 
Environmental assessments in Sierra Leone are at present guided by the Environment 
Protection Agency Act (2008), which makes the Sierra Leone Environmental Protection 
Agency (SLEPA) responsible for the effective monitoring of the country#s environmental 
issues as well as ensuring compliance with the environmental impact assessment 
procedures.  It also emphasizes the need to promote socio-economic development within 
the context of prescribed acceptable environmental standards and safeguards. This 
Project will be executed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security 
(MAFFS).  
 
The ESMF, RPF, and PF revealed gaps in institutional and technical capacities of 
counterpart agencies to plan, assess and monitor implementation of environmental and 
social safeguards and mitigation plans. The Project, therefore, envisages strengthening 
the Project Management Team (PMT) by providing training for its staff to ensure 
systematic implementation and monitoring of environmental and social safeguards plans. 
Training will start quite early in the implementation phase and continue throughout the 
life of the project.  
 
Also, during implementation the PMT will report, within the broad frame of the project 
M&E, on compliance with the measures agreed with the Bank on the basis of the findings 
and results of the ESMF, RPF, and PF, status of remediation measures, and the findings 
of monitoring programs. The PMT understands that monitoring information would assist 
to evaluate success of mitigation measures as part of the overall project supervision, and 
allow corrective actions to be taken when needed. The M&E of the mitigation plan will 
be integrated with the project#s overall design, budget, implementation, and M&E. The 
EMP will become part of the M&E manual of the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) 
and annual work plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Throughout project design and formulation GoSL has consulted widely with project-
affected groups (i.e. farmers, landowners, traditional authorities, public and private sector 
organizations, research and academia, women and youth, civil society, etc), local 
communities, and non-governmental organizations, about the project#s environmental 
and social impacts while preparing the ESMF, RPF, and PF.  Project strategy recognizes 
the need to address social priorities in order to achieve conservation objectives. Villages 
Page  6
and communities adjacent to the conservation sites are extremely poor and often lacking 
access to basic social infrastructure including schools, health centers, and drinking water.  
Many villages are physically isolated, especially during the rainy season, and income-
generating opportunities are often absent.  This leads to pressure on the accessible natural 
resources from slash-and-burn agriculture, wood harvesting for domestic use, use of non-
timber forest products and hunting.  While local communities are aware of the restrictions 
imposed by the establishment of the conservation sites, and recognize the importance of 
supporting conservation objectives, basic livelihood alternatives need to be developed 
and supported in order to compensate for losses incurred due to the restriction of access 
to resources and further strengthen support for conservation.  Consequently, the project 
will actively engage communities and traditional authorities in preparing and 
implementing conservation management plans, as well as in evaluating the overall impact 
of project activities.  In particular, local communities will play a key role in identifying 
and quantifying threats to wetlands and natural resources, stakeholder mapping, surveys, 
training workshops, and outreach programs, and will be represented in the Conservation 
Site Management Committees, which will endorse site plans at the local level.  
 
The status of the small number of human settlements adjacent to the project sites will be 
verified in the early stages of implementation when boundaries will be confirmed and 
demarcated.  As an alternative to relocation, the Forestry Division is assessing the 
possibility of regularizing settlements and zoning conservation areas in accordance with 
plans that will be agreed with local communities.In the event that resettlement is 
considered to be the optimal course of action, it will be carried out in accordance with the 
Resettlement Policy Framework and Process Framework.  
 
Regarding environmental impacts, the entire project constitutes an environmental 
mitigation and management plan.  It has been designed and will be implemented in a 
participatory manner in order to build capacity to address specific threats to the 
ecological integrity of selected priority conservation sites.  It will also develop a strategic 
plan to share best practice with managers and other stakeholders at other priority 
conservation sites, thereby leading to mitigation or prevention of existing or potential 
impacts on wetlands conversation in Sierra Leone.  Threats include loss of natural 
ecosystems or key species, as well as destruction and disturbance of habitats.  The project 
will involve local communities and other stakeholders, including traditional authorities, 
in the preparation and endorsement of site specific plans, and interventions will include 
support for community development activities that are linked with conservation 
objectives.  The project will also build awareness at the national and district levels of the 
needs and opportunities to mitigate or pre-empt threats to priority habitats or species in 
regional development planning.  
 
Nonetheless, consultations on how best to effect safeguard mitigation measures on the 
ground will continue throughout the implementation phase. Relevant project materials 
were disclosed to project-affected groups, CBOs and NGOs. GoSL disclosed the ESMF, 
RPF, and PF in-country in the media, via radio and print, from January 5-7, 2011 and 
subsequently through site-based workshops which took place on January 7th and 8th, 
2011.   
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/08/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/03/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/08/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/03/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
Page  8
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart 
01/28/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour 
01/24/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mi Hyun Bae Mbayo 
01/17/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
01/28/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
01/28/2011 
Comments:   
