Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/20/2011 
Report No.:  AC6135
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P096105 
Original Project Name: Rural and Private 
Sector Development 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P125256 
Project Name:  Rural and Private Sector Development Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Charles Annor-Frempong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural marketing and trade (38%);General industry and trade sector 
(25%);General public administration sector (17%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (15%);Agricultural extension and research (5%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (23%);Rural services and infrastructure 
(22%);Rural markets (22%);Export development and competitiveness (22%);Rural 
policies and institutions (11%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original project development objective is:  to support sustained growth in agriculture 
with increased competitiveness in export and higher valued crops, increased 
employement and increased rice and palm oil production.  
 
Revised project development objective is: to improve efficiencies along the value chain 
of agricultural commodities with higher benefits flowing to producers.  
 
The key outcome indicators under the original project are as follows: (i) Efficiency of 
agricultural value chains in food crops, as reflected in farm level value addition; and (ii) 
Efficiency of agricultural value chains in export crops as reflected in quality premiums. 
Under the current project and the additional financing the key development outcomes are: 
(i) 50 percent of target beneficiaries for the selected value chain increase their production 
Page  2
by at least 20% by the end of the project; (ii) 50 percent of target beneficiaries for the 
selected value chain increase their sales by at least 10% by the end of the project;(iii) 
time taken to transport goods to the nearest market reduced by 20 percent after 
rehabilitation of selected feeder roads; (iv) real farm gate prices increase by at least 10 
percent for the selected value chains of the targeted beneficiaries; and (v) producers 
confirm firm supply and contractual agreements with marketers/processors for selected 
value chains of the target beneficiaries.  
 
The project will support initiatives to improve quality of produce for domestic/export 
markets, assist in strengthening marketing organizations at the producer level as well as 
private trade engaged in domestic marketing and export, support value addition, and 
provide limited support for filling critical gaps in infrastructure along the value chain, in 
conjunction with initiatives supported by Government/other donors.   
 
3. Project Description 
The original project has four components with an indicative outlay of US$34.54 million 
(IDA financing: US$30 million):  
 
Component 1:  Domestic Marketing Improvement  
 
Support the improvement of:  (a) domestic distribution channels for crops, including 
rice and cassava and fruits and vegetables and for poultry (industrial layers), livestock 
and fisheries as pilot activities; (b) the ability of farmers to market their goods in 
Freetown and other large domestic markets; and (c) supply to consumers of commodities 
at competitive prices.  
 
Component 2:  Agricultural Export Promotion  
 
The implementation of an export promotion initiative to support beneficiaries, including 
agricultural producers, agricultural exporters and other private enterprises in the value 
chain for commodities identified as promising for export by the DTIS.  
 
Component 3: Support to Farmer-Based Organizations and Technology Improvement  
 
This component supports legally registered farmer organizations and their unions, 
agribusinesses, marketing entities, and other rural businesses through the provision of 
capacity building, policy regulations and market information. Support to research to 
conduct studies in strategic areas that will promote agricultural research and export 
promotion.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation and Policy Regulations  
 
The establishment of a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to carry out the management 
and monitoring and evaluation functions of the Project and support for the development 
of key policy regulations.  
 
Additional Financing Components: There are 4 components:  
 
Component 1: Domestic Market improvement. The additional financing will be used to 
scale up improvements in access to markets through rehabilitation and maintenance of 
feeder roads. The project has financed the rehabilitation of 468km of feeder roads. This 
Page  3
figure represents approximately 11 percent of a total 4,152 kilometers of feeder roads in 
the country out of which the condition of close to 70 percent are classified as fair or poor. 
The additional financing will support the rehabilitation of additional 1,000km of feeder 
roads in 9 out of the 13 districts. The remaining 4 districts will be supported by IFAD.  
 
Component 2: Agricultural Export Market Improvement. The additional financing will 
be used to scale up cocoa production and marketing. The project has supported the 
establishment of three district cocoa cooperatives (coops) with a total membership of 
12,688 (Male, 10,256; Female, 2,432). The total area cultivated by the members is 
approximately 26,000 acres. The coops exported approximately 140 Mt of Grade one 
cocoa beans between August and December 2010 (first year of operation).  Better prices 
(70 percent of world price) paid by the coops has prompted other buyers to increase their 
prices giving cocoa farmers a much better income.  
 
Component 3: Strengthening Farmer-Based Organizations (FBOs). The Project supports 
farmer-based organizations with improved planting materials and through the matching 
grants with processing equipment, storage facilities and capacity strengthening. 
Recommendations from a study on rice marketing currently being undertaken in 
collaboration with the IFC will be supported. This study is focusing on assessing the 
current processing, marketing and distribution mechanisms and proposes technically and 
economically feasible mechanisms to improve them. To minimize the incidence of "elite 
capture", the FBOs would further be strengthened through the development of an FBO 
specific benefit guidelines. Currently, majority of the FBOs has business plans, but do not 
have benefit-sharing mechanisms. The project will support the development of such 
mechanism and the National Association of Farmers of Sierra Leone (NAFSL). The 
NAFSL will be supported to re-invent itself into a self sustaining and autonomous 
farmers' organization capable of providing support to its members. Part of the funds will 
be used to engage reputable consultants to review the current set-up and 
restructure/reposition the association to be able to provide better services to its members.  
 
Component 4: Policy Regulations, Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. 
The scaling up and extension of closing date will require additional resources to support 
project management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented country-wide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTEN) 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
There would be no large scale or irreversible impacts expected from implementation of 
project activities. However, there are likely to be minor environmental and social impacts 
from the sub projects and feeder roads rehabilitation activities that can be mitigated or 
even avoided with careful planning and implementation. Farmer's use of fertilizer in 
Sierra Leone is the lowest in Sub Sahara Africa. Seeds and planting materials are also 
used with infrequency relative to the rest of Africa, so there will be no issues with pest 
management.  The project components will include activities that will have positive 
impacts on the environment and will also include time bound and costed mitigation 
measures for addressing potential adverse impacts that are likely to emanate from 
implementation of activities under the Project.  
 
In cases where the project supports the development of new infrastructure like markets 
and export structures and the building of other facilities, including feeder roads 
rehabilitation, there could be impacts on land and other livelihoods including impact on 
small sections of farms.  Under the ongoing project implementation, there have been few 
and minor cases of impacts. The rehabilitation of the feeder roads did not entail the 
construction of any new roads. The works involved clearing of weeds and unsuitable 
material on existing roads, cambering, re-gravelling and compaction. Other works 
included construction of culverts and small bridges. Site-specific spot checks and 
screening carried out during implementation found potential impacts to be ephemeral, 
negligible, and preventable.  These did not require ESMPs and were adequately dealt 
with using national and local laws and regulations. Minor social impacts such as the 
removal of few economic trees and small portions of cassava farms were amicably 
resolved among the 3 local councils, contractors, local leaders and the affected people. 
Again, as the works were minor, implementation was guided by national and local laws 
and regulations. During implementation of the AF, the project will conduct screening of 
all feeder roads site and will again be guided by national and local laws and regulations 
Page  5
or, where necessary, for larger works, appropriate instruments (Environmental 
Management Plans) will be prepared. The project has made adequate provisions to 
address any potential or real safeguard cases through the revised ESMF and RPF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There will be no negative long-term impacts as measures have been put in place to 
prevent, mitigate and address any such minor safeguard issues that would come up during 
project implementation. On the other hand, the project has the potential to positively 
impact the beneficiary communities, especially women and the youth, Government 
institutions and other stakeholders.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The original Project developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) as required. The ESMF and mitigation measures were, however, very broad in 
outlook. The Project was expected to commission additional site-specific and sub-project 
specific environmental and social impact assessments and management plans prior to 
commencement of activities, where required for sub-projects as these were not known at 
the time of project preparation.  These were not necessary during implementation of the 
original project, as the impacts were very minor and did not require the preparation of 
ESMPs. The PCU/GoSL were guided by national and local laws and regulations. During 
implementation of the AF, the project will conduct screening of all feeder roads site and 
will again be guided by national and local laws and regulations or, where necessary, for 
larger works, appropriate instruments (Environmental Management Plans) will be 
prepared.  
 
Under the Additional financing, in addition to the revised ESMF and RPF, guidelines 
for disposal of waste and effluents from processing of produce will be prepared as part of 
general operations manual for the sub-projects that are likely to generate both liquid and 
solid waste. Activities that will lead to such waste disposal are yet to commence even 
under the original project. For all project activities, there will be screening to assess the 
environmental and social impacts and appropriate safeguard actions will be taken.  
 
Under the original project, it was envisaged that there could be land take and 
resettlement for the rural feeder road rehabilitation and other marketing infrastructure. 
Consequently, the original project prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). 
However, during implementation, there was no land acquisition. Land for construction of 
processing facilities was voluntarily donated by individuals or communities which have 
been documented and copies submitted to the PCU. The proper documentation for land 
was a condition for qualification by the FBOs. During implementation, a review of the 
RPF and ESMF noted that the documents needed to be revised especially the institutional 
Page  6
arrangements and the grievance redress mechanisms, procedures for entitlements and an 
effective mitigation and management plan. Under the additional financing, the original 
RPF and ESMF have been updated to address these weaknesses. The revised documents 
have also been consulted upon by stakeholders and their concerns have been reflected to 
ensure effective due diligence. The ESMF and RPF have been re-disclosed on April 11, 
2011.  
 
During implementation, after the screening process and where required, a Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) and site specific 
ESMPs will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to commencement of any 
civil works or where cash compensation is required, the amount can be put into an escrow 
account whilst civil works can go ahead.  
 
Under the additional financing, no new safeguards policies have been triggered since it 
will finance similar activities that were implemented during the original project phase. 
On feeder roads, there will be no new construction. All feeder roads activities will be 
rehabilitation works involving re-gravelling, re-shaping, compacting and small side 
culvert and bridge construction. The project will conduct screening of all feeder roads 
sites and where new safeguards issues are raised, the appropriate policies will be 
triggered and instruments prepared for implementation.  
 
The PCU and other implementing agencies will be appropriately strengthened to ensure 
implementation and systematic monitoring of environmental and social issues. There will 
be training and capacity enhancement at the national and local levels to implement 
resettlement and environmental management plans if needed; and to assist consultants 
and contractors seeking guidance. The ESMF includes detailed guidelines to manage and 
mitigate potential negative environmental and social impacts of the project at the sub-
project level during project implementation especially for feeder roads rehabilitation.  
 
The National Commission for Environment and Forestry (NaCEF) has been replaced by 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for institutional oversight. The newly 
established EPA is the public agency responsible for the sustainable management of the 
environment in the country. It is mandated to regulate the country's environment and to 
ensure that sustainable pathways are adopted in the country's socio-economic 
development, setting standards and enforcing compliance of environmental, social and 
health safeguards. It has offices at the sub-national levels that work in close collaboration 
with the district administrations to enforce and monitor compliance. Although relatively 
new as a national body, it draws staff from the previous Departments of Environment and 
Forestry. The EPA assists by providing technical assistance to the Project and monitor 
implementation of the ESMF and RPF. In accordance with its legal mandate, the EPA 
will approve all specific environmental and social impact studies that may be done under 
the additional financing.  
 
As part of ensuring effective implementation and monitoring of safeguards issues, the 
Project is collaborating with the EPA to strengthen Grievance Redress Mechanisms that 
will help in identifying and addressing any safeguards issues for further attention at the 
Page  7
chiefdom, district and national level, including constant discussion of safeguards issues 
as part of the communication strategy.  
 
In-country capacity for environmental and social monitoring has been enhanced over the 
years. In spite of this, there is still the need for further capacity improvement. The 
additional financing will procure services for the training, specific impact studies and 
assessments when needed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include institutions and farmers, traders, processors and exporters 
and support services who are at the chiefdom levels. The institutions include the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Safety (MAFFS), District level officials, The Sierra 
Leone Roads Authority (SLRA), Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI), The Ministry of 
Works and Infrastructure (MoWI), Ministry of Local Government and Rural 
Development (MLGRD), Ministry of Housing and Infrastructure (MWHI) and the 
Ministry of Lands, Country Planning and the Environment (MLCPE), and the Human 
Rights Commission.  The original ESMF and the RPF were disclosed at the Infoshop and 
in-country in January 2007 through workshops in Freetown and other districts and at the 
World Bank infoshop. These documents were revised to reflect the results of the 
consultation workshops. Stakeholders consulted were drawn from a wider range of 
groups including government Agencies, Implementation Partners, Business Enterprises, 
Civil society, Traditional rulers, and community members.  
 
Under the additional financing, further consultations with these relevant stakeholders 
have been held as part of the activities for the preparation of the revised documents and 
for the re-disclosure of the revised safeguards documents. Issues raised have been 
incorporated into the revised ESMF and RPF. Among the issues raised were: giving 
legitimacy to the grievance redress mechanism, the scope of what would constitute a 
grievance and the need for grievance prevention. Other concerns raised were sensitization 
of community members to understand the grievance redress mechanism to avoid abuse 
and their input to ensure ownership of the mechanism.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/06/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/05/2011 
 
Page  8
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  9
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Charles Annor-Frempong 
04/11/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour 
04/11/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Beatrix Allah-Mensah 
04/11/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/11/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/11/2011 
Comments:   
