                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/16/2011                                      Report No.: AC6238
1. Basic Project Data
Country: South Asia                            Project ID: P126193
Project Name: Second Phase of the APL on Strengthening Regional Cooperation for
Wildlife Protection in Asia
Task Team Leader: Sumith Pilapitiya
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 16, 2011         Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2011
Managing Unit: SASDI                           Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                               Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);General public
administration sector (30%)
Theme: Biodiversity (80%);Environmental policies and institutions (10%);Other trade
and integration (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              2.25
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The long-term vision of the regional program is to stabilize and, if possible, increase the
population and habitats of critically endangered animals in South Asia. Since wildlife
and habitats cross administrative boundaries and because knowledge and capacity vary
widely across and within countries, a regional approach is needed to address cross-border
issues, build synergies, share skills, knowledge and experiences and build regional
collaboration for the conservation of critical habitats and ecosystems. The proposed
project sits squarely in GTI#s framework and introduces mitigation measures for a
regional public bad illegal wildlife trade.

 The project development objective (PDO) is to assist the participating governments of
Bhutan and others to build or enhance shared capacity, institutions, knowledge and
incentives to collaborate in tackling illegal wildlife trade and other selected regional
conservation threats to habitats in border areas. The project will focus on a selected set
of country-specific initiatives as well as key mutually agreed regional activities that are
crucial to attaining the regional strategic goals.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Capacity building for addressing the illegal trans-boundary wildlife trade
(US$ 95,000)

 Component 1 aims to bring about regional harmonization and collaboration in
combating wildlife crime through strengthened legislative and regulatory frameworks,
well-equipped specialized agencies and systems, as well as relevant training and
awareness programs for staff across the range of agencies that contribute to the
enforcement of wildlife laws and regulations. Since capacity building of WCD is
supported by other donor agencies and programs, Bhutan will rely largely on the capacity
developed under externally funded programs. It is anticipated that, collectively, the
activities would generate well coordinated frameworks, systems, technology,
infrastructure and expertise in Bhutan.

 Sub-component 1.1 Institutional strengthening in wildlife conservation and illegal
wildlife trade control (approximately US$85,500) would support the establishment of an
information/intelligence network that will contribute towards strengthening enforcement
and control of illegal wildlife trade. This activity will complement the ongoing and
proposed capacity building programs supported by other development partners, such as
WWF, and they will strengthen WCD#s effectiveness in wildlife conservation and illegal
wildlife trade control.

 Sub-component 1.2 Staff capacity building and training toward regional collaboration
(about US$9,500) would support: (i) training and workshops in strengthened enforcement
for WCD#s field staff; and (ii) improving trans-boundary coordination. These activities
will benefit from TRAFFIC#s recommendations on new ways to enhance the ability to
combat illegal wildlife trade and strengthen conservation and PA management.

 Component 2: Promoting wildlife conservation in Asia (US$ 2.042 million)

  Sub-component 2.1: Virtual Regional Center of Excellence (VRCE) for wildlife
conservation (about US$14,250) seeks to fill crucial knowledge and information gaps in
addressing regional threats to conservation. It entails the creation of VRCE that would
include a network of scientists and practitioners whose mission would be to expand the
scope and quality of research in wildlife conservation needed to develop a common
response against illegal wildlife trade in and outside the region and to address other
regional conservation and landscape level issues to be agreed by the participating
countries. For all participating countries to benefit from knowledge sharing efforts,
VRCE could sponsor the creation of a local networking forum in each country to
facilitate exchange of research information, collaboration and coordination of country
level institutions involved in wildlife conservation research. Coordination of the forum
in Bhutan would be facilitated by WCD.

 VRCE would provide the first (and only) coordinated, institutional response for research
and knowledge dissemination on wildlife conservation in South Asia with possible links
to analogous efforts in East Asia. The exclusive focus will be on either promoting a
conservation-related regional public good or addressing a regional public bad. Given the
existence of national institutions with expertise in this area already, it is critical for
VRCE to bring value-added and not duplicate existing efforts. By playing the role of
coordinator and facilitator of knowledge and expertise, VRCE could become a vehicle for
promoting dialogue and good practices as well as disseminating knowledge. Because
VRCE will be virtual and will have no central physical facility, it will rely heavily on
state-of-the-art information and telecommunication technology (ICT) to conduct its
business and to attain its objectives. A Regional Operational Steering Committee
(ROSC) # described in Section IV # would assist in the development of VRCE#s overall
program and objectives.

  VRCE would build on existing regional and global environmental initiatives and benefit
from established experience, mechanisms and protocols. It would draw on strategic
partnerships with renowned wildlife conservation institutions in the region and
elsewhere. It would develop an active knowledge dissemination program that would
include: (i) publication of research and pilot project results; (ii) sponsorship of
workshops, lectures and seminars; (iii) special seminars aimed at decision makers in the
participating governments (legislators, administrators and policy makers); (iv) training
modules and teaching materials for wildlife managers; and (v) development of protocols
for informing policy and wildlife managers in the field.

 Sub-component 2.2: PA and GRF management with regional conservation benefits
(about US$2.03 million). Bhutan # like Bangladesh and Nepal that are participating in
the regional project#s first phase # recognizes that conservation of wildlife resources, in
general, and of charismatic flagship species, in particular, would not succeed without
prudent investments in PAs and GRFs aimed at ensuring a haven for wildlife. Hence,
this sub-component would support the establishment and operation of two competitive
funding windows for: (i) conservation, protection and management of PAs and GRFs
with regional conservation benefits; and (ii) innovative pilot projects in wildlife
conservation with regional dimensions. Activities supported under the funding windows
will complement other conservation efforts supported by development partners,
international conservation NGOs and the Royal Government of Bhutan (RGOB).

 RGOB adheres to a policy of utilizing only grant funds for pure conservation
investments in habitat management, species monitoring and endangered species recovery
plans, etc. Such activities will be supported by grant funds outside the framework of this
project. This sub-component would support investments that lead to improvements in
wildlife protection and management of PAs and GRFs. Priority under Window 1 will be
given to activities such as the development of PA management offices, wildlife rescue
centers and information/visitor centers. The activities supported by other donors and
those financed under the project would complement each other and together would
enhance the ability of WCD to more effectively engage in conservation, protection and
management of Bhutan#s PA network.
  Window 2 would support innovative pilot projects that would contribute towards more
effective conservation at the national and regional levels. Activities supported under this
window include: (i) pilot programs in human wildlife conflict management models with
financial and other incentives to encourage human wildlife coexistence; (ii) identification
and development of ecotourism opportunities, camping sites, nature trails, canopy walks,
etc.; (iii) pilot programs in greening infrastructure in and around PAs and GRFs in order
to enhance the conservation status of sensitive ecosystems; and (iv) pilot programs in the
conservation of endangered flagship species.

 A competitive, demand-driven approach to reward innovation and efficiency of the
managers of the PAs and GRFs would be applied in selecting the activities that would
receive support under Windows 1 and 2. A transparent review and approval process for
both windows will be developed and implemented. The eligibility criteria (including a
negative list of activities) will be specified in the operational manuals to be finalized prior
to disbursement.

 Lessons from ADB and other donor-funded wildlife projects in South and East Asia
demonstrate that partnerships between public conservation agencies with NGOs (such as
WWF, WCS, IUCN, etc.) and local communities are integral to the success of pilot
models but the sustainability of the initiatives relies on the leadership of the public
conservation agencies. To that end, the project would promote partnerships between
NGOs or local communities and the managers of PAs and GRFs but the submission of
Windows 1 and 2 proposals will be led by WCD. Access to Window 2 funds may be
secured indirectly by NGOs and communities by engaging in partnerships with WCD to
prepare and carry out activities as part of the projects supported by Window 2.

 Since the precise PAs and GRFs would be identified only during the preparation of the
funding proposals, more focused consultations with those Bhutanese communities that
may be affected by the proposed investments as well as site-specific environmental and
social assessments would be undertaken when Component 2.2 is underway. However,
WCD has prepared an environmental and social management framework (see Section
VI.E).

 Component 3: Project coordination and communication

 Component 3 would focus on project coordination and communications. Since project
coordination and implementation will be carried out by WCD#s regular staff, with
support from DOFPS and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MOAF), funding of
project coordination and operating costs will be RGOB#s contribution to the project. No
project funds will be used for this purpose.

  The project will adopt a multi-pronged approach to communications in order to meet
regional and local challenges. It will rely on the regular communications mechanism
within WCD and DOFPS to meet the project#s communication needs. A wide range of
consultations with various stakeholder groups will be conducted at the national and local
levels. It is expected that rolling consultations will continue throughout the project cycle.
The communications sub-component # that is being developed and implemented in
collaboration with the World Bank#s external relations specialists # will harmonize with
GTI in view of the latter#s broader geographic mandate to engage in demand side
management.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Currently three countries, namely, Bangladesh and Nepal (phase I of the APL) and
Bhutan (this phase II of APL) are participating in this program. Project interventions are
designed to benefit the countries throughout their territories, although emphasis would be
on site-specific activities in areas with cross border conservation benefits. At this stage,
the exact locations of interventions in PAs and GRFs in Bhutan have not been
determined. To be eligible for funding, PAs and GFRs should have interconnected
habitats and ecosystems with neighboring countries.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSDE)
   Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are expected to be positive
since the project focuses on tackling illegal wildlife trade and other select regional
conservation threats to critical wildlife habitats in cross border areas. Therefore, it is not
envisaged that there will be any significant or irreversible environmental or social
impacts under the project. Since some of the project interventions will be undertaken in
natural habitats and forests, OP 4.04 and 4.36 are triggered, although there will not be
any resources extraction or forestry supported under the project. No involuntary
resettlement and land acquisition will take place under the proposed project. Although no
involuntary resettlement or land acquisition would take place due to project activities,
there could be impacts on community livelihoods as a result of better enforcement of
regulations in PAs and GRFs, landscape-based conservation planning and the human
wildlife conflict management through coexistence interventions which could affect land
use patterns. Thus, OP 4.12 is triggered.

 In the Bhutanese context, the concept of indigenous peoples is ambiguous. People in
every valley/region can be considered indigenous people, with almost every valley/region
having distinct dialects. Also, it should be noted that in the Bhutanese context such minor
ethnic groups usually form the dominant local community. Therefore, there are no groups
which can be said to be vulnerable or disadvantaged as a consequence of their ethnicity.
Hence the IP policy will not be triggered. The vulnerable and disadvantaged groups will
be dealt through OP 4.12.

 Of the three components of the project, Component 2 could have potential
environmental and social impacts.

 Component 2 will include investments in conservation in PAs and GFRs as well as
addressing the human wildlife conflict through co-existence models and development of
ecotourism opportunities. The investments other than the VRCE will be funded through
two specialized funding windows. VRCE as the name implies would provide a platform
for wildlife conservation scientists and practitioners to respond to illegal wildlife trade
through expanded scope and quality of research in wildlife conservation and therefore,
will not have any negative environmental or social impacts, but will enhance positive
impacts over the long-term. The project#s Regional Operational Steering Committee will
ensure governance of VRCE and the rotational directorship among participating countries
will assure ownership and representation.

 The activities proposed under Component 2.2 will eventually have significant
conservation benefits. It is anticipated that some activities that are likely to be proposed
will involve small civil works and possible, temporary, negative environmental impacts
during the implementation phase. Due to the demand-driven nature of this component
where proposals will be submitted from PA and GFR managers to implement crucial
aspects of the conservation activities with regional benefits, it is not possible to pre-
identify specific activities that will be included in the proposals until the proposals are
submitted to Window 1. Main activities to be proposed for funding under Window 1
within PAs, and GFRs may include improvements in existing park infrastructure. The
environmental impacts of such interventions could include temporary disturbance to
habitats and wildlife populations of conservation importance in the surrounding areas due
to construction. The project operational manual will include a comprehensive set of
precautions to be taken by contractors during any civil works undertaken with project
resources. These precautions dealing with borrow pits, disposal areas, disposal of
lubricants, location of construction camps and worker housing, etc. will also be written
into a construction manual attached to each contract for civil works as an obligation.
There will be no worker camps within PAs and GFRs. As the project sites are
ecologically sensitive zones, extreme caution must be taken with proper disposal of any
waste generated during work and restoration of the sites to their natural state.
 Innovative pilot projects that will be funded under Window 2 may include a broad range
of activities needed to address the human wildlife conflict and develop and implement
coexistence models and development of eco tourism. No adverse environmental issues
are expected under this component. Community participation in implementing the pilot
projects is critical for long-term success. This would involve raising the awareness of
communities on the importance of for example tiger conservation, training on techniques
of handling stray tiger intrusions to villages without harming the tiger, establishment of
an effective communication system between the community and the response teams from
Bhutan WCD, exploring the possibility of training select community members in basic
immobilization techniques and containment until the tiger response teams arrive, training
for the response teams on safe tranquilizing and capture methods, etc. These are not
expected to involve activities that have adverse environmental impacts.

 Typical activities funded under this window are: (i) identification of wildlife corridors
and making connectivity linkages for the long term survival of flagship species such as
elephants. This may involve the construction of electric fences for isolating these
corridors from developed and human inhabited areas; (ii) restoration of degraded
ecosystems within the corridors; and (iii) restoration of existing degraded or abandoned
water bodies; and (iv) electric fencing at ecological boundaries and human settlements to
prevent elephant incursions. Since these interventions will enhance the environmental
and ecosystem quality of the wildlife corridors and prevent elephants from destroying
crops and property, adverse or irreversible environmental impacts are not anticipated.
Limited, localized environmental impacts are likely during the restoration and
rehabilitation of existing water bodies and erection of electric fencing.

  The potential social impacts of activities that may take place are likely to be on
livelihood patterns of community members as the pilots may attempt to changes to land
use practices of local communities and safety of community members selected to
participate in immobilization and containment during tiger attacks. In addition, there will
be positive impacts where the project will revisit the existing compensation schemes for
those affected by human-wildlife conflicts with proposals for revisions or modifications,
as well as incentive mechanisms such as crop substitutions and payments for
environmental services.

 The second area that will be supported under Window 2 is ecotourism development that
would support the formulation of ecotourism plans with demonstrated regional
environmental and conservation benefits, and implementation of priority activities under
ecotourism plans with ensuing regional benefits for conservation. It is likely that
activities such as improvements to tourism facilities, e.g., visitor centers, visitor toilets
and resting areas, picnic sites, camp sites, nature trails, wildlife hides, watch towers and
facilities for non-motorized boats, canoes and kayaks for wildlife viewing, etc. The
typical negative impacts to be associated with such interventions include changes to land
form, decrease in aesthetic value, disturbance to animal life and habitats, etc. But since
these are small scale interventions, significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental
impacts are unlikely. The project would support studies and possibly pilots aimed at
ensuring that the economic benefits from ecotourism accrue not only to investors but also
to local people and to local governments.

 Greening of infrastructure in and around PAs and GFRs would enhance the conservation
status of sensitive ecosystems. Hence these activities would be environmentally
extremely beneficial, as it will give the opportunity for the government to use
mechanisms to ensure the compatibility of infrastructure with the larger ecosystem
including land use planning that is ecologically sensitive, wildlife corridors, strategic
environmental assessments, other environmental assessments that look at the cumulative
impacts on the landscape, human-wildlife conflict risk assessments and guidelines or
regulations for green infrastructure.

 The project will ensure once the locations of intervention are identified, site specific
environmental and social impacts assessments including status and possible impacts of
vulnerable communities if present are carried out prior to finalization of site-specific
activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Enhancing ecotourism opportunities under the project could result in unplanned tourism
development taking place in the peripheries of protected areas and national forests. This
could result in the loss of conservation value in the landscapes that contain the PA and
GFR networks. Therefore, proper planning and regulation of development of areas
peripheral to PAs and GFRs are crucial in order to ensure that these areas are managed
within their carrying capacities and stress to wildlife is minimal. The perceived economic
liability of wildlife conservation to the national economies will be reduced through
development of responsible ecotourism, thus providing an incentive to the leadership of
the countries to ensure that the PA and GFR networks are conserved in the long term.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Thus far, countries in the Asia region have sought to tackle the illegal trade unilaterally,
with uncoordinated investments in enforcement, while the problem is regional in nature.
As noted earlier, valued wild resources are poached in one country, stored in another and
transported through another to the final destinations. The trade is practiced by moving to
the most porous locations with the lowest level of enforcement. Coordination and
unification of enforcement efforts is thus essential to increase the costs to poachers and
reduce the volume of trade. The regional approach proposed in this program therefore
seems crucial to effectively address the controlling illegal wildlife trade. Drawing upon
the example of the ASEAN-WEN, this project will seek to promote synergies and
harmonize enforcement efforts. However, there are very few best practices and lessons
that are available so far in this context. Recognizing the complexities involved, an
important aspect of this project is to create the synergies and structures that are needed to
promote learning, and adaptive management approaches that permit improvements to be
incorporated.
 Project design has also benefited from the growing body of empirical evidence on the
medium-term performance of integrated conservation and development projects (ICDPs).
While ICDPs seemed to offer the tantalizing prospect of promoting conservation and
rural development simultaneously and often without any need for explicit investments in
habitat or wildlife protection, the emerging literature suggests that success in achieving
the dual goals of development and sustainability has often been elusive. ICDPs have been
more successful in providing rural employment than in producing any discernable
conservation benefits. Indeed, ICDPs tend to add new income-generating activities rather
than eliminate or substitute activities that are not conducive to conservation. In
recognition of the limitations, the project looks to alternative approaches and research on
approaches that blend regulations with direct incentives for conservation. The project
would promote innovation in regional conservation approaches through competitive,
demand-driven funding with a transparent process for the submission, review and
approval of proposals for wildlife management.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in lieu of project specific
Environmental Assessments (EA) and Social Assessments have been prepared as details
of specific project locations, sub-project activities and interventions are not available
until project implementation. The ESMF primarily includes description of the
environmental and social policies and legislation that will govern the project
interventions, an assessment of generic issues typically associated with anticipated
interventions under the project, measures for environmental and social risk mitigation and
institutional arrangements for conducting environmental and social assessments,
implementation and monitoring. The World Bank safeguard policies triggered under this
project are: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04),
and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Therefore, the ESMF was prepared taking
the policies that have been triggered into account and will serve as a guide to the level of
environmental and social analysis and mitigation required for all interventions supported
by the project which will have the potential for adverse environmental and social impacts
and thereby ensure compliance with the World Bank environmental and social safeguard
policies and the relevant national regulations during implementation.

  The type of environmental assessment and planning required will be based on the
findings of the environmental checklist to be completed for each physical intervention or
site. As a category B project with no significant adverse environmental impacts, all
physical activities financed under the project in general will be required to prepare
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for each site or activity. No sub-projects will
be approved from any of the two windows of the Component 2 without a satisfactory
EMP being submitted with the detailed proposal which will be reviewed and cleared by
the Bank prior to fund disbursements.

 The social checklist that will also need to be completed for each site identified will also
provide an indication on the need to conduct detailed socio-economic assessments. All
activities that may have the potential for social impacts are required to be developed after
consultations with the affected community. Consultations are pre-requisite for designing
any activity supported under Sub-component 2.2, Window 2. In order to ensure social
safeguard requirements are adequately assessed, the ESMF includes an assessment of
generic issues that are expected in view of anticipated interventions under the project,
including a Resettlement Policy Process Framework in case of land use restrictions and
livelihood impacts occur and Gender Development Framework to ensure gender issues
are mainstreamed, measures for social risk mitigation and institutional arrangements for
conducting social impact assessments (SIAs), implementation and monitoring. The
project will not fund any activity if a prior social assessment has not been completed if
found necessary under the social checklist.

  Bhutan environmental clearance processes are fully operational and experience and
knowledge on EA has been built in the institutions that are involved in the project. The
existing knowledge within the implementing agency to conduct and review EMPs under
the project is deemed adequate. However, an area that could do better with improved
performance, EMP monitoring which tends to be the weakest link in the EA cycles. The
project would place strong emphasis on post EMP clearance monitoring and identify
technical assistance to strengthen this aspect within the implementing agencies.

  The primary responsibility of coordinating work related to social safeguards will rest
with WCD. However, while environmental management capacity is adequate, the
capacity to manage social safeguards requirements is comparatively lower. WCD will
assign dedicated social development officer to work with the environmental officer to
take the responsibility of ESMF implementation. These officers will make sure that
safeguards documents are prepared for all relevant project sites/activities and that suitable
mechanisms are mobilized to ensure their implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Project preparation is done in mainly in consultation with custodians of wildlife
conservation. Since the specific locations of the field interventions are still unknown,
more focused group discussions with communities likely to be affected by have not been
held in order not to raise expectations in advance of concrete plans for intervention. Such
consultations in the absence of knowledge of the protected areas and national forests
where the site specific activities will take place, as well as not having specific knowledge
of proposed activities could result in raising expectations of communities that project
benefits may accrue and be counterproductive in the longer term. Therefore, site specific
community consultations will take place when the sub-project proposals are being
prepared. However, the project has made provision for site-level consultations with
stakeholders prior to finalization of proposals for funding through the funding windows.
The final proposal design and details in the intervention will be made public at the
specific sites prior to approval. The ESMF was disclosed to the public in Bhutan April
20, 2011. The final ESMF was submitted to IDA for clearance on April 18,2011. It will
be available at the Infoshop as soon as it is cleared by the Bank.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/18/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/20/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/05/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/18/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/20/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/05/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
  acceptable to the Bank?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
  Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
  been carried out?
  Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
  constraints?
  Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
  provisions for certification system?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                            Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Sumith Pilapitiya                            04/05/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Darshani De Silva                            04/05/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Daniel R. Gross                              04/05/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                            05/05/2011
  Comments: cleared.
Sector Manager:                     Mr Herbert Acquay                               05/05/2011
  Comments: cleared
