Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6042 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/26/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: South Asia 
Project ID: P115767 
Project Name: India-Nepal and India-Bangladesh Cross Border Transmission and Trade 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Raghuveer Y. Sharma 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 25, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2011 
Managing Unit: SASDE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (60%);Renewable energy (40%) 
Theme: Analysis of economic growth (67%);Climate change (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
60.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
60.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Proposed India-Nepal Cross-Border Transmission Project is to enable 
electricity trade to meet deficits in Nepal and export electricity to India along commercial 
principles.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Proposed Project would comprise, design, construction and operation of:  
 
a) In India, a 100 km 400 kV double circuit transmission line between Muzaffarpur and the 
Nepal border to be owned by a joint venture comprising Power Grid Corporation of India 
(PGCIL), Sutlej Jal Vidyut Nigam, IL&FS (all from India) and Nepal Electricity Authority 
(NEA);  
 
b)
In Nepal, a 40 kilometer 400 kV double circuit transmission line and concomitant substation 
at Dhalkebar to be owned a joint venture of NEA, IL&FS and PGCIL; and  
Page  2
c) In Nepal, a 325 km 400 kV double circuit Hetouda-Duhabi transmission line to be owned 
and operated by Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA).  
 
These transmission lines would be operated as part of the India-Nepal synchronous system, for 
which PGCIL and NEA will be responsible.  
 
The construction of sections of the Hetouda-Duhaby line is part of the Butwal-Dhalkebar-
Duhabi 465 km transmission system and would enable the project to deliver the imported 
electricity to load centers; and bring the exportable electricity to Dhalkebar substation. Part of 
this additional line, Hetauda-Bharatpur (70 km) section is already under implementation with 
World Bank financing; and for Bharatpur-Bardghat (70 km) section, World Bank financing has 
been secured.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The most extensive portion of the project # the Hetauda-Dhalkebar-Duhabi 400 KV transmission 
line, would pass through southern Nepal, mostly Terai flat lands, but also substantial stretches 
would pass through the Siwalik Hills. The Koshi River, north of its entry into India, would be the 
most significant water body to be crossed. While the land-use along the line is most likely to be 
agriculture in the eastern portion, it would also traverse several stretches of forests in the western 
portion. The Dhalkebar-Bittamod-Muzaffarpur (in India) would pass through almost flat lands 
with few known sensitive environmental receptors. The proposal for the 400 KV substations 
would include a new site at Duhabi/Inurawa, a pre-identified site in Hetauda, as well as 
augmentation or new location of the Dhalkebar. On the India side, the existing substation at 
Muzaffarpur would be used to transfer power between Nepal and India.   
 
E.  Borrow
er’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
NEA has some recent experience of implementing environmental management for transmission 
projects conforming to the World Bank#s safeguards policies. It is currently implementing its 
largest project with Bank assistance # construction of 220 KV lines and substations in the 
Bharatpur-Bardaghat, Bharatpur-Hetauda, and Khimti-Dhalkebar lines, some of which are in the 
same area as the proposed project. The increased emphasis on the rejuvenation of the power 
sector in Nepal has meant that the capacity of the NEA#s environmental and social team is being 
stretched. This would be strengthened as part of this project preparation to include 400 KV 
transmission lines and substations, which is being attempted for the first time to boost power 
transfer and trade with India # importing about 150 MW for the short term and then connecting 
with the hydro projects being developed in Nepal for export after these come on-stream.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will involve construction of new 400 KV transmission lines and substations. 
Though transmission has few direct adverse impacts in the operation stage, planning and 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
construction of these facilities could require mitigation/enhancement measures to ensure that 
there is little adverse impact of these important facilities. Impacts pertaining to alignment/route 
selection across sensitive stretches like forests, siting of sub-stations and ensuring appropriate 
drainage in the vicinity of their locations, occupational health and safety of construction workers 
as well as staff, would be some of the key areas of attention.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The current proposals for the lines do not pass through any recognized critical natural 
habitats. However, the during the project preparation phase the assessment will specifically 
verify, on the stretches through the forest areas in the western portion and across the Koshi river 
in the east, the extent to which any natural habitats, not recognized currently as critical, may get 
impacted.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
A
substantial portion of the main East-West (Duhabi-Hetauda) line is likely to pass through 
the Forest Areas in the Siwaliks. The project will identify the extent of impacts, suggest adequate 
mitigation measures in line with GoN rules, and Bank policy, and put in place appropriate 
institutional arrangements to ensure their timely implementation.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Since civil works are involved, impacts on #chance finds# at work sites are likely impacts 
that would have to be managed. Adverse impacts on locally important cultural properties would 
be examined, if any, for appropriate mitigation during planning and implementation stages.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
TBD   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
TBD   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/01/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Detailed Environmental Impacts Assessment (EIA), called Initial Environmental 
Examination or IEE in Nepal, and concomitant Social Impact Assessment (SIA) which 
would include the mitigation and management plans would be prepared before appraisal of 
the proposed project.  
 
Under the on-going Power Development Project, a transmission master planning exercise 
will be undertaken, which will also have an environmental and social component. The results 
of this study would also help streamline the procedures for environmental management and 
social development within the NEA with a view to have its own ESPP as the project 
progresses.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Raghuveer Y. Sharma 
01/24/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
01/25/2011 
Comments:  The PCN stage ISDS is cleared with Category A. Please follow the disclosure requirements 
and submit the same through the operations portal. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
01/24/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
