Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/02/2011 
Report No.:  AC5776
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  South Asia 
Project ID:  P121210 
Project Name:  Strengthening Reg Cooperation for Wildlife Protection in Asia 
Task Team Leader:  Sumith Pilapitiya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 28, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDI 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);General public 
administration sector (30%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (80%);Environmental policies and institutions (10%);Other trade 
and integration (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
39.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims to assist the participating governments to build or enhance shared 
capacity, institutions, knowledge and incentives to jointly tackle illegal wildlife trade and 
other select regional conservation threats to habitats in cross border areas.  The project 
will focus on a selected set of country-specific initiatives that are crucial to meeting the 
regional strategic goals.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is envisaged around three themes: (i) capacity building and cooperation for 
addressing the illegal trans-boundary wildlife trade, (ii) promoting wildlife conservation 
in South Asia; and (iii) project coordination and communication/outreach.  Two 
countries, Bangladesh and Nepal are participating in the first APL.  In response to a 
formal request from Bhutan, preparation of the second APL would commence shortly.  
The boost in resources allocated by the Government of India for PA management and 
wildlife protection has energized the collaboration among South Asian countries around 
Page  2
conservation.  India may participate in the project in the future and, if it does, there would 
be no investments in PAs and other wildlife habitats of India.  
 
A
multi-phase adaptable program loan (APL) is proposed as the lending instrument for 
the project so that support is made available on the basis of country readiness.  This 
broader regional approach will provide confidence in a long-term commitment and 
engagement by the Bank to ensuring a higher profile and stronger identification with the 
program by all involved countries.  
 
Component 1: Capacity building and cooperation for addressing the illegal trans-
boundary wildlife trade (Total US$14.304 million, including contingencies, of which: 
Bangladesh US$13.304 million and Nepal US$ 1.0 million)  
 
Component 1 aims to bring about regional harmonization and collaboration in 
combating wildlife crime through strengthened legislative and regulatory frameworks, 
well equipped specialized agencies and systems, as well as relevant training and 
awareness programs for staff across the range of agencies that contribute to the 
enforcement of wildlife laws and regulations.  It is anticipated that the activities 
collectively would generate well coordinated frameworks, systems, technology, 
infrastructure and expertise at compatible or near compatible levels across the countries 
participating in the project.  
 
Sub-component 1.1 Institutional strengthening in wildlife conservation and illegal 
wildlife trade control would support: (i) technical advisory/assistance (TA) services to 
establish, upgrade or strengthen the different units under Bangladesh#s Wildlife Circle 
and Wildlife Center to undertake training, research, education and awareness and 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E); (ii) TA services to establish Bangladesh#s Wildlife 
Crime Control Unit (WCCU) and Nepal#s Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) 
responsible for forensics, quarantine, legal support and assisting in the discharge of 
country responsibilities as signatories to CITES; (iii) TA services for the development of 
analytical and operational protocols to meet CITES requirements; (iv) provision of 
operational support and training for field-level rapid response cells; (v) TA services for 
the review and revision of Nepal#s legislative framework and strengthening of relevant 
institutions; and (vi) operational support for the establishment of the Secretariat for 
Nepal#s National Tiger Conservation Committee within the Ministry of Forests and Soil 
Conservation.  
 
Bangladesh is in the midst of revising the country#s Wildlife Conservation Act that 
would grant more powers to the Wildlife Circle (WC) within the Bangladesh Forest 
Department (FD) and create a better enabling environment for wildlife management.  The 
project would support technical and management consultancies to enable BFD to 
effectively discharge its enhanced mandate under the new Act. The consultancies would 
evaluate BFD#s roles and responsibilities under the new Act and assist BFD in 
developing an effective institutional structure and in building capacity to carry out its 
mandate.  Nepal, on the other hand, has a long history of wildlife conservation as 
demonstrated by the enactment of various policies, legislation and regulations.  However, 
Page  3
weak institutional capacity and inadequate financial resources have resulted in lapses in 
enforcement of regulations and poor PA management.  
 
Sub-component 1.2 Staff capacity building and training toward regional collaboration 
would support: (i) training and re-orientation for the benefit of support staff, including 
regional knowledge sharing; (ii) establishment or strengthening of the Wildlife Center; 
and (iii) training to the staff of the Wildlife Center in M&E techniques.  
 
The development of Sub-component 1.2 benefited from TRAFFIC#s recommendations 
(See Annex 8).  As part of TRAFFIC#s mission to deliver innovative and practical 
conservation solutions, it develops and organizes training and other capacity-building 
initiatives for officials involved in the regulation of wildlife trade.  As recommended by 
TRAFFIC, the project would highlight new ways for enhancing the ability of agencies 
within Bangladesh and Nepal to combat illegal wildlife trade and strengthen 
conservation.  
 
Component 2: Promoting wildlife conservation in South Asia (Total US$22.70 million, 
including contingencies, of which: Bangladesh US$20.925 million and Nepal US$1.775 
million)  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Virtual Regional Center for Excellence (VRCE) for wildlife 
conservation seeks to fill crucial knowledge and information gaps in addressing the many 
regional threats to conservation.  It entails the creation of the VRCE that would include a 
network of scientists and practitioners in wildlife conservation whose mission would be 
to expand the scope and quality of research in wildlife conservation needed to develop a 
common response against illegal wildlife trade in and outside the region and to address 
other regional conservation issues to be agreed by the participating countries.  
Specifically, this sub-component would support the provision of TA services and 
equipment for VRCE#s establishment and operations.  
 
VRCE would provide the first (and only) coordinated, institutional response for research 
and knowledge dissemination on wildlife conservation in South Asia.  The exclusive 
focus will be on either promoting a conservation-related regional public good or 
addressing a regional public bad.  Given the existence of national institutions with 
expertise in this area already, it is critical for VRCE to bring value-added and not 
duplicate existing efforts.  By playing the role of coordinator and facilitator of knowledge 
and expertise, VRCE could become a vehicle for promoting dialogue and good practices 
as well as disseminating knowledge.  Because the center will be virtual and will have no 
central physical facility, it will rely heavily on state-of-the-art information and 
telecommunication technology (ICT) to conduct its business and to attain its objectives.  
A
Regional Operational Steering Committee (ROSC) # described in Section IV.A # 
would assist in the development of VRCE#s overall program and objectives.  
 
VRCE would build on existing regional and global environmental initiatives and benefit 
from established experience, mechanisms and protocols.  It would draw on strategic 
partnerships with renowned wildlife conservation institutions in the region and 
Page  4
elsewhere. It would develop an active knowledge dissemination program that would 
include: (i) publication of research and pilot project results; (ii) sponsorship of 
workshops, lectures and seminars; (iii) special seminars aimed at decision makers in the 
participating governments (legislators, administrators and policy makers); (iv) training 
modules and teaching materials for wildlife managers; and (v) development of protocols 
for informing policy and wildlife managers in the field.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: PA, Forest Reserve (FR) and National Forest (NF) management 
with regional conservation benefits.  The client countries recognize that conservation of 
wildlife resources, in general, and of charismatic flagship species, in particular, would not 
succeed without prudent investments in PAs, FRs and NFs aimed at ensuring a haven for 
wildlife.  Hence, this sub-component would support the establishment and operation of 
two competitive funding windows for the management of PAs, FRs and NFs with 
regional conservation benefits and for innovative pilot projects in wildlife conservation.  
Sub-component 2.2 would focus on investments that result in regional conservation 
benefits.  
 
Window 1 of Sub-component 2.2 would support the following typical activities: 
rehabilitation and development of water resources in PAs and FRs; control of invasive 
species; rehabilitation of existing roads; improvements in existing park infrastructure; 
species monitoring and recovery programs; preparation and implementation of 
endangered species recovery plans; implementation of real-time field based monitoring 
systems; development of landscape scale imaging platforms and strengthening 
enforcement.  Window 2 would support innovative research projects in wildlife 
conservation, pilot programs in conservation of endangered species, piloting of human 
wildlife coexistence models and incentive schemes, such as payments for environmental 
services for those affected by the conflict; development of ecotourism plans with regional 
conservation benefits; or implementation of priority activities under such plans.  
 
The project will support activities under both windows in Bangladesh.  However, 
Window 1 will not be implemented in Nepal.  The Government of Nepal will allocate 
funds amounting to US$6 million over five years from its national budget to support 
activities on conservation, protection and management of PAs and NFs for long-term, 
regional conservation benefits.  The Government#s support and the specific activities will 
be carried out separately and will not be part of the proposed project.  Window 2, 
however will be implemented in Nepal.  
 
A
competitive, demand-driven approach to reward innovation and efficiency of the 
managers of the PAs, FRs and NFs would be applied in selecting the activities that would 
receive support under Windows 1 and 2.  A transparent review and approval process for 
both windows will be developed and implemented.  The eligibility criteria (including a 
negative list of activities) will be specified in the operational manuals that will be 
finalized prior to disbursement for Windows 1 and 2.  
 
Lessons from ADB and other donor-funded wildlife projects in South Asia demonstrate 
that partnerships between public conservation agencies with NGOs (such as WWF, 
Page  5
IUCN, etc.) and local communities are integral to the success of pilot models but the 
sustainability of the initiatives relies on the leadership of the public conservation 
agencies.  To that end, the project would promote partnerships between NGOs or local 
communities and the managers of PAs, FRs and NFs but the submission of Window 2 
proposals will be led by the conservation agencies.  Access to Window 2 funds may be 
secured indirectly by NGOs and communities through their partnerships with the 
conservation agencies in preparing and carrying out activities as part of projects 
supported by Window 2.  
 
Since the precise PA, FR and NF sites as well as conservation landscapes would be 
identified during the preparation of the funding proposals, more focused consultations 
with those communities that may be affected by the proposed investments as well as site-
specific environmental and social assessments would be undertaken when Component 2.2 
is underway.  However, both countries prepared respective environmental and social 
management frameworks consisting of assessments of generic environmental and social 
issues that may arise during implementation and of mitigation measures as well as 
guidance for future site-specific environmental and social assessments # have been 
prepared (see VI.E).  
 
Component 3: Project coordination and communications (Total US$4.996 million, 
including contingencies, of which: Bangladesh US$4.771 million and Nepal US$0.225 
million)  
 
Component 3 would provide services, TA and incremental costs for project staff as well 
as operating costs for the management and coordination of the project.  Sub-component 
3.1 would support project coordination arrangements for national and regional activities.  
 
Sub-component 3.2: Communications.  The project will adopt a multi-pronged approach 
to communications in order to meet regional and local challenges.  The project would set 
up separate communications units within the PIU/PMUs that will implement coordinated 
strategies for regional and national communication.  A wide range of consultations with 
various stakeholder groups will be conducted at the national and local levels.  It is 
expected that rolling consultations will continue throughout the project cycle. To ensure 
that all stakeholders have a clear understanding about this project, mass communication 
tools will be used to simplify and explain the basic concept and principles.  The tools will 
include multimedia audio/video products, dramas in local languages, brochures, and 
website(s).These products will be tailored to meet local conditions and languages.  The 
communications sub-component # that is being developed and implemented in 
collaboration with the World Bank#s external relations specialists # will harmonize with 
GTI in view of the latter#s broader geographic mandate to engage in demand side 
management.  
 
Sub-component 3.3 would represent the Government of Bangladesh#s commitment to 
cover the salaries and overheads of existing government staff and the cost of land 
purchases to build wildlife recovery and rehabilitation centers.   
 
Page  6
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Currently two countries, namely, Bangladesh and Nepal are participating in this program.  
Project interventions are designed to benefit the countries throughout their territories, 
although emphasis would be on site-specific activities in areas with cross border 
conservation benefits.  At this stage, the exact location of interventions in PAs, FRs and 
NFs have not been determined.  To be eligible for funding, PAs, FRs and FNs should 
have interconnected habitats and ecosystems with neighboring countries.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSEN) 
Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are expected to be positive 
since the project focuses on tackling illegal wildlife trade and other select regional 
conservation threats to critical wildlife habitats in cross border areas. Therefore, it is not 
envisaged that there will be any significant or irreversible environmental or social 
impacts under the project.  Since some of the project interventions will be undertaken in 
natural habitats and forests, OP 4.04 is triggered.  No involuntary resettlement and land 
acquisition will take place under the proposed project.  Although no involuntary 
resettlement or land acquisition would take place due to project activities, there could be 
impacts on community livelihoods as a result of better enforcement of regulations in PAs, 
FRs and NFs, landscape-based conservation planning and the human wildlife conflict 
management through human-elephant and human-tiger coexistence interventions which 
could affect land use patterns.  Thus, OP 4.12 is triggered. In order to safeguard lifestyles 
and livelihoods of Indigenous Peoples living around PAs and national forests, and to 
ensure that the project does not have any adverse impacts on indigenous communities OP 
4.10 is also triggered.  Of the three components of the project, Components 1 and 2 could 
have potential environmental and social impacts.  
Page  7
Component 1 of the project will support institutional capacity building and cooperation 
for addressing the trans-boundary illegal wildlife trade in Bangladesh and Nepal, hence 
no adverse environmental impacts are envisaged, except short-term impacts due to the 
construction or renovation of a few buildings such as Wildlife Center and wildlife 
recovery and rehabilitation centers in Bangladesh and WCCB and for field-level rapid 
response cells in Nepal.  Most of these facilities will not be located within PAs, FRs or 
NFs.  Therefore it is unlikely that such construction will have irreversible impacts.  
Likely social impacts will mainly relate to less access to PAs because of stronger 
enforcement and access to potential project benefits in terms of opportunities for 
employment and skills enhancement within communities as well as among staff 
participating agencies, particularly with regard to training opportunities.  
 
Component 2.1 will include investments in conservation in protected areas and national 
forests as well as addressing the human wildlife conflict through co-existence models and 
development of ecotourism opportunities.  The investments other than the VRCE will be 
funded through two specialized funding windows.  VRCE as the name implies would 
provide a platform for wildlife conservation scientists and practitioners to respond to 
illegal wildlife trade through expanded scope and quality of research in wildlife 
conservation and therefore, will not have any negative environmental or social impacts, 
but will enhance positive impacts over the long-term.  The project#s Regional 
Operational Steering Committee will ensure governance of VRCE and the rotational 
directorship among participating countries will assure ownership and representation.  
 
The activities proposed under Component 2.2 will eventually have significant 
conservation benefits.  It is anticipated that some activities that are likely to be proposed 
will involve small civil works and possible, temporary, negative environmental impacts 
during the implementation phase.  Due to the demand-driven nature of this component 
where proposals will be submitted from PA, FR and NF managers to implement crucial 
aspects of the conservation activities with regional benefits, it is not possible to pre-
identify specific activities that will be included in the proposals until the proposals are 
submitted to Window 1.  However, based on experience with PA, FR and NF 
management in Bangladesh and Nepal as well as other South Asian countries, activities 
typically undertaken in management of PAs, FRs and NFs can be determined.  
 
Some likely activities to be proposed for funding under Window 1 within PAs, FRs and 
NFs may include rehabilitation and development of water resources, habitat management, 
such as control of invasive species, preparation and implementation of endangered 
species recovery plans, implementation of real time field based monitoring systems, 
development of landscape scale land use imaging platforms, rehabilitation of existing 
roads, improvements in existing park infrastructure, species monitoring and recovery 
programs, protection of inviolate (strict protection) areas for species conservation; 
strengthening law enforcement, etc. The environmental impacts of such interventions 
could include temporary disturbance to habitats and wildlife populations of conservation 
importance in the surrounding areas due to construction.  The project operational manual 
will include a comprehensive set of precautions to be taken by contractors during any 
Page  8
civil works undertaken with project resources.  These precautions dealing with borrow 
pits, disposal areas, disposal of lubricants, location of construction camps and worker 
housing, etc. will also be written into a construction manual attached to each contract for 
civil works as an obligation.  There will be no worker camps within PAs, FRs and NFs.  
As the project sites are ecologically sensitive zones, extreme caution must be taken with 
proper disposal of any waste generated during work and restoration of the sites to their 
natural state.  
 
Innovative pilot projects that will be funded under Window 2 may include a broad range 
of activities needed to address the human wildlife conflict and develop and implement 
coexistence models and development of eco tourism.  Human-wildlife conflict, 
particularly involving elephants and tigers has emerged as one of the most critical socio-
economic, political and conservation challenges. No adverse environmental issues are 
expected under this component, as the only civil works likely to be undertaken would be 
to erect electric fences at the boundaries of villages and permanent (non-shifting) 
agriculture for protection from wildlife. Tiger-human conflict (THC) is a serious concern 
in both countries given the increasing trend of buffer zone communities affected by THC.  
Community participation in implementing the pilot projects is critical for long-term 
success.  This would involve raising the awareness of communities on the importance of 
tiger conservation, training on techniques of handling stray tiger intrusions to villages 
without harming the tiger, establishment of an effective communication system between 
the community and the response teams from Bangladesh WC and Nepal Department of 
National Parks and Wildlife Conservation (DONPWC), exploring the possibility of 
training select community members in basic immobilization techniques and containment 
until the tiger response teams arrive, training for the response teams on safe tranquilizing 
and capture methods, etc.  These are not expected to involve activities that have adverse 
environmental impacts.  
 
Human-elephant conflict (HEC) is another serious problem.  HEC is escalating in both 
countries with serious repercussions for both humans and elephants.  Current approaches 
have done little to address the problems effectively.  Translocations and elephant drives 
used as a HEC management tool in many countries have proven to be a costly failure to 
both humans and elephants.  They have largely failed because the approach neglects the 
root causes of the problem.  Most PAs are already at or even beyond carrying capacity 
and hold the maximum number of elephants they can support.  Additionally, PAs are 
generally primary or mature forests and they provide sub-optimal habitat for edge 
species, such as elephants.  There is, therefore, a need to find a new approach to 
management of HEC by finding mechanisms capable of transforming wild elephants 
from economic liabilities and the foes of local farmers to wild, living, communal and 
economic assets. Ecotourism is one promising approach.  
 
Typical activities funded under this window are:  (i) identification of wildlife corridors 
and making connectivity linkages for the long term survival of flagship species such as 
elephants.  This may involve the construction of electric fences for isolating these 
corridors from developed and human inhabited areas; (ii) restoration of degraded 
ecosystems within the corridors; and (iii) restoration of existing degraded or abandoned 
Page  9
water bodies; and (iv) electric fencing at ecological boundaries and human settlements to 
prevent elephant incursions.  Since these interventions will enhance the environmental 
and ecosystem quality of the wildlife corridors and prevent elephants from destroying 
crops and property, adverse or irreversible environmental impacts are not anticipated.  
Limited, localized environmental impacts are likely during the restoration and 
rehabilitation of existing water bodies and erection of electric fencing.  
 
The potential social impacts of activities that may take place are likely to be on 
livelihood patterns of community members as the pilots on human-elephant conflict may 
attempt to changes to land use practices of local communities. Whereas, in managing 
tiger human conflict, the likely issues that may arise are due to safety of community 
members selected to participate in immobilization and containment during tiger attacks.  
In addition, there will be positive impacts where the project will revisit the existing 
compensation schemes for those affected by human-wildlife conflicts with proposals for 
revisions or modifications, as well as incentive mechanisms such as crop substitutions 
and payments for environmental services.  
 
The second area that will be supported under Window 2 is ecotourism development that 
would support the formulation of ecotourism plans with demonstrated regional 
environmental and conservation benefits, and implementation of priority activities under 
ecotourism plans with ensuing regional benefits for conservation. It is likely that 
activities such as improvements to tourism facilities, e.g., visitor centers, visitor toilets 
and resting areas, picnic sites, camp sites, nature trails, wildlife hides, watch towers and 
facilities for non-motorized boats, canoes and kayaks for wildlife viewing, etc.  The 
typical negative impacts to be associated with such interventions include changes to land 
form, decrease in aesthetic value, disturbance to animal life and habitats, etc. But since 
these are small scale interventions, significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental 
impacts are unlikely.  The project would support studies and possibly pilots aimed at 
ensuring that the economic benefits from ecotourism accrue not only to investors but also 
to local people and to local governments.  
 
The project will ensure once the locations of intervention are identified, site specific 
environmental and social impacts assessments including status and possible impacts of 
IPs if present are carried out prior to finalization of site-specific activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Enhancing ecotourism opportunities under the project could result in unplanned tourism 
development taking place in the peripheries of protected areas and national forests.  This 
could result in the loss of conservation value in the landscapes that contain the PA, FR 
and NF networks.  Therefore, proper planning and regulation of development of areas 
peripheral to PAs, FRs and NFs are crucial in order to ensure that these areas are 
managed within their carrying capacities and stress to wildlife is minimal. The perceived 
economic liability of wildlife conservation to the national economies will be reduced 
through development of responsible ecotourism, thus providing an incentive to the 
Page  10
leadership of the countries to ensure that the PA, FR and NF networks are conserved in 
the long term.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Thus far, countries have sought to tackle the illegal trade unilaterally, with uncoordinated 
investments in enforcement, while the problem is regional in nature.  As noted earlier, 
valued wild resources are poached in one country, stored in another and transported 
through another to the final destinations.  The trade is practiced by moving to the most 
porous locations with the lowest level of enforcement.  Coordination and unification of 
enforcement efforts is thus essential to increase the costs to poachers and reduce the 
volume of trade.  The regional approach proposed in this program therefore seems crucial 
to effectively address the controlling illegal wildlife trade.  Drawing upon the example of 
the ASEAN-WEN, this project will seek to promote synergies and harmonize 
enforcement efforts.  However, there are very few best practices and lessons that are 
available so far in this context.  Recognizing the complexities involved, an important 
aspect of this project is to create the synergies and structures that are needed to promote 
learning, and adaptive management approaches that permit improvements to be 
incorporated.  
 
Project design has also benefited from the growing body of empirical evidence on the 
medium-term performance of integrated conservation and development projects (ICDPs).  
While ICDPs seemed to offer the tantalizing prospect of promoting conservation and 
rural development simultaneously and often without any need for explicit investments in 
habitat or wildlife protection, the emerging literature suggests that success in achieving 
the dual goals of development and sustainability has often been elusive. ICDPs have been 
more successful in providing rural employment than in producing any discernable 
conservation benefits.  Indeed, ICDPs tend to add new income-generating activities rather 
than eliminate or substitute activities that are not conducive to conservation.  In 
recognition of the limitations, the project looks to alternative approaches and research on 
approaches that blend regulations with direct incentives for conservation.  The project 
would promote innovation in regional conservation approaches through competitive, 
demand-driven funding with a transparent process for the submission, review and 
approval of proposals for wildlife management.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in lieu of project specific 
Environmental Assessments (EA) and Social Assessments have been prepared as details 
of specific project locations, sub-project activities and interventions are available until 
project implementation.  The ESMF primarily includes description of the environmental 
and social policies and legislation that will govern the project interventions, an 
assessment of generic issues typically associated with anticipated interventions under the 
project, measures for environmental and social risk mitigation and institutional 
arrangements for conducting environmental and social assessments, implementation and 
monitoring, actions to be taken if IPs are present. The World Bank safeguard policies 
Page  11
triggered under this project are: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural 
Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12 and Indigenous Peoples 
(OP/BP 4.10).  Therefore, the ESMF was prepared taking the policies that have been 
triggered into account and will serve as a guide to the level of environmental and social 
analysis and mitigation required for all interventions supported by the project which will 
have the potential for adverse environmental and social impacts and thereby ensure 
compliance with the World Bank environmental and social safeguard policies and the 
relevant national regulations during implementation.  
 
The type of environmental assessment and planning required will be based on the 
findings of the environmental checklist to be completed for each physical intervention.  
As a category B project with no significant adverse environmental impacts, all physical 
activities financed under the project in general, including Components 1 and 2, will be 
required to prepare Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for each site or activity.  
No sub-projects will be approved from any of the two windows of the Component 2 
without a satisfactory EMP being submitted with the detailed proposal which will be 
reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to fund disbursements.  With regard to 
Component 1, no funds will be disbursed for any physical activity (other than training) 
without EMPs being reviewed and cleared by the Bank.  
 
The social checklist that will also need to be completed for each site identified will also 
provide an indication on the need to conduct detailed socio-economic and IP assessments. 
All activities that may have the potential for social impacts are required to be developed 
after consultations with the affected community.  Consultations are pre-requisite for 
designing any activity supported under Sub-component 2.2, Window 2.  In order to 
ensure social safeguard requirements are adequately assessed, the ESMF includes an 
assessment of generic issues that are expected in view of anticipated interventions under 
the project, including a Resettlement Policy Process Framework in case of land use 
restrictions and livelihood impacts occur and guidelines for the development of an 
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to be used in the event that project activities may take 
place in areas where indigenous people are located, measures for social risk mitigation 
and institutional arrangements for conducting social impact assessments (SIAs), 
implementation and monitoring.  The project will not fund any activity if a prior social 
impact assessment has not been completed if found necessary under the social checklist.  
 
Bangladesh and Nepal environmental clearance processes are fully operational and 
experience and knowledge on EIA has been built in the institutions that are involved in 
the project. The existing knowledge within the implementing agencies to conduct and 
review EMPs under the project is deemed adequate. However, an area that could do 
better with improved performance, EMP monitoring which tends to be the weakest link in 
the EA cycles of both countries. The project would place strong emphasis on post EMP 
clearance monitoring and identify technical assistance to strengthen this aspect within the 
implementing agencies.  
 
The primary responsibility of coordinating work related to social safeguards will rest 
with Project Implementation Unit/Project Management Unit (PIU/PMU) in the two 
Page  12
countries.  However, while environmental management capacity is adequate, the capacity 
to manage social safeguards requirements is comparatively weak, especially in the 
Bangladesh PIU.   Social sector capacity exists in the National Trust for Nature 
Conservation (NTNC) who will serve as the PMU in Nepal.  Both the PIU in Bangladesh 
and the PMU in Nepal will assign dedicated social development officers to work with the 
environmental officers to take the responsibility of ESMF implementation. These officers 
will make sure that SIAs are prepared for all relevant project sites/activities and that 
suitable mechanisms are mobilized to ensure their implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Project preparation is done in mainly in consultation with custodians of wildlife 
conservation, however in Nepal the Government appointed project preparation team 
included a representative from the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and from the National 
Trust for Nature Conservation (NTNC). In Bangladesh the project design was completed 
in consultation with IUCN and the Wildlife Trust of Bangladesh.  Consultations were 
held with the conservation NGO community in both Bangladesh and Nepal.  Since the 
specific locations of the field interventions are still unknown, more focused group 
discussions with communities likely to be affected by have not been held in order not to 
raise expectations in advance of concrete plans for intervention.  Such consultations in 
the absence of knowledge of the protected areas and national forests where the site 
specific activities will take place, as well as not having specific knowledge of proposed 
activities could result in raising expectations of communities that project benefits may 
accrue and be counterproductive in the longer term.  Therefore, site specific community 
consultations will take place when the sub-project proposals are being prepared.  
However, the project has made provision for site-level consultations with stakeholders 
prior to finalization of proposals for funding through the funding windows.  The final 
proposal design and details in the intervention will be made public at the specific sites 
prior to approval by the Proposal Review Committee.  The ESMF was disclosed to the 
public in both countries on November 8, 2010. The final ESMF was submitted to IDA for 
clearance on November 3, 2010.  It will be available at the Infoshop as soon as it is 
cleared by the Bank.  
 
The disclosure dates provided in Section B. reflects the dates of Bangladesh disclosure 
which were done last. Nepal submitted the safeguards documents to the Bank on 
November 3, 2010 and disclosed it on November 8, 2010.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/07/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/08/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  13
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/07/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/08/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/07/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/08/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Resettlement Action Framework and Indigenous Peoples Framework are included within 
the overall Environmental and Social Management Framework.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
Yes 
Page  14
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
11/07/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darshani De Silva 
11/07/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
11/07/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
11/07/2010 
Comments:  Approved subject to incorporation of changes suggested to the ESMF for the ROC 
meeting 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Herbert Acquay 
11/24/2010 
Comments:  Approved 
