Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/18/2011 
Report No.:  AC6122
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  South Asia 
Project ID:  P115767 
Project Name:  Nepal-India Electricity Transmission and Trade Project 
Task Team Leader:  Raghuveer Y. Sharma 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 18, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (60%);Renewable energy (40%) 
Theme:  Analysis of economic growth (67%);Climate change (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
119.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
36.52 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
10.59 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
13.20 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
22.98 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
83.29 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the proposed Project are to: (a) establish cross-border 
transmission capacity between India and Nepal of about 1000 MW to facilitate electricity 
trade between the two countries and (b) increase the supply of electricity in Nepal by the 
sustainable import of at least 100 MW.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Proposed Project would comprise the following components:  
 
Part A  
 
Component A1: Muzaffarpur-Sursand Transmission Line (non-IDA financing).  In 
India, design, construction and operation of approximately 90 km 400 kV double circuit 
transmission line between Muzaffarpur and Sursand at the Nepal border to be owned by 
Page  2
Cross Border Power Transmission Company (CPTC) a joint venture comprising Power 
Grid Corporation of India (PGCIL), Sutlej Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd (SJVNL), the 
Infrastructure Leasing and Finance Service Ltd. (IL&FS) (all from India) and proposed to 
include Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA); and  
 
Component A2: Dhalkebar - Bhittamod 400 kV Transmission Line (non-IDA 
financing). In Nepal, design, construction and operation of an apporoximately 40 km 400 
kV double circuit transmission line between Bhittamod (India border) and  Dhalkebar to 
be owned by Power Transmission Company of Nepal (PTCN) a joint venture of the 
Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA), IL&FS and PGCIL.  
 
Part B  
 
Component B1: Hetauda- Dhalkebar-Duhabi Transmission Line and Substations. In 
Nepal, design, construction and operation of an approximately 285 km 400 kV double 
circuit Hetauda-Dhalkebar-Duhabi transmission line and concomitant substations to be 
owned and operated by NEA; and  
 
Component B2: Measures for synchronized operation of the Nepal grid with the Indian 
grid. After construction of the 400 kV cross border links between Nepal and India, it is 
also necessary to install properly tuned Power System Stabilizers (PSS) in the major 
power generating stations and other measures in Nepal in order to properly synchronize 
the two power systems.  
 
Part C  
 
Consulting Assistance to NEA for:  
 
B1) 
Owner#s Engineer for NEA, especially for Component A-3, Hetauda-Duhabi 400 
kV transmission line;  
 
B2) 
Preparation of a Transmission System Master Plan to plan future transmission 
system development within Nepal and additional cross-border interconnections;  
 
B3) 
Lenders# Engineer for enabling results monitoring, highlighting obstacles to 
achieving results in a timely manner, ensuring that appropriate remediation actions are 
developed and implemented by NEA/Borrower of the Project; and  
 
B4) 
Institutional Capacity building for NEA's Transmission business to strengthen the 
capability to realize additional cross-border transmission links and concomitant internal 
strengthening; and to understand the benefit-sharing concepts from export-oriented 
hydroelectric projects.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Of the 285km of East-West spine 400kV line, the initial 18.6 km (Hetauda- Hurnamadi) 
stretch of transmission line passes through a hilly area.  Over the next 23.4 kilometers 
(Hurnamadi- Nijgadh), the line route gradually changes from hills to Terai. The 
remaining 243.2 km (Nijgadh- New Duhabi) passes through flat plain of Terai and runs 
Page  3
almost parallel to, and on the northern side of the East-West Highway. The substations 
are being expanded in Hetauda and Dhalkebar, while a new station is proposed in 
Duhabi. For the Dhalkebar to India border the 40 km line running north-south, there are a 
few sensitive environmental receptors along the corridor. For the India portion about 
90km long, from the border to Muzaffarpur, the alignment is flat lands, with a stretch of 
about 0.75ha forest land to be acquired. No other sensitive receptors have been identified 
along that stretch.  
 
The East-West Duhabi-Hetouda (D-H) portion of the proposed transmission line (the 
largest component of the proposed Project) mostly runs parallel to existing infrastructure 
or in already anthropogenically impacted areas. The proposed alignment often co-shares 
the Right Of Way (RoW) of the existing 132 kV transmission line and the Mahendra 
Highway, especially in sections where it passes through the core forest area. The 
proposed alignment has been selected to entirely avoid going through the critical natural 
habitat zones of Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve (KTWR) and the Parsa Wildlife reserve. 
The EA indicates that the proposed line does not go through any national park, wildlife 
reserve, buffer zone, conservation area, wetlands, or historically and archaeologically 
important sites. However the transmission line passes close to the buffer zone of Koshi 
Tappu Wildlife Reserve, which is known to contain sensitive flora and fauna.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (SASDS) 
Mr Ishwor Neupane (SASDT) 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSS3) 
Mr Toran Sharma (SASDE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment: In most cases, transmission and distribution have few 
significant environmental impacts. The majority of the impacts are associated with 
Page  4
transmission lines that could pass through sensitive habitats or substations located in such 
areas. Thus direct impacts on the environment are generally restricted to rights of way 
(ROW) and land acquired for sub-stations. Other issues include potential safety of the 
workforce and public living/working near the alignment and a temporary reduction in 
groundwater recharge in areas where the groundwater table is depleted. During the 
operation stage, key issues include the potential of habitat fragmentation, bird collision 
with towers and wires, noise impacts in locations close to sensitive receptors, etc., and a 
low risk of spillage of transformer oils.  
 
A
comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was undertaken 
for Transmission lines that included developing baseline environmental and social 
conditions along the anticipated ROW as well as identification and evaluation of impact 
resulting from proposed intervention. The ESIA indicates that environmental and social 
impacts associated with the project activities are not direct, irreversible or significant in 
nature. Hence the project is rated Environmental Category B.  
 
Due to the substantial geographical project scope the safeguards assessment was kept 
wide to identify and assess environmental and social impacts. The completed ESIA 
reports were received which indicate that environmental and social impacts associated 
with the project activities can be mitigated with appropriately robust mitigation measures 
to be implemented by the Contractor as well as NEA. The assessment influenced the 
alignment selection and has resulted in complete avoidance of direct impacts on critical 
habitat - the Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve. Using the information gathered during the 
assessment, other anticipated impacts are construction related that will be mitigated using 
an environmental mitigation and monitoring plan. The ESIA provides recommendations 
to avoid and mitigate environment and social impacts, particularly measures that inform 
the final tower and conductor design, such as changes to tower design, using colored 
markers on transmission line, keeping extra ground clearance where there is potential for 
animal crossings etc.  
 
For this project, the majority of the safeguards issues arise along the 285km long east-
west line. The Nepal portion of the north-south connector has relatively few issues since 
no forest areas are involved, and on the India side the 100 km has one stretch of canal-
side forests of about 0.78ha that would need to be cleared.  
 
The final draft reports of the Environmental Impact Assessment  (called Initial 
Environmental Examination or IEE in line with GoN nomenclature) as well as the Social 
Impacts Assessments (SIA) including the relevant mitigation and resettlement action 
plans have been received for the 285km Hetouda-Duhabi line and the 39km Dhalkebar-
Bhittamor (India Border) in Nepal. The reports contain detailed maps which show that 
the proposed Hetouda Duhabi transmission line (the largest component of the proposed 
Project) mostly runs parallel to existing infrastructure or in already anthropogenically 
impacted areas. The proposed alignment often co-shares the Right Of Way (RoW) of the 
existing 132 kV transmission line and the Mahendra Highway, especially in sections 
where it passes through the core forest area. The proposed alignment has been selected to 
entirely avoid going through the critical natural habitat zones of Kosi Tappu Wildlife 
Page  5
Reserve and the Parsa Wildlife reserve. At its nearest, the D-H transmission line passes 
1.5km from buffer zone of Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve (KTWR), which is known to 
inhabit sensitive flora and fauna.  
 
However, the alignment does contain sections which have potential to indirectly affect 
environmentally sensitive areas that essentially constitute 'hotspots' from an 
environmental/natural habitat perspective. These indirect impacts result from a limited 
level of forest conversion and include: (i) habitats for migratory birds; (ii) migration 
routes of the wild Asian Elephant; and (iii) locations hosting plant species that are on the 
IUCN and CITES protected list.  
 
The ESIA indicates that anticipated impacts on these hotspots are not expected to be 
significant, adverse, sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented in nature, or to affect an area 
significantly broader than the sites or facilities subject to physical work, and the 
immediate RoW.  The Environmental Impact Assessment also indicates that the existing 
132 KV line is not reported to have caused adverse impacts on the migration of birds or 
the Asian Wild Elephant that continues to migrate over the highway and under the 132 
kV line. The proposed 400 kV line running parallel (for the most part) will have a greater 
vertical ground clearance than a 132 kV line, and elephants (which are actually attracted 
by the crops and the traversing of elephants happens close to the harvesting season), can 
continue to pass through unhindered under the new line. The ESIA contains measures and 
activities which would mitigate the direct negative impacts on these hotspots to 
acceptable and sustainable levels. These measures include the fencing of the towers in the 
Elephant migration corridors to prevent injuries to the animals or damage to the lines 
themselves. Felled trees will, in accordance with Nepal law, be replaced at a rate of 25 
trees planted per tree cut as part of the re-forestation component under the project. In 
effect all trees, including the ones under IUCN protected list, would be increased 25 
times, and the affected forest area itself would be compensated 3 times over (in hectare 
terms).  
 
NEA will also initiate and complete a biodiversity study focusing on the hotspots in 
more depth during the detailed design stage of the project. The findings of this study will  
inform the design, prior to its finalization of appropriate and effective mitigation 
measures for specific situations/stretches.  
 
The other anticipated environmental and social issues include potential for localized 
changes to drainage, potential for spillage of chemicals in the sub-stations, as well as the 
during project impacts related to labour force - illegal tree-cutting and damage to wildlife, 
etc. These issues will be avoided using good construction practices, and supported by 
implementation of an environmental management plan.  
 
Sufficient resources have been allocated under the project for these mitigation and 
management of environmental and social impacts. Comprehensive monitoring and 
evaluation arrangements, including the provision of services on environmental expert in 
the Owner's and Lender's Engineer, and processes would also be put in place for these.  
Page  6
For the Indian section of this cross-border power transmission project, the 
environmental and social policies and procedures developed by the Indian utility 
corporation/agency "POWERGRID", and consistent with the World Bank safeguards 
policies will be applied to identify, mitigate and monitor any negative environmental and 
social impacts, and enhance positive ones. The social impact assessment will identify and 
address issues related to indigenous peoples if any.  
 
Natural Habitats: With careful reworking of the alignment, two recognized protected 
areas have been avoided resulting in increased length of the H-D line. In the portions of 
line through forest areas, some sections of the line alignment cross migratory paths of 
wild animals like elephants in the west of Dhalkebar, and migratory birds close to the 
KTWR.  
 
Forests: The project envisages that 158000 trees in about 390 ha of forest land will be 
felled in Nepal along the D-H line as there are no forest lands in the RoW for the 
Dhalkebar Bhittamor line, and less than 1 ha in India for transmission towers. Each lost 
tree will be compensated by planting 25 sapling, as per the regulation in Nepal. No 
commercial logging is envisaged under the project.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources: The angle towers and substations of the two sections in 
Nepal will require the relocation of three small local temples (Gram Devata Dewhar 
Than, Shiva Teimple, Hanuman Temple) that the project will undertake in consultation 
with the local community.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement.  The project has two sections with a 100 km in India and 324 
km in Nepal. The 100 km of the Indian section has agreed to adopt the Indian Power Grid 
Corporation's safeguard policy, which has been accepted as equivalent to the World 
Bank#s safeguard policies.  
 
For the 324 km in Nepal, NEA has carried out a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) for the 
entire length. The SIA provides the socioeconomic and demographic information in the 
project districts, and provides a screening of the indigenous communities in the project 
areas. NEA has disseminated project information and carried out extensive consultations 
with local communities and governments over the entire proposed transmission route.  
The SIA has confirmed the presence of indigenous communities in the project areas and a 
free, prior and informed consultations have confirmed their support for the project.  An 
impact inventory survey and a census survey of the affected population were carried out 
for the angle towers and substations.  They confirm that they will require 21 ha of land 
and relocation of nine private structures, affecting 133 households (873 people), 
including six households who will lose their structures.  Three temples and one primary 
school will also need to be relocated. The affected population belongs to 29 different 
caste/ethnic groups. A resettlement action plan (RAP) has been developed for power 
towers at angle points and sub-stations, while a Social Impact Management Framework 
has been developed for the transmission lines and suspension towers whose alignment 
Page  7
and locations are expected to be finalized with contractors' technical input during 
implementation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant, irreversible indirect and/or long term adverse impacts are currently 
envisaged. Habitat fragmentation and operational impacts on wildlife are expected to be 
minor and decrease with the operational life of the transmission line.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The original alignment of the east-west line was reworked to avoid two recognized 
conservation areas - Core and buffer of the Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve; and buffer 
area of the Parsa Wildlife Sanctuary. While this has resulted in an increase in the length 
of the line, potential adverse impacts have been permanently avoided. For the selection of 
locations of the substations, alternative sites were analyzed including specific criteria for 
environmental aspects.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA): As an output of its assessment, in 
line with GoN requirements, an IEE that has also included an EMP with separate budget 
and implementation responsibilities clearly laid down has been prepared by the NEA. 
The EMP includes the measures that the contractor will be required to take in the 
implementation stage, including bio-engineering measures for tower base areas, and 
protection measures for the workers and public close to the project sites.  The social 
provisions in this document include a survey of affected stakeholders and a framework 
for all required measures relating to compensation, resettlement and restoration of 
livelihoods.  
 
Natural Habitats: In addition of avoiding the recognized conservation areas, the project 
has also endeavored to align the line close to the existing 132-KV line so that the land 
take in forest areas, and fragmentation are minimized to the extent practical. Other 
restrictions on siting labor camps will also be in place. In addition, laborers will be 
instructed not to damage local flora and fauna.  
 
Forests: In line with GoN requirements, the project will plant 25 times as many saplings, 
as trees are cut. It will eventually require about 1000 ha area to be planted which will be 
identified and afforested under the project. This will result in increase of forest cover 
over the life of the project infrastructure.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources: The alignment will affect two locally important shrines 
whose relocation will be under the project after consultations with the communities 
concerned. In case of chance finds, the process to be followed for conservation/protection 
has been included in the EMP.  
 
Page  8
Implementation Arrangements: An Environmental Monitoring Unit (EMU) will be 
headed by the personnel from the Environment and Social Study Department of NEA. 
The EMU will comprise two cells Environmental Mitigation Implementation Cell 
(EMIC) and Environmental Monitoring Cell (EMC). The EMC will be headed by an 
independent consultant hired from the local consulting firms with experinece in similar 
monitoring works. The EMC will monitor works as stipulated in the EMP documents.  
 
Apart from the regular project level monitoring by the EMU, a joint inspection team 
comprising representative of the District Forest Office, District Development Committee, 
VDCs representative and representative of CFUG will also monitor the project works on 
a
regular basis. In parallel, district level line agencies will undertake routine monitoring.  
Finally, the project will fund a Lender's engineer whose scope will include periodic 
safeguard oversight.  
 
Involuntary resettlement.  A resettlement action plan (RAP) has been prepared for 
power towers at angle points and substations. The RAP follows relevant domestic and 
World Bank policies. It is developed on the basis of an inventory survey of impacts and 
census survey of the affected population as well as extensive consultations with the local 
communities The RAP describes in detail the impacts, compensation policy and 
entitlements, compensation payment and relocation arrangements for the private 
structures, one school and the three temples.  It also describes the institutional setup and 
monitoring arrangements.  
 
Indigenous peoples. A Social Impact Management Framework is prepared for 
transmission lines and towers whose alignment and locations are yet to be finalized 
during project implementation.  This framework is developed to guide the preparation of 
the social planning to address impacts under the transmission lines and suspension 
towers. The SIMF covers involuntary resettlement; vulnerable communities including 
indigenous peoples, consultation, grievance redress mechanisms and institutional 
arrangement.  It includes an overall policy framework on resettlement and indigenous 
peoples, a resettlement and rehabilitation framework, a vulnerable community people#s 
development framework, consultation and grievance redress mechanisms, institutional 
and monitoring evaluation arrangements.  
 
Physical cultural resources.  Consultations were carried out with local communities over 
the relocation impacts and arrangements. Local communities agreed with proposed 
arrangements to relocate the temples to nearby sites with better structures.  The project 
will compensate for the structures and will provide assistance in their relocation and 
reconstruction.  These are included in the Resettlement Action Plan. However, given the 
extent of construction and the pending finalization of the transmission lines and 
supporting towers, the EMP also includes mechanisms to handle #chance finds# and 
possible impacts under these activities.  
 
NEA Capacity: The currently variable NEA capacity to implement the EMP is being 
strengthened with the on-going engagements in the Power sector in Nepal. However, the 
scale of the work proposed will require continuous attention. The NEA is planning to 
Page  9
have an Independent Engineer to supervise the implementation of the project by the 
Contractor, which will also include expertise on environmental management. On its own, 
the ESSD is also likely to be responsible for implementation of activities which are 
required from the NEA.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are residents of the 77 VDCs and 2 municipalities, especially those 
living close to the alignment and locations of the substations across 10 districts in Nepal 
for the D-H line, and those who will bear direct negative potential impacts by 
construction and operation of the TL. Also, local, national and regional NGOs are 
recognized as important stakeholders, e.g. in nature and wildlife conservation and social 
protection. For the Dhalkebar-Bihittamor section, such stakeholders include residents of 
the 25 VDCs through which the alignment passes. Extensive consultations were carried 
out during the project planning process with local stakeholders, including local 
communities, various ethnic groups and local governments.  Public meetings were 
organized during the assessment study and information regarding the project benefits and 
impacts was shared with the local residents. In addition, officials of the Forest 
Department, and those charged with the protected areas - KTWR and Parsha sanctuary 
have also been consulted as key stakeholders. During the IEE preparation, 47 Forest User 
Groups were also consulted for the D-H line.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/17/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  10
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
No 
Page  11
provisions for certification system? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Raghuveer Y. Sharma 
02/16/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gaurav D. Joshi 
02/16/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
02/16/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Toran Sharma 
Mr Ishwor Neupane 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
02/16/2011 
02/16/2011 
02/16/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
02/18/2011 
Comments:  cleared on understanding that addtional biodiversity studies will be undertaken and 
GoN will implement and monitor RAP and EMP through their budget. Please see email of 
02/17/2011 for details. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
02/18/2011 
Comments:   
