Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/02/2011 
Report No.:  59450
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P112933 
Project Name:  Eco-Systems Conservation And Management Project (ESCAMP) 
Task Team Leader:  Sumith Pilapitiya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 16, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (67%);Environmental policies and institutions (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
ESCAMP's project development objective (PDO) is to improve the management and 
stewardship of specific PAs and other biologically critical locations in the terrestrial, 
marine and wetland ecosystems of Sri Lanka  through: (i) improved management of 
natural habitats within select conservation landscapes; (ii) initiation of innovative 
programs to reduce human-elephant conflict (HEC) through co-existence; (iii) 
enhancement of the revenue earning opportunities of PAs and affected communities 
through upgraded nature-based tourism and community partnerships to reduce 
dependence on forest resources; and (iv) strengthening of the institutional capacity and 
investment capability of PA conservation agencies.   
 
3. Project Description 
All project activities will take place within the identified landscapes and are expected to 
contribute towards establishing effective ecological networks, securing the integrity of 
ecosystems and viable populations of species # while promoting green infrastructure 
development # within the conservation landscapes.  The project, although divided into 
components for clarity, is supporting complementary activities that contribute towards 
improving the management and stewardship of the conservation landscapes through 
investments and interventions in specific PAs and other biologically critical locations in 
Page  2
the terrestrial, marine and wetland ecosystems of the identified landscapes.  The project#s 
four main components are listed below.  Annex 4 provides an in-depth description of the 
project.  
 
Component 1: Promotion of Ecosystem Conservation and Management (US$11.9 
million)  
 
This component would support the preparation of strategic conservation plans in the 
four landscapes and the use of project funds to implement the key aspects of such plans.  
A
competitive demand-driven approach would be applied in selecting the activities 
within the landscape plans that would receive support under Component 1#s three 
funding windows, one of which would be financed by AusAID. The funding windows 
would support conservation and management of the critical ecosystems outside the 
protected area network, but within the four conservation landscapes; investing in 
improving the management of protected areas within the conservation landscapes; and 
improving community participation in reducing deforestation and forest degradation, 
respectively.  The review and approval process for the funding windows is explained in 
Annex 4.  The formation of the Proposal Review Committee is a condition of project 
negotiations.  
 
Component 2:  Demonstrating Human Elephant Conflict (HEC) Management through 
Co-existence (US$11.00 million)  
 
HEC mitigation in Sri Lanka and in Asia, has been based solely on attempts to restrict 
elephant movements by limiting them in national parks through ill conceived elephant 
drives, translocations and attempts to restrict movement by electric fences located on the 
boundaries of national parks.  They have largely failed because they neglect the root 
causes of the problem, and do not consider management on a landscape level.  With two-
thirds of the elephant population living outside DWC PAs in Sri Lanka and with 
inadequate carrying capacity for elephants within the DWC PA network to accommodate 
all elephants in the wild, this component will explore options for Human Elephant 
Coexistence (HECOEX) on a landscape basis, utilizing FD forest reserves as well DWC 
protected areas as outlined in the National Policy on Conservation of Wild Elephants.  
The component would support the creation of economic incentives in the HECOEX sites 
as well as the development of a national master plan for HEC mitigation and practical 
models for HECOEX in the North.  
 
Component 3: Enhancing the Quality of Nature-based Tourism in support of PA 
Conservation and Management (US$6.00 million)  
 
Sri Lanka is well placed to capitalize on nature-based tourism.  The proximity of its 
national parks to cultural attractions and beaches presents opportunities for tapping a 
more lucrative segment of the tourist market attracted by the combination of #nature, 
culture and beaches.#  Unlike its regional competitors, Sri Lanka has a uniquely high 
density of natural and cultural assets, including the renowned #cultural triangle# and a 
rich array of celebrated species such as elephants, leopards, sloth bears, whales and 
Page  3
dolphins. Sri Lanka is one of the best places in the world for observing large herds of 
Asian elephants as well as leopard and whale watching.  GOSL has identified responsible 
nature-based tourism as an important area for diversifying tourism products and boosting 
revenues.  Equally important, nature-based tourism would promote conservation and 
environmental education.  This component would focus on developing nature-based 
tourism opportunities within the priority PAs in the four conservation landscapes.  
 
Component 4: Strengthening Knowledge and National Capacity for Ecosystem 
Conservation and Management (US$9.06 million)  
 
This component would support the following: enhancement and upgrading of the 
capacity of the Wildlife Training Center and Sri Lanka Forestry Institute to the standard 
of regional training centers in wildlife and forestry in South Asia; strengthening DWC#s 
and FD#s management and staff skills through twinning arrangements with international 
conservation agencies; project monitoring and evaluation; specific studies aimed at 
effective project implementation; and TA to MOE in natural resource management 
planning, policy making and environmental performance monitoring.  A sub-component 
financed by AusAID would improve FD#s capacity to implement participatory 
approaches to reduce community dependence on forest resources.  Finally, GOSL will 
pay the stipulated allowances for the regular staff of DWC, FD and MOE for 
implementing the project and other counterpart funding as its financial contribution to the 
project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will concentrate its investments and activities in four priority conservation 
landscapes that are formed by contiguous areas with unique ecological, cultural and 
socio-economic characteristics.  The selected conservation landscapes are dominated by 
PAs belonging to both DWC and FD.  The four landscapes also contain ecologically 
sensitive sites and wildlife corridors outside the designated PA network which were 
identified in a Protected Area Gap Analysis Study as needing strategic conservation 
interventions. The four landscapes comprise: (i) the biodiversity rich landscape ranging 
from the Kanneliya-Dediyagal-Nakiyadeniya (KDN) forest to Galways Land Sanctuary 
(SA) in the South West and Central wet zone; (ii) from the South Eastern dry and arid 
zone, the forest ecosystem ranging from Bundala National Park (NP) to Maduru Oya NP, 
which is the landscape with the largest PA network in the country; (iii) from the mixed 
climatic zone, the landscape ranging from Victoria-Randenigala-Rantambe to the 
integrated land-seascape of Pigeon Island Marine NP; and (iv) the integrated land-
seascape of Bar Reef SA-Wilpattu NP to Kahala Pallekelle SA, also from the mixed 
climatic zone. Specific sites of intervention are yet to be identified.  
 
The project will support crucial and high priority interventions to conserve and manage 
such ecosystems and include, where appropriate, close collaboration with the local 
population to ensure the long-term sustainability of the efforts. In addition, to reduce 
further fragmentation of critical forest areas that provide ecosystems goods and services 
beyond biodiversity conservation, sites will be selected for community forestry initiatives 
Page  4
on the basis of conservation issues faced by the respective forest reserves, including an 
analysis of the vulnerability of forests to deforestation and forest degradation covering 
mainly dry and arid zones of Sri Lanka.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
Ms Nadeera Rajapakse (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are expected to be positive 
since the project focuses on conservation of protected areas and sensitive ecosystems 
outside the PA network, but within conservation landscapes.  Therefore, it is not 
envisaged that there will be any significant or irreversible environmental or social 
impacts under the project.  No involuntary resettlement and involuntary land acquisition 
will take place under the proposed project. Even though involuntary land acquisition and 
resettlement of individuals and/or families will not take place due to project activities, 
conservation planning and human elephant coexistence interventions is likely to affect 
land use patterns of the communities outside PAs and thus, OP 4.12 is thus triggered.  
 
Component 1 will include activities funded under 3 windows. While it is recognized that 
all activities proposed will eventually have significant conservation benefits, it is 
anticipated that some of the activities that are likely to be proposed will involve small 
civil works and hence certain temporary negative environmental impacts during the 
implementation phase. Due to the demand driven nature of this component where 
proposals will be submitted from the field level by DWC and FD to implement crucial 
aspects of the conservation landscape management plans, it is not possible to identify 
specific activities that will be included in the proposals until landscape management plans 
and PA management plans are developed during implementation.  However, based on 
typical activities undertaken in management of protected areas and conservation 
landscapes, it is possible to anticipate the types of activities that will be proposed for 
Page  5
funding by the three funding windows.  Activities that will be funded under window 1 
may include a broad range of activities needed to protect and conserve the identified 
critical eco-system outside the PA network, but within the conservation landscapes.  
Typical activities funded under this window are:  (i) identification of wildlife corridors 
and making connectivity linkages for the long term survival of flagship species such as 
elephants.  This may involve the construction of electric fences for isolating these 
corridors from developed and human habituated areas; (ii) restoration of degraded 
ecosystems; (iii) restoration of existing degraded or abandoned water bodies; (iv) 
valuation of environmental services within the landscape and restoration of degraded but 
potentially high ecosystem services; and (v) preparation of green infrastructure guidelines 
for use for infrastructure development projects (not funded by this project) within the 
conservation landscapes.Since these interventions will enhance the environmental and 
ecosystem quality of the conservation landscape it is not anticipated that there will be 
adverse or irreversible environmental impacts.  Limited, localized environmental impacts 
are likely during the restoration and rehabilitation of existing water bodies and erection of 
electric fencing.  
 
Some of the likely activities to be proposed for funding under window 2 (which is 
restricted to activities within PAs) may include development of water resources, 
improvement to road networks, rehabilitation of field offices and staff quarters, boundary 
demarcations, removal of invasive species, species monitoring and recovery plan 
implementation, etc.  Environmental impacts of such interventions may include 
temporary disturbance to habitats and wildlife populations of conservation importance in 
the surrounding areas due to use of machinery and earth work, noise and air pollution due 
to frequent movement of vehicles as well as use of machinery and burning of uprooted 
vegetation, spread of invasive species from vehicles and material brought into the park 
from outside, disposal of dredged silt/soil etc. Other risks would be the possibility of 
increased wildlife poaching during construction work and attraction of domestic cattle 
herds to newly developed water resources giving rise to other problems. Extreme caution 
has to be practiced in terms of managing invasive species to ensure that the problem is 
not further aided. Sri Lanka has many examples of severe invasions of aquatic weeds in 
waterways as well as terrestrial species in dry coastal areas which includes several PAs. 
Solid waste/debris disposal will be another issue that will need addressing. Activities that 
will involve earth movement and construction will result in the displacement of top soil 
and generation of wastes. In addition, wastes will be generated from worker camps, if 
operated-however these worker camps will not be within PAs.  As the project sites are 
sensitive zones, extreme caution has to be taken in terms of proper disposal of any waste 
generated during work and to leave sites restored to its natural state on completion of 
each activity.  
 
Funding from window 3 is for community participation in activities that result in 
reducing forest degradation and deforestation. Specific site selection within the 
conservation landscape and the buffer zones will be based on the range management 
plans prepared by FD and prioritized on the basis of conservation issues faced by the 
respective forest reserves, including an analysis of the vulnerability of forests to 
deforestation and forest degradation within the identified conservation landscapes.  The 
Page  6
action plans would aim to: (i) reduce deforestation and forest degradation by reducing the 
dependency on extractive forest resources by providing alternative agricultural and non-
agricultural income generating opportunities for local communities; (ii) enhance the 
productivity and environmental sustainability of agricultural lands within the selected 
conservation landscapes; (iii) reduce soil erosion; (iv) improve soil and water 
conservation in agricultural lands and home gardens; (v) increase the quality and quantity 
of timber produced from designated woodlots and home gardens and (vi) assisting the FD 
in management of selected forest reserves. Since these activities are small scale and 
undertaken by communities, it is not anticipated that there will be significant or 
irreversible adverse environmental impacts.  
 
There is potential for adverse social impacts from activities funded under windows 1 
and 2 for communities living within the conservation landscapes.  The issues faced by 
these communities are likely to be livelihood related, and could occur under activities 
supported under window 1.  Demarcation of wildlife corridors for elephant migration 
may involve livelihood impacts on communities using such areas today.  Yet the human 
elephant coexistence models proposed under the project do not envision restrictions of 
shifting agriculture (chena) within these corridors as chena after growth creates ideal 
elephant habitat, this is compatible with the use of the corridor by elephants.  Co 
habitation is the underlying principle of HECOEX models.  While migrations generally 
take place during the dry season when seasonal chena cultivation has been completed, 
crop damage by elephants could result in livelihood impacts. Although communities tend 
to use PA land for cattle grazing, timber felling, extraction of non-timber forest products 
and poaching, all such activities are prohibited by the legislation governing protected 
areas (Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance and Forest Ordinance).  With likely 
proposals from DWC and FD to strengthen enforcement in PAs, there is a good chance 
that strengthened enforcement and management of PAs will result in curbing such 
activities that will result in livelihood impacts on communities involved in such illegal 
activities.  This will result in possible changes to the "traditional" ways of how PA land 
has been used by communities.  
 
Component 2 addresses a national priority which has emerged as one of the most critical 
socio-economic, political and conservation challenges in the present times, the human 
elephant conflict. No adverse environmental issues are envisaged under this component 
as the only civil works undertaken will be to erect electric fences at the boundaries of 
villages and permanent agriculture for protection from elephants. Fencing at the 
ecosystem boundaries will in fact increase elephant habitat from what is currently 
practiced today so this is positive for elephant conservation as well.  Since there is a 
possible risk of failure associated as with any pilot project that attempts innovative 
approaches, that risk exists with the HECOEX pilots that will be implemented under this 
component.  However, failure of the HECOEX pilots will not lead to any adverse 
environmental impacts that are not already present, because what is being proposed even 
in failure has less adverse environmental impacts than the detrimental impact on the 
elephant population that is taking place at present. Traditional approaches to management 
of HEC have been translocations, drives and electric fences on administrative boundaries 
of PAs.  This approach has led to exceeding the elephant carrying capacity of PAs 
Page  7
resulting in excessive damage by elephants to the vegetation in PAs, which results in 
adverse impacts on the environment and the elephant population.  Whereas the pilots will 
involve electric fencing on the ecological boundaries, boundaries of villages and 
permanent agriculture, creating larger habitats for the elephants and reducing the stresses 
on both elephants and the environment. The groundwork for this new approach is based 
on solid scientific research which has been conducted over the last 10 years, therefore the 
probability of failure is low. Therefore no significant or irreversible adverse 
environmental impacts are likely under this component.  
 
Potential social impacts of this component are likely to be on livelihood patterns of 
community members as the pilots on HEC may attempt to restructure chena cultivation, 
which is a major livelihood activity for local communities. Chena, although illegal is 
taking place in multiple use forest reserves and other state forests now under the 
jurisdiction of FD. Since the after growth from chena farming is essential elephant 
habitat, and is a crucial aspect of HECOEX models, there will no prohibition against 
chena agriculture.  Consultations on the proposed project and its SMF have been 
conducted by the DWC and FD with communities in the Southern Province affected by 
the human-elephant conflict.  
 
Component 3 will focus on enhancing the quality of nature based tourism in PAs which 
will require the development of necessary tourism facilities such as visitor centers, visitor 
toilets and resting areas, renovation of existing park bungalows, picnic sites, camp sites, 
nature trails, wildlife hides, watch towers and facilities for non-motorized boats, canoes 
and kayaks for wildlife viewing, etc. Some typical negative impacts to be associated with 
such interventions include changes to landform, decrease in aesthetic value, disturbance 
to animal life and habitats, etc. But since these are small scale interventions, significant 
and/or irreversible adverse environmental impacts are unlikely.  Likely social impact of 
this component will mainly relate to access to potential project benefits in terms of 
opportunities for skills enhancement in tourism related employment within FD and DWC 
and training opportunities.  
 
Component 4 of the project will support institutional capacity building within the DWC, 
and FD and hence, no adverse environmental impacts are envisaged, except for the 
construction or renovation of a few buildings in the Sri Lanka Forestry Institute and the 
Wildlife Training Center.  Both these facilities are not located within PAs therefore it is 
unlikely that such construction will have irreversible impacts.  Likely social impacts will 
mainly relate to access to potential project benefits in terms of opportunities for skills 
enhancement in tourism related employment within FD and DWC and training 
opportunities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Government of Sri Lanka has major development plans in the south-eastern part of 
Sri Lanka, with the construction of an international port and international airport as well 
as an industrial complex and commercial activities.  This region also has the largest 
protected area complex in the country.  Therefore, the Government's development plans 
Page  8
for this region could have significant adverse impacts for conservation and management 
of the protected areas unless the PA network is able to make significant contributions to 
the national and local economy.  The proposed project proposes to enhance nature based 
tourism in the PA complex in the south as well, thereby increasing it contribution to the 
national economy, thus providing an incentive to the Government to ensure the PA 
network is conserved, in the long term.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
significant portion of the project is designed to address these emerging issues arising 
from the proposed development in the southeastern region of the country.  The 
development of landscape plans for the 4 critical ecosystems identified, with guidelines 
for green infrastructure would ensure the environmentally sensitive development within 
the conservation landscapes that are dominated by PAs and sensitive ecosystems. Project 
interventions to manage the HEC through HECOEX will enable the human and large 
elephant population in this region to coexist.  Project interventions designed to increase 
the revenue potential from protected areas as well as invest in conservation management 
activities will contribute significantly to encourage the Government to proceed with its 
development plans in harmony with the significant natural resource base conserve the 
protected area network in the south for nature based tourism.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) in lieu of project specific 
Environmental Assessments (EA) has been prepared as details of specific project 
locations, sub-project activities and interventions are not yet available.  The EMF 
primarily includes an assessment of generic issues that are typically associated with 
anticipated interventions under the project, measures for environmental risk mitigation 
and institutional arrangements for conducting environmental assessment, EMP 
preparation, implementation and monitoring. The environmental safeguard policies 
triggered under this project are: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural 
Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and Pest Management 9OP/BP 4.09).  
Therefore, the EMF has been prepared taking the policies that have been triggered into 
account and will serve as a guide to the level of environmental analysis and mitigation 
required for all interventions supported by the project which will have the potential to 
trigger negative environmental impacts and thereby ensure compliance with the World 
Bank#s environmental safeguard policies and the relevant national environmental 
regulations during implementation.  As a category B project with no significant adverse 
environmental impacts, all physical activities financed under the project in general and 
components 1, 3 and 4 in particular will be required to prepare an Environmental 
Management Plans (EMP) for each site or activity. No sub-projects will be approved 
from any of the three windows of the Component 1 without an EMP being submitted 
with the detailed proposal which will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to fund 
disbursements.  With regard Component 3 and 4 no funds will be disbursed for any 
activity (other than training of guides and safari jeep drivers) without EMPs being 
reviewed and cleared by the Bank.  For other project components which are expected to 
Page  9
have only minimal environmental impacts, any specific activity that may result in adverse 
environmental impacts will be required to prepare an EMP prior to fund disbursement. 
Therefore, the project will not fund any physical activity if a prior environmental 
screening and analysis has not been undertaken and EMPs prepared.  
 
A
Social Management Framework (SMF) has been prepared in lieu of project specific 
Social Impact Assessments (SIA) as details of specific sites, sub-project activities and 
interventions are not available until the conservation landscape plans and PA 
management plans as well HECOEX pilot plans are available.  These plans will be 
prepared during project implementation because extensive community consultation is a 
pre-requisite for the preparation of these plans.  The SMF primarily includes an 
assessment of generic issues that are expected in view of anticipated interventions under 
the project, including a Resettlement Policy Process Framework in case of land use 
restrictions outside PAs and a guidelines for the development of an Indigenous Peoples 
(IPP) in case of sub-projects in the two PAs, where IPs live close by, measures for social 
risk mitigation and institutional arrangements for conducting social impact assessments 
(SIA), implementation and monitoring. All relevant sub-projects financed under 
component 1nd 2 of the project will be subjected to specific Social Impact Assessment 
(SIA) and the subsequent preparation of social mitigatory measures for each intervention. 
The project will not fund any relevant physical activity if a prior social impact assessment 
has not been completed. Therefore, the SMF will serve as a guide to the level of social 
analysis and mitigation required for all interventions supported by the project which will 
have the potential to trigger negative social impacts and thereby ensure compliance with 
the World Bank#s social safeguard policies during implementation.  
 
Sri Lanka's environmental clearance process is almost two decades old and during this 
time much experience and knowledge on EIA has been built by the CEA and other 
institutions that have been involved in it. The FD and DWC have been designated Project 
Approving Agencies for EIA/IEE approvals within areas under their jurisdiction since 
1993.  Therefore, the existing knowledge within the DWC and FD to conduct and review 
EMPs under the project is deemed adequate. However, an area that could do better with 
improved performance, especially within DWLC and FD, is post EA clearance 
monitoring which tends to be the weakest link in the Sri Lankan EIA cycle. The project 
would place strong emphasis on post EMP clearance monitoring and identify technical 
assistance to strengthen this aspect within the implementing agencies.  
 
The primary responsibility of coordinating work related to SIAs will rest with the 
implementing agencies, namely the DWC and the FD. The project will be implemented 
through the regular arms of the implementing agencies and hence there will not be an 
external PMU. The implementation of the SMF and monitoring the conducting of  the 
SIAs will be the responsibility of social officers within the DWC and FD, specially 
assigned for the task throughout the project period. These officers will make sure that 
SIAs are prepared for all relevant project sites/activities and that suitable mechanisms are 
mobilized to ensure the implementation of the SIAs. The SIAs will be carried out by 
contracted local consultants/NGOs/CBOs. Since capacity in this area may need 
improvement, the project will finance training prior to the initiation of project activities 
Page  10
of staff and of also consultants who will be able to assist the FD and DWC in preparing 
and implementing SIAs for project activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Project preparation is done in consultation with project-affected groups, who are the 
community surrounding the PAs, and other stakeholders such as the field staff of the 
relevant departments and the conservation community about the project's design, 
environmental and social aspects and take their views into account. Consultations with 
such groups, especially conservation NGOs, started very early in the project cycle, even 
before the PCN was approved by the Bank's management and continue to date. A e-
discussion site has been established for this project for the conservation community to 
interact with the Bank team and convey their thoughts and concerns.  These free and 
informed consultative sessions focus on a number of issues ranging from environmental 
and social concerns to project design and its components as well as implementation 
arrangements. Specific consultations have been initiated in the two PAs where 
Indigenous communities live (even though there is no indication of whether these PAs 
will be project beneficiaries), and special consultations are also ongoing with 
communities particularly exposed to the human-elephant conflict in the Southern 
Province. The project hopes to continue with this mechanism of engagement and 
consultation with local NGO forums and other stakeholders throughout project 
preparation and implementation. Further, closer consultations with the key stakeholders, 
especially at the local level, will be conducted on environmental and social aspects 
concerned when site specific EA and/or EMP preparation commences.  
 
Getting the community members involved in the development and implementation of 
relevant pilot projects will help minimize negative impacts on the community due to 
project activities. Stakeholder consultations with representatives from the communities 
such as, Grama Niladhris, school principals and teachers, Samurdhi officers and other 
village level government officials can be useful, particularly at the development stage of 
a
proposal. Opinion surveys, focus group discussions and semi-structured interviews with 
selected community members representing the two genders, age groups, ethnicities and 
religious groups can be useful, particularly before the implementation of a particular 
project. Consultation sessions will be carried out prior to finalizing the design of the pilot 
projects under component 2, because the implementation of pilots will have direct 
livelihood impact on local communities, where voluntary agreements regarding 
regulation of chena cultivation and compensations will have to be reached.  
 
A
broader Continuous SIA (CSIA) will be done for the overall project during years 2 
and 4  providing an independent assessment of the wider social impacts of the project 
interventions, implementation of the safeguards framework, impact on livelihood and 
functioning of th grievance redress mechanism. The CSIA will be conducted by an 
independent consultant firm and will encompass all areas covered by the project, 
highlighting any the risks, challenges, opportunities and problems within the project   
 
Page  11
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/03/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/04/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/03/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/04/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/03/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/04/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/03/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Please note the Resettlement Framework and Indigenous Peoples Plan are part of the 
Social Management Framework of the project.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
Yes 
Page  12
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  13
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya 
07/16/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nadeera Rajapakse 
07/16/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
04/27/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
08/03/2010 
Comments:  cleared. See details in email of 08/03/2010 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
08/09/2010 
Comments:  Cleared-reference EM Aug-9-2010 
