Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5692 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/11/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P113488 
Project Name: Human Capital Foundations of a Knowledge Hub: Transforming the 
Education System 
Task Team Leader: Harsha Aturupane 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 18, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2011 
Managing Unit: SASED 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (80%);Primary education (20%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (70%);Education for all (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to enhance equitable access and quality of primary and 
secondary education to provide a foundation for the knowledge-based economic and social 
development of the country.  
 
The success of the project in terms of meeting its key objectives are to be measured by the 
following indicative outcomes:  
 
(i) Promoting equity of access to primary and secondary education.  
 
*
The survival rate of students up to Grade 11 (age 16 years) in the education system. This 
outcome will be measured by gender and province, to ensure that gender and regional variations 
are captured.  
 
(ii) Improving the quality of education.  
 
*
National assessments of learning outcomes conducted according to a regular and continuing 
cycle for English, IT, science and mathematics in the primary and secondary grades and used for 
education program development. The assessments will be designed capture gender and 
Page  2
provincial variations in learning outcomes, and provide feedback on the performance of the 
education system to policy makers and education stakeholders for further development of the 
system.  
 
(iii) Strengthening governance and delivery of education services.  
 
*
School-based management established in all schools.  
 
Baseline information on these outcomes will be obtained during project preparation. Thereafter, 
information on the outcomes will be collected during project implementation as part of 
monitoring and evaluation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would support the GOSL to transform the basic and secondary education system to 
lay the foundation of a modern, knowledge-based middle-income economy. The GOSL 
Education Sector Development Framework and Program (ESDFP) is organized around three 
pillars. The project would support the key development initiatives under all three pillars through 
a
programmatic sector-wide approach (SWAp).  
 
Pillar One: Promoting equity of access to basic and secondary education. The central initiative 
under this pillar is to ensure that all children and youth aged 6-16 years complete 11 years of 
education. A set of good quality secondary schools offering education in the science, arts and 
management curriculum streams will be developed to expand the opportunities for secondary 
education. A set of primary schools will be linked as "feeder schools" to each secondary school. 
This network of linked primary and secondary schools is being identified through a strategic 
school mapping exercise in all provinces.  
 
The promotion of equity of access will be supported through a set of demand side incentives 
and supply side measures. Demand side incentives consist of tuition free primary and secondary 
education in government schools; a set of free textbooks and school uniforms for children from 
grades 1-11; the appointment of school attendance committees in each local school community 
to promote school enrolment and attendance; and school health and nutrition programs, including 
meals for children from poor communities and sanitation facilities to promote school attendance 
by girls. The supply side measures include ensuring that a primary school is available within 
each village and a secondary school offering science, arts and management curriculum streams 
are available within reasonable travelling distance for all students. In addition, non-formal 
education programs and special education programs will be available for students who need 
these alternative types of education. Non-formal education programs and special education 
programs are particularly important for children and youth in the Northern and Eastern 
Provinces, which are just emerging from nearly three decades of armed conflict.  
 
Pillar two: Improving the quality of education. A strategic initiative under this pillar is the 
development of a system for the regular and continuing assessment of cognitive skills. The 
Faculty of Education of the University of Colombo has established a National Education 
Research and Evaluation Centre (NEREC) that will be developed to conduct both national 
assessments and also enable Sri Lanka to participate in international assessments such as 
TIMMS and PISA. The information and feedback from these assessments will be useful for 
Page  3
policy makers and technocrats in key areas such as curriculum development, pre-service teacher 
education, continuing teacher development, and in the production of educational material 
including textbooks. The learning assessments will also provide feedback for Provincial Councils 
on the performance of the education systems in the provinces.  
 
The ESDFP will pay special attention to the promotion of learning in IT, English, science and 
mathematics, particularly through curriculum reforms and teacher development modeled on high 
performing education systems in middle-income countries, especially East Asia. In addition, an 
important reform that has been introduced is the Bilingual Education program, where a range of 
subjects in the secondary grade cycles are available in the English medium. These initiatives are 
designed to expand the pool of secondary school completers fluent in English, and skilled in IT, 
science and mathematics, that will provide the foundation for Sri Lanka to become a knowledge 
hub with knowledge-based services. The national assessments of learning outcomes will cover 
these key subjects such as English, science and mathematics, as well as students following the 
Bilingual Education program, to provide feedback and further ideas for development, to policy 
makers and education technocrats.  
 
The ESDFP also seeks to promote social cohesion through the education system, by increasing 
interactions between students from different ethnic and religious communities through 
educational, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities, and by using the school curriculum to 
present a favourable multi-ethnic, multi-cultural societies favourably to students. This is a key 
initiative for the future social and political stability of Sri Lanka, which is emerging from a long 
running ethnic-based civil war.  
 
Pillar three. Strengthening governance and delivery of education services. The main 
development initiative of the ESDFP under this pillar is the establishment of a balanced control 
model of school based management in the country. Under this model, school officials such as 
principals, teachers and administrators will be joined by stakeholders in the local school 
community, such as parents, past pupils and well-wishers, in the management and administration 
of schools. In particular, the schools will be able to raise resources to supplement the funds 
received from the government to develop the schools, particularly to improve student learning 
and for initiatives to strengthen the "soft skills" of students, such as team work, an industrious 
and disciplined work ethic, good communication skills, leadership and enterprise, that are in 
demand by employers. This initiative will build on a successful pilot program of school-based 
management, called Program for School Improvement (PSI), which had a positive impact on the 
learning outcomes of primary school students. The model of school-based management that will 
be supported under the project will be an expanded version of the PSI, which will also have 
strategic interventions for secondary schools.  
 
The ESDFP will also strengthen the capacity of the education management system, particularly 
the sub-provincial system at the zone and division levels. Special emphasis will be given to 
strengthening the planning, budgeting and administration skills, and monitoring capacity at these 
levels. In addition the central role of school principals is recognized by policy makers. The 
project would support the Government's initiatives to build the leadership and management 
capacities of school principals. This is particularly important given the additional roles that 
Page  4
schools principals will have to play as school based management is expanded, and greater 
responsibility and power is devolved to schools.  
 
The IDA operation through the SWAp would: (a) support the policies and development plans of 
the central and provincial Ministries of Education; (b) focus on results and outcomes rather than 
inputs, and link disbursements to performance; (c) be mainstreamed into existing government 
structures without the creation of parallel structures such as project management units; and (d) 
use country systems wherever feasible and appropriate.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation. The ESDFP has a strong focus on the monitoring and evaluation of 
results and outcomes. The monitoring and evaluation activities will focus on program inputs, 
processes, outputs, results and outcomes. The monitoring activities will be undertaken mainly by 
government education agencies, such as the Ministry of Education, the Finance Commission, the 
Provincial Councils and the National Institute of Education (NIE). Evaluation activities will 
generally be contracted out to independent research agencies, such as the National Education 
Research and Evaluation Center (NEREC) and private consulting firms. Policy research will be 
undertaken mainly with the assistance of specialized research agencies, such as universities, 
research centers (including NEREC) and research institutes (including the NIE).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in all parts of Sri Lanka.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower (Ministry of Education) has reasonable experience and capacity in managing 
environmental safeguard issues related to education projects under the Education Sector 
Development Project (2006-2010).  The on-going ESDP has developed an Environmental and 
Social Screening Assessment Framework (ESSAF), which has served effectively to safeguard 
environmental and social safeguards requirements. An updated ESSAF will be prepared before 
appraisal, to take into account any new needs that may get identified during preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASDI) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While irreversible or cumulative environmental impacts are not envisaged due to project 
activities, environmental impacts may occur during construction and maintenance of education 
facilities, especially water supply and sanitation systems in schools, some of which are currently 
unsatisfactory and contribute to health risks, especially for young students.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/26/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Management Framework will be prepared by May 2011 and will be 
integrated with the project implementation arrangements.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Harsha Aturupane 
01/03/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
01/05/2011 
Comments:  cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
01/11/2011 
Comments:  cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
