Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/03/2011 
Report No.:  AC6155
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P086747 
Original Project Name: Community 
Livelihoods in Conflict Affected Areas 
Project ( Yali Pibedemu Viyapruthiya) 
(Maru Eluchchithittum) 
Country:  Sri Lanka 
Project ID:  P125855 
Project Name:  Second Additional Financing for the Community Livelihoods in Conflict 
Affected Areas Project 
Task Team Leader:  Seenithamby Manoharan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 2, 2011 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Other social services 
(30%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (10%) 
Theme:  Rural non-farm income generation (30%);Participation and civic engagement 
(30%);Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (20%);Rural markets 
(10%);Gender (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
38.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed Additional Financing is to help conflict and/or flood 
affected communities and villages in North, East and the adjoining areas by restoring 
their livelihoods, enhancing agricultural production and income, and building their 
capacity for sustainable social and economic reintegration. It is consistent with the CAS 
objective to support the generation of economic opportunities in the country#s most 
lagging regions. Its expected outcomes are (i) recovery of agriculture through 
rehabilitation of irrigation schemes, (ii) enhanced connectivity of affected communities 
by repairing rural roads, (iii) restoration of drinking water facilities by repairing drinking 
water schemes, and (iv) restoration of livelihoods through short-term employment and 
supporting farmers to be ready for their next cultivation.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing activities would focus on the twelve conflict-affected districts 
where the Project is already working, while scaling up to four adjoining districts where 
flood damages occurred. The project would build on the community institutions already 
established through the RaP for supporting the recovery to pre-flood conditions. While 
the existing RaP credits will help recovery in currently supported villages, this additional 
finance would provide support to an additional 400 villages across these sixteen districts. 
The recovery of poor people#s livelihoods and rehabilitation of social and economic 
infrastructure would be achieved through two of the existing project components: (i) 
village rehabilitation and development, and (ii) rehabilitation of major irrigation schemes.  
 
Village Rehabilitation and Development (US$ 13 million) - Under this component, the 
project will work through community based institutions to restore livelihoods and 
enhance incomes of village inhabitants by rehabilitating key village-based small 
economic infrastructures (including minor irrigation and agricultural roads) and 
providing essential support to vulnerable groups for the recovery of livelihoods. This 
would include the provision of greenhouse interventions through the Government#s Divi 
Neguma flagship scheme and support economic activities for people whose livelihoods 
(farm and non-farm) were affected by the floods. Communities would be responsible to 
plan, design and implement small scale-infrastructure and livelihood activities with 
support from Community Resource Persons.  
 
Rehabilitation of Irrigation Schemes and Rural Infrastructure (US$ 25 million) - Under 
this component, to restore key economic and social infrastructure, the project would 
rehabilitate the key irrigation and water supply schemes, roads, and other infrastructures 
damaged by flood. Restoration of irrigation schemes would include repairs of breaches in 
embankments and canals, removal of debris deposited in the canal prisms, control 
structures, canal cross drainage structures and outlets.  Restoration of water supply 
schemes will include repair to water source, damaged pipelines and pumping equipment. 
The restoration of roads will encompass the reconstruction/repair of damaged 
embankments, culverts, bridges and retaining walls. The project would also support the 
recovery of productive infrastructure such as agricultural and market facilities, milk 
collection centers etc and services that had been damaged by the flood.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project is a follow up operation to the ongoing operation to Community 
Livelihoods in Conflict Affected Areas. The project location is the North and East 
provinces and selected areas of the adjoining administrative districts and four new 
districts.  
 
In November and December 2010, Sri Lanka was hit by the heaviest rains in almost one 
hundred years, which caused devastating destructions and landslides. According to the 
Disaster Management Center (DMC) of the Ministry of Disaster Management, more than 
1.1 million (284,000 families) were affected by the flood with 27 deaths and 12 people 
reported missing. Around 363,000 people were displaced in some 630 temporary 
Page  3
relocation centers. In total, 12 out of 25 districts were affected by the flood mostly 
located in Eastern, Northern and Central Provinces. Three districts of the Eastern 
Province - Batticaloa, Ampara and Trincomalee - suffered the most representing 94% of 
total population affected by flood. Further heavy rains and floods at the end of January 
2011 have extended the affected areas, including communities from the war affected 
districts of Vavuniya and Mullaitivu in the Northern Province. DMC stated that more 
than 15,400 houses were damaged, 71,000 ha paddy cultivation badly affected, over 400 
small/medium tanks damaged, more than 1.2 million people affected in total and a proper 
damage assessment is yet to be made.  
 
Although flood water started receding and the displaced people began to return to their 
homes in January 2011, the new floods of late January / early February 2011 has 
exacerbated the problems. Government estimates and the reports of UN agencies indicate 
enormous levels of destruction. According to World Food Program, around 500,000 
people have become food-insecure needing immediate food assistance to avoid hunger 
and malnutrition. Widespread destruction of houses, roads, agricultural land, livestock, 
livelihood assets, and other infrastructure have been reported, which have dramatic 
impacts on the livelihoods of the population especially those just recovering from long-
period of military conflicts. The initial estimates indicated that over 250,000 acres of crop 
land have been partially or fully damaged. In Batticaloa district over 80% of paddy lands, 
in Ampara 20% of paddy lands, and Trimcomalee 35% of paddy lands have been 
severely damaged. This will have immediate impacts on this seasons crops, and prices of 
rice, vegetable, and other food items are expected to rise. A large number of livestock 
losses is reported most of the losses occurring in Batticaloa districts.  Around 55,000 
cattle and 25,000 goats have been reported as perished. Damages to minor and major 
irrigation schemes, tanks, bunds, wells, water supply points, and rural roads are also 
reported to be high (Government has recently started more detailed assessment of the 
extent of damages).  
 
The project components would mostly deal with small-scale civil works related to 
irrigation schemes, village roads and individual household-level income- generating 
activities that do not lead to serious negative environmental impacts. There are salient 
characteristics and situations of the physical location of the project that would be relevant 
to safeguard analysis.  Those characteristics would become safeguard relevant and social 
risk relevant only if project investments are made in the following circumstances:  
 
(i) 
in protected areas (natural habitats, forests and wild life reserves, and national 
parks that are  known to project stakeholders);  
 
(ii) 
in land mined areas ( declared by the Government and known to project 
stakeholders);  
 
(iii) 
to improve water storage capacity of the existing irrigation tanks in a manner that 
will lead to potential water right disputes consequent to the disturbance to existing 
hydrological balance of typical small tank cascades, existing agricultural and water use 
practices of the people downstream using the same water source or stream;  
 
(iv) 
that will require involuntary land acquisition; and  
Page  4
(v) 
that would benefit lands of the displaced people presently encroached illegally 
and occupied by other people.  
 
Focal village selection criteria will exclude project interventions to ensure that cases (i) 
and (ii) above will not arise. The project will carry out prior hydrological analysis of tank 
cascades to address the safeguard issue (iii) above at subproject planning and design 
stages.  Adequate design guidelines and practices are currently in force to appraise and 
screen the subprojects against this potential risk. On the social front, systematic and in-
depth stakeholders consultations will be held at unearthing adverse impacts, if any, to be 
suffered by any #sub- group# in the #watershed# and measures are drawn at nullifying 
the same. The stakeholder consultations will be an integral part of the EMP.  Project will 
not require involuntary land acquisition.   With regard to the item (v) above, the project 
has developed a framework to monitor encroachments by the communities and clarified 
the mechanism for dealing with such situations.  The ongoing project  as well as ENREP 
has applied the framework successfully and are able to manage the issues effectively.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish (SASDS) 
Ms Darshani De Silva (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As outlined above and as evident from the implementation experience of the ongoing 
Community Livelihoods in Conflict Affected Areas Project (Reawakening Project), the 
Additional Financing is not expected to result in significant potential environmental 
safeguard issues and negative impacts. If there are any potential negative impacts they are 
site specific related to infrastructural rehabilitation, improvement and construction 
activities and household-level income-generating activities. With adequate amount of 
resources (both monetary and human), good planning, suitable designs and mitigation 
measures, potential positive impacts can be enhanced and negative impacts easily 
Page  5
managed with proper planning, design, construction, supervision, monitoring and post-
project operation and maintenance.  
 
Rehabilitation of irrigation tanks, canals and ponds may include de-silting and 
rehabilitation of the earthen bunds and reconstruction and repair of the sluice gates (in the 
case of larger tanks and in some irrigation canals).  None of the proposed rehabilitation 
work involved any dams higher than 4m. Therefore, dam safety plans, POEs and EPPs 
will not be necessary. However, in oreder to ensure due deligence is in place during 
rehabiliattion work, the OP on Dam Safety has been triggered, which will ensure the 
borrower will take adequate measures to address any dam safety related on case-by-case 
basis and if such measures are required. The more significant adverse environmental 
impacts of such rehabilitation activities are not on site but off site. Such off site impacts 
include the disposal of dredge material, which is a serious concern and must be disposed 
off in designated locations.  
 
Rehabilitation of existing rural roads would include resurfacing with gravel, bitumen or 
concrete.  The exact surface type will vary depending on the use of the road and will be 
determined during Project implementation.  There may be a possibility of minor road 
widening in some instances, particularly based on road safety reasons.  The major direct 
environmental impact associated with rural roads is erosion.  Construction in the rainy 
season or improper construction methods which leave soil exposed unnecessarily can 
cause significant erosion.  In forested areas, high traffic volumes and speeds could have 
adverse impacts on wildlife movement and adequate precautions have to be taken to 
protect animal migration routes from being interfered with.  This is especially applicable 
to elephant migration routes and its interference would result in enhanced human-
elephant conflict in such areas.  
 
Rehabilitation of water supply schemes include activities such as construction impacts, 
expansion and rehabilitation of the water supply source, wells and intake structures, 
transmission mains and pumping stations and treatment works and distribution systems. 
Rehabilitation of water supply schemes undertaken by the National Water Supply and 
Drainage Board (NWSDB) will be medium schemes supported under the Project.  The 
smaller schemes supported by the Project would be community water supply and 
sanitation schemes largely constructed and managed by the communities.  The 
rehabilitation of water supply schemes and sanitation facilities implemented by the 
NWSDB are medium scale sub-projects and would involve a greater probability for 
adverse environmental impacts.  
 
The above activities can result in negative impacts, if not managed consciously. 
However, such impacts will be site-specific and restricted to those areas close to the 
existing infrastructure, which can be easily managed. There can be some potential off-site 
impacts too that can be managed through good planning and design, construction and 
operation phases. The safeguards measures identified and implemented in the on-going 
phase of the project will continue to be applicable for the Additional Financing activities.  
 
Social Safeguards:  
Page  6
Social Safeguard/ Development Issues and Risks:  
 
As is evident from the implementation experience of the ongoing NEIAP and ENREP,  
the proposed interventions are  not expected to result in significant potential social 
safeguard issues and negative impacts.  The project does not envisage involuntary 
resettlement, land acquisition, and does not affect cultural property and indigenous 
people.  If there are any potential negative impacts or risks they are mostly village 
specific and can be easily managed through the participatory and community based 
planning (village social profiles, village development plans, land ownership and 
encroachment inventory), implementation and monitoring mechanism of the project.  
 
A. 
Social Safeguards.  
 
(i)          OP 4.12 is not triggered because project need not acquire lands involuntarily.  
 
The proposed interventions, similar to the on-going project, would comprise: (i)  
 
rehabilitating village tanks for  irrigated agriculture, (ii) rebuilding needed infrastructure 
such as rural roads,  (iii) mobilizing the rural population in the focal villages for 
collective action in development activities, and  (iv) supporting a menu of livelihood 
support activities (LSA) to provide supplementary income to the poor and vulnerable 
segments of the population.  None of these activities do not require the state, to 
ostensibly, acquire  private lands. Hence, the project need not trigger  OP 4.12.  
 
(ii) 
OP 4.10. Indigenous Peoples is not an issue  
 
There are very few indigenous populations in Sri Lanka, specifically, the Veddah (or 
Wanniyala-aetto).  The Veddah are by no means a homogeneous group, sharing a 
common religion, language, and culture, which is one reason why some people claim that 
the groups does not actually exist.  Nevertheless, there are populations that identify 
themselves as Veddah, even if they no longer hunt and gather, and are acculturated into 
the main stream society. In fact, the issue of ethnic and religious affiliation is a larger 
factor in determining vulnerability at national and local level in the present Sri Lankan 
context. Given these, OP 4.10 is not triggered.  
 
.
(iii) 
OP 4.11- Policy on Cultural Heritage does not arise  
 
The OMS  on Cultural Heritage triggers when a development project disturbs the built 
environment with historical interest.  In as much as NEIAP engages exclusively in the 
rehabilitation of village tanks and command areas and the reconstruction of existing 
roads, it is very unlikely that project activities would disturb any area or site of historic or 
archaeological interest.  
 
Social Risks  
 
Page  7
Encroachment/ Disputes. Encroachment is  the unauthorized occupation and use of 
lands originally occupied and used by a person who got displaced and left the original 
homes as a result of the ethnic conflict. In some instances, given the ethnic conflicts, as 
communities had to flee, titles of the property may have been lost / mis placed. Land 
boundries could have been erased too. The floods could complicate these issues further. 
This could make it difficult for the owners to demarcate their lands properly. The Bank/ 
Project is fully aware of these issues and appropriate measures have been drawn to 
address the same.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to create serious cumulative negative environmental impacts 
due to the implementation of multiple project components. The application and use of the 
environmental and social safeguards management framework has become an 
unprecedented component in any community-based rural development program.  The 
Additional Financing will continue to treat social and environmental aspects as integral 
parameters of project planning, implementation and monitoring.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The community-led needs assessment and village-level planning process in partnership 
with governmental and nongovernmental partners will consider alternatives, deviations 
and modifications to project activities during planning and design as well as during 
implementation to mitigate any adverse social and environmental aspects and issues. 
Based on the experience of previous stages of the project, more investment in resources 
to better manage the environmental and social requirements has been emphasized for this 
additional financing.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Emergency Additional Financing Appraisal Stage ISDS is an update to capture the likely 
changes and impacts on any new activities. The new activities will not generate any 
additional impacts that were not identified in the original project. Hence this ISDS is an 
update of the appraisal stage ISDS of the original project. No additional safeguards-
related studies are expected to take place, except studies that may be needed for certain 
activities, which will be decided at the time of activity planning and will be based on the 
existing Environmental Safeguards Management Framework (ESMF), Environmental 
Guidance Note and Community Operational Manual.   
 
The project has developed and operationalized a comprehensive social and 
environmental safeguard framework for the ongoing Re-awakening Project and the first 
additional financing, which has been cleared by the IDA. It provides an appropriate basis 
to proceed with this additional financing. Satisfactory environmental training manuals for 
project staff, NGO staff and communities have been developed, and selected project 
stakeholders have already been trained. Although social and environmental safeguard 
Page  8
compliance is an integral part of project planning, implementation and monitoring, and 
the project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework includes safeguard indicators, 
the opertionalizing of safeguards requirements have been less than satisfactory. 
Previously due to the civil conflict situation, the Project Management Unit (PMU) has not 
been able to maintain and attract environmental staff. However, with the conflict situation 
has been changed, the PMU has recruited a senior and experience consultant with 
engineering and environmental background to lead the team of environmental officers (4 
numbers) to ensure more concerted efforts to ensure environmental and social safeguards 
of the project. Overall satisfactory compliance will be a requirement to continue financial 
disbursement.  
 
Environmental assessment (OP 4.01/ BP 4.01)  
 
The project activities would be identified by the communities through a transparent 
participatory needs assessment and planning process through the development of village 
baseline social profiles (VSPs), Village Rehabilitation Plans (VRPs) and village 
agricultural development plans (VADPs). The data and information pertaining to 
potential social and environmental impacts and issues of the identified subprojects (as 
discussed above) will be primarily collected through this process. During the initial needs 
assessment process to develop VRPs and VADPs for flood affected areas, communities 
will be provided awareness on relevant social and environmental aspects. All project 
activities and subprojects that will be prepared on the basis of VRPs and VADPs will 
undergo environmental screening using the checklists (already available and used under 
Reawakening project) by the communities as well as project implementing staff. The 
environmental screening process will distinguish subprojects and activities that will 
require thorough environmental review to prevent/mitigate negative environmental 
impacts or those that will provide opportunities to enhance positive impacts. All 
safeguards-related relevant documents for each sub-project will be maintained at the 
Village Development Organizations (VDOs), PPMUs and PMU. The project will 
continue to provide environmental awareness and skill development training to field-level 
project staff, social mobilizers and community members to carry out environmental 
screening, monitoring and incorporating appropriate mitigation measures during 
subproject formulation and execution. The training manuals as well as the environmental 
assessment checklists developed and made operational in Re-awakening project will be 
used for this purpose. Provisions will be included to undertake measures to enhance 
positive environmental impacts and mitigate/prevent negative effects.  
 
The Environmental Guidance Note will also capture the monitoring and evaluation 
indicators, reporting requirements and reporting formats to improve environmental 
monitoring of the project.  
 
The project will maintain records of completed and approved checklists and EMPs for 
all infrastructure activities. The project will also conduct an independent environmental 
audit based on a terms of reference agreed with IDA covering the parent project, first 
additional financing and emergency additional financing by June 30, 2012.  
Page  9
Social Risks  
 
Social disputes:  During project design, hydrological sensitivity analysis will be carried 
out to assess the potential impact on hydrology and water balance of tank cascades 
consequent to enlargement of storage capacity of any tank in the cascade. If hydrological 
analysis prove that the proposed interventions would affect existing water availability and 
use at any downstream point, such improvements will not either be financed or tailored to 
result in no harm.  Such assessments would also include verification of any downstream 
impacts, including potential water shortages for downstream users, if tank capacity 
improvements are envisaged. If disturbance to existing hydrological balance and 
downstream users are anticipated then a separate Social Assessment and Environmental 
Assessment would be undertaken on a case by case basis and a decision to fund the 
improvements would be made on the basis of the assessments.  Also project would 
consult and reach consensus between upstream and downstream users, before any 
upstream modifications are invested.  
 
Land Encrochment/Disputes. It is well recognized that the issue of land encroachment/ 
disputes is a much larger and more pertinent issue , given the post conflict situation. Also, 
the judicial process is lengthy, costly and time-consuming and hence, the project has  
remain vigilant  and address the same effectively and quickly.  Towards this, the ongoing 
as well as the other Bank Assisted Project # ENREP- have developed and put in place an 
effective arrangement. The same has worked well so far. Efforts will be made to be 
vigilant continuously and improve upon the same further. The measures drawn include: 
(i) an  operational manual; (i) systematic and comprehensive implementation monitoring;  
(iii) A  land register to form a part of Village Social Profile; (iii) enhancing land dispute 
management skills; and (iv) sensitizing officials as well as launching awareness 
campaigns . These will continue under the proposed project.  
 
A
designated Social Officer is located in the PMU whose responsibility is compliance 
oversight.  Safeguards auditing will take place as a part of the overall independent 
monitoring and evaluation of the Project.  Ensuring compliance with the provisions of the 
ESMF will be undertaken through independent monitoring and evaluation and safeguards 
audits supported under the Project.  In addition, regular IDA implementation review 
missions will also undertake close monitoring of social risk management compliance.  
 
Additionally, a broader CSIA (Continuous Social Impact Assessment) will be conducted 
for the overall project in 2012 during implementation and in 2013 at completion. This 
CSIA will review the larger issues of overall social impact of the project sub-project 
selection, beneficiary identification, construction quality, local economic recovery, and 
conflict and reconciliation. This would be a significant measure of taking care of 
concerns regarding the conflict sensitivity of the project and its general impact incl. 
safeguards aspects. The CSIA will be carried out by independent, specialized consultancy 
firm.   
 
Page  10
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The stakeholders include conflict-affected and flood-affected rural communities (women, 
farmers, youth and others), Staff members of the government department (at village, 
district and provincial levels), NGO partners and private consultants (at village, district 
and provincial levels), and community- based organizations. The sub-project design and 
implementation will involve consultation and participation of all stakeholders at different 
levels. The PMU has already taken action to disseminate its social and environmental 
safeguard and risk management framework and has operationalized it to some extent at 
the community and village levels. It has published the framework for wider dissemination 
and will continue to do so in any new areas in the future. Awareness creation on the 
social/environmental development provisions will continue through the Additional 
Financing resources too. The updated Environmental Guidance Note will be also 
translated into local languages and will be also disseminated to project management 
teams and the direct beneficiaries.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/01/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/08/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  11
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Seenithamby Manoharan 
03/30/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darshani De Silva 
03/30/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Suryanarayan Satish 
04/21/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sanjay Srivastava 
04/25/2011 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
04/25/2011 
Comments:  Cleared 
