Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/09/2010 
Report No.:  AC5882
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  St. Vincent and the Grenadines 
Project ID:  P124939 
Project Name:  Hurricane Tomas Emergency Recovery Loan 
Task Team Leader:  Niels B. Holm-Nielsen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 12, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: January 27, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Flood protection 
(40%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (60%);Other urban development (40%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the Project are to support the Recipient's efforts to: (i) rehabilitate 
damaged and vulnerable infrastructure caused by the passage of Hurricane Tomas; and 
(ii) strengthen the Recipient's ability to analyze location specific risks.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Hurricane Tomas Emergency Recovery Project will rehabilitate damaged 
infrastructure, schools and shelters.  The project will also include institutional 
strengthening investments aimed at improving the Government's capacity to identify and 
assess risks/vulnerabilities to adverse natural events.  Proceeding with urgent 
rehabilitation works under BP/OP 8.00 will enable the Government to begin work on 
strengthening vulnerable infrastructure prior to the 2011 hurricane season.  This project is 
an Emergency Recovery Loan (ERL) being processed in accordance with Bank 
Operational Policy / Bank Procedures 8.00.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This project consists of 3 components relating to institutional strengthening, Works, and 
project management. Component 1 (US$4.450)  
 
-
Rehabilitation of vulnerable and damaged infrastructure, consists of a range of small to 
mid-sized works are included and have been specifically identified by the GoSVG.  All 
project sites have been visited by the Bank during appraisal.  
 
Activities include:  
 
-
Rehabilitation of 0.1 mile of damaged road  
 
-
Repair and reconstruction of three damaged schools and three damaged community 
centers  
 
-
Repair and rehabilitation of existing river defense works  
 
Component 2 is for US$164,000. Activities will include purchase of equipment and 
provision of services to assist with data collection and management.  
 
Component 3 is US$400,000 for project management. In all cases works relate to the 
repair and rehabilitation of existing structures with no new constructions included under 
the project.  Environmental impacts associated with the activities included under the 
project relate are limited to those resulting from actual construction activities and cease 
when construction has concluded.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gerald E. Meier (LCSEN) 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (SDV) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This project is rated Category B under the Bank Safeguard Policy Environmental 
Assessment 4.01 owing to the possible need for an Environmental Assessment associated 
with river defense works.  Remaining works are rehabilitation, reconstruction and 
roadway repair and stabilization. All the physical works to be financed have been 
identified and screened by the Bank. With the exception of river defense works, project 
activities relate to the repair and rehabilitation of existing structures with no new 
constructions included under the project.  
 
Environmental impacts associated with these activities are limited to those resulting 
from actual construction activities and cease when construction has concluded.  While no 
significant negative impacts, including impacts on critical or other natural habitats, are 
anticipated in the case of river defense works, these activities will be the subject of an 
Environmental Assessment to be conducted during project execution.  The 
Environmental Assessment will assess and mitigate as necessary any potential natural 
habitat impacts. The findings of this assessment will be integrated in the design and 
execution of these works.  
 
Social impacts are limited to school repair activities and are to be managed in 
coordination with the Ministry of Education to assure disruption is minimized and student 
safety is assured. Works identified under the project are focused on public infrastructure 
and will not involve the acquisition of land or resettlement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project does not stimulate indirect or induce future activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Framework will be prepared prior to any works and will 
be included in the project operations manual. This framework will include: a) the steps 
and procedures to guide environmental management sub-projects including project 
environmental and social oversight; b) generic criteria for smaller scale works consistent 
with the Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines (2007) for World Bank Group-
funded activities;  c) integration of pertinent national and local laws to be included in 
design and preparation of bidding documents for works; c) terms of reference for 
preparation of the specific environmental assessment of the river defense investment.  
 
Page  4
Construction during the school term will require coordination with the Ministry of 
Education to assure students are protected from hazards associated with construction sites 
and that students are maintained in an environment conducive to learning.  Procedures 
will be included in the Operations Manual to define the coordination activities required 
between the PSIP and the Ministry of Education needed to minimize these potential 
impacts to staff and students.  Among the activities will be the inclusion of specific 
contractor requirements to be implemented based on the nature and timing of 
construction activities.  During the review process for school construction contracts, the 
Ministry of education will work with the PSIP to ensure that timing and security issues 
are adequately addressed in the contracts to protect the student environment.  
 
GoSVG, as a result of several years experience with Bank projects, has demonstrated 
capacity and competence with the implementation of Bank safeguard requirements.  
Additionally, the project supervision team will review PSIP safeguard activities to assure 
compliance with Bank requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The repair of schools may adversely impact the student population due to timing of 
construction and disruption due to construction. Mechanisms have been established 
within the PSIP to coordinate with the Ministry of Education in the planning of these 
activities to assure impacts to students are minimized.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/30/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/16/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This project is being processed under OP/BP 8.0.  The Environmental Assessment 
required for the river defense works, when completed, will be disclosed in accordance 
with National GoSVG and Bank requirements.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Niels B. Holm-Nielsen 
12/06/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Gerald E. Meier 
12/06/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong 
12/06/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
12/06/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
12/06/2010 
Comments:   
