Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/28/2011 
Report No.:  AC6049
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  St. Lucia 
Project ID:  P125205 
Project Name:  Saint Lucia Hurricane Tomas Emergency Recovery Loan 
Task Team Leader:  Niels B. Holm-Nielsen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 13, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 3, 2011 
Managing Unit:  LCSUW 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (40%);General education sector (20%);General water, 
sanitation and flood protection sector (15%);Health (15%);Central government 
administration (10%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (80%);Other urban development (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's objective is to support the recovery and reconstruction efforts of the 
Government of Saint Lucia in the aftermath of Hurricane Tomas. The project activities 
include: i) strengthening the Government's ability to analyze, assess, and integrate natural 
hazard and climate change risk reduction into national development policies and 
decision-making processes; and ii) rehabilitating damaged and vulnerable transport, 
health, and education infrastructure affected by the passage of Hurricane Tomas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The four components of the project are as follow:  
 
Component 1: Critical Imports (US$1.5 million). This component will finance the 
import of low-sulfur diesel fuel the Recipient has procured for electricity generation and 
transportation to resume and maintain economic activities shortly after Hurricane Tomas. 
The fuel will be financed retroactively, and the inclusion of this sole import is based on 
Page  2
an assessment of Saint Lucia's monthly import bill and review of satisfactory 
procurement practices.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Hazard and Risk Analysis (US$ 1.5 
million). This component will strengthen the institutional capacity of Ministry of 
Housing, the Ministry of Physical Development and Environment, and the National 
Emergency Management Organization, including improving national capacity to evaluate 
and integrate natural hazard and climate change risk reduction into national development 
policy and decision-making processes using geo-referenced information; carry out 
various risk assessments and impact evaluation studies in highly affected areas and 
specific sectors; and review the National Disaster Management Plan and strengthen 
disaster management capacity.  
 
Component 3: Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of Damaged Critical Public 
Infrastructure (US$11 million). This component will finance civil works, technical 
advisory services, and goods required for the rehabilitation of the damaged transport, 
health and education sectors infrastructure. These civil works will be executed to ensure 
that target structures are resilient to future adverse natural events, thereby reducing their 
vulnerability to disasters.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring Support (US$1 million). This 
component will strengthen and develop the institutional capacity of the Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU) for Project management and execution, including procurement, 
financial management, monitoring and supervision of Project activities, through the 
acquisition of goods, provision of technical advisory services, training and operating 
costs.  
 
This project is an Emergency Recovery Loan processed in accordance with Bank 
Operational Policy / Bank Procedures 8.00.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Works relating to the rehabilitation and reconstruction of schools, health centers and 
bridges will be carried out throughout the island of Saint Lucia. Preliminary lists of the 
specific facilities that will be included in the project have been prepared in consultation 
with relevant line ministries.  
 
In the health sector, the Dennery hospital facility will be rebuilt in its current location 
and about 5 existing health facilities will receive rehabilitation and repairs (i.e. roof 
replacement; hurricane-resistant windows and doors etc.). In the education sector, a 
number of early childhood, primary, and secondary schools will be rehabilitated (i.e. roof 
and ceiling damage, land slippage, damage to classroom furniture and equipment, etc.). 
The Dennery Infant School will be relocated and constructed in a new location. The 
Ministry of Education has identified a new suitable location, which is a vacant area/land 
owned by the Government. In the transport sector, around 6 critical bridges will be 
rehabilitated.  
Page  3
Reconstruction efforts under the project will go beyond rebuilding the damaged 
infrastructure and will aim for "building better" taking into account existing best practices 
in disaster preparedness. These include, for example, replacement of hurricane-resistant 
windows and doors on schools that are rehabilitated through this project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Anjali Acharya (LCSEN) 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (SDV) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is considered Category "B", and OP 4.01 is triggered. All works will focus on 
rehabilitation and reconstruction of infrastructure damaged during the hurricane, which 
are expected to be small and medium scale, generating only minor and localized 
environmental impacts that can be easily identified, mitigated and managed.  
 
No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected. Overall, the 
expected environmental impacts are mostly associated with the construction phase of the 
rehabilitation works, and include debris management, worker sanitation, noise control, 
use of hazardous materials, soil erosion etc.  
 
The project is not expected to impact critical natural habitats. However, the Natural 
Habitats Policy (OP 4.04) is triggered as a precaution, and to permit flexibility in the 
activities financed.  
 
Given the project's main focus on rehabilitating existing infrastructure, no impacts to 
physical cultural resources are anticipated during project implementation. However, the 
policy on "Physical Cultural Resources" (OP 4.11) has been triggered as a precaution. 
The ESSAF includes screening mechanisms for physical cultural resources as part of the 
Page  4
environmental screening process for subprojects, and "chance find" procedures are 
included in all works contracts.  
 
Land acquisition and resettlement are not anticipated under this project. In most cases, 
the works relate to the repair and rehabilitation of existing structures. As for the two new 
constructions, namely, the Dennery hospital and the Dennery infant school, the hospital 
facility will be rebuilt in its current location and the school will be relocated and 
constructed on currently unoccupied public land already identified by the government. 
However, the "Involuntary Resettlement" Policy (OP 4.12) is triggered as precaution, and 
to allow flexibility in the activities financed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project neither stimulates indirect impacts nor induces future activities in the project 
area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been 
developed for this project and will be followed during implementation. The ESSAF has 
been prepared in accordance with OP/BP 8.00 to ensure compliance with the World 
Bank's safeguard policies. The ESSAF establishes the objectives, procedures, 
institutional framework, and implementation arrangements for identifying and managing 
potential environmental and social impacts from project activities. It also addresses 
mechanisms for consultation and redress of possible grievances, and includes the specific 
screening tool that is recommended for use on all sub-projects. The Framework also 
assists the PCU in screening all the subprojects for their likely social and environmental 
impacts, identifying documentation and preparation requirements and prioritizing the 
investments. An Environmental Management Framework used for earlier World Bank 
disaster management Bank projects will be applied to any financed works, and makes 
part of the ESSAF, which will be included in the project operations manual. This 
framework will include screening procedures for environmental and social impacts of 
sub-projects, using appropriate checklists; generic criteria for smaller scale works 
consistent with the Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines (2007) for World Bank 
Group funded activities; integration of pertinent national and local laws to be included in 
design and preparation of bidding documents for works; and environmental clauses for 
work contracts.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is currently under preparation. The RPF will 
assists the PCU in i) screening all subprojects for land acquisition and physical and/or 
livelihood displacement resulting from such land acquisition; and ii) identifying 
documentation and preparation requirements for compliance with World Bank 
Page  5
Safeguards Policy. In the unlikely event that the project leads to land acquisition and/or 
resettlement, Abbreviated Resettlement Plans (ARPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs), as may be applicable, will be prepared for specific sub-projects in accordance 
with the project's RPF.  
 
The PCU, as a result of several years of experience with Bank projects (including 
several on disaster management), has demonstrated capacity and competence with the 
implementation of Bank safeguard requirements. Further training for PCU staff during 
project implementation will aim at building internal capacity to oversee compliance with 
environmental and social safeguards. Additionally, the project supervision team will 
review PSIP safeguard activities to assure compliance with Bank requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the citizens of Saint Lucia, with a particular emphasis on 
students and their families, teachers, school administrators, medical patients and medical 
employees as well as the general citizenry who will benefit from the reconstruction of 
damaged schools, health centers, roads and bridges. Many citizens will be affected by the 
rehabilitation of the damaged health and education sectors as access to schools and health 
services will be restored. The Ministry of Health as well as the Ministry of Education will 
work closely with the PCU to ensure that all safeguard policies are adhered to.  
 
The Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) and the 
RPF will be shared with concerned communities, nongovernmental organizations and 
development partners. It will be publicly disclosed in-country by the PCU in appropriate 
form for local public review at one or more convenient locations and will also be made 
available at the World Bank's InfoShop. Relevant subproject specific safeguard 
documents/mitigation plans prepared subsequently will also be disclosed. Any feasibility 
and detailed design studies financed by this operation will also adhere to World Bank 
safeguard policies relating to consultation and disclosure.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/25/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/25/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/25/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/25/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/25/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/25/2011 
 
Page  6
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
No 
Page  7
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Niels B. Holm-Nielsen 
01/28/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Anjali Acharya 
01/25/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong 
01/25/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
01/25/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
01/28/2011 
Comments:   
