Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2011 
Report No.:  AC6201
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P122039 
Project Name:  Social Safety Net Strengthening Project 
Task Team Leader:  Menahem M. Prywes 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Project is to improve the capacity of the Government of 
Tajikistan to plan, monitor, and manage social assistance for the poor. To achieve this, 
the Project will build a National Registry for Social Protection and invest in training, 
equipment, and related items.   
 
3. Project Description 
The European Union, the Asian Development Bank, and the World Bank will support 
reform Tajikistan#s system of social assistance through budget support grants.This IDA-
supported project builds the capacity of the Government to achieve and manage this 
reform.  
 
This reform has already begun: the European Union is now helping the Ministry of 
Labor and Social Protection to pilot the reform of social assistance in two districts.   The 
pilot consolidates the two largest social assistance programs into a single benefit, and 
uses a proxy-means test to target benefits to the poorest 20 percent of the population.  
This IDA-supported Project will support extension of this reform to the national level.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: National Registry for Social Protection (USD 1.4 million equivalent). 
The first component will establish a National Registry for Social Protection. This will 
help the Government to apply a proxy-means test to identify the poorest households 
eligible for receipt of social assistance; it will also help the Government to monitor and 
control payments of social assistance. Moreover, it will provide a platform for building 
registries for additional social protection programs.  
 
This component will support procurement of a system design contract and a software 
development contract.  It will also support procurement of computer and electronic 
equipment necessary for operation of the registry to central and local government offices.  
 
Component 2: Capacity building (USD 1.2 million equivalent).  The second component 
will train government personnel at the central and local levels to implement the reform.  
It will also build the capacity of the Government to use the registry to control and audit 
payments of social assistance. Finally, it will support a small government policy and 
planning unit.  
 
Component 3: The third and final component would be for project management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed Project would support a national reform of social assistance.  The Project 
may support some light rehabilitation in the central office of the Ministry of Labor and 
Social Protection and in the district offices of its Agency for Social Protection.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project Team is not aware of any safeguards issues relating to the Project. 
Nevertheless, the Project Operations Manual will include environmental guidelines 
relating to the minor repairs to offices.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n/a   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Menahem M. Prywes 
04/12/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Kathy A. Lindert 
04/19/2011 
Comments:   
Page  5
