Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
RESTRUCTURING STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/27/2010 
Report No.:  58950
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P089244 
Project Name:  Energy Loss Reduction Project 
Task Team Leader:  Imtiaz Hizkil 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (48%);Oil and gas (48%);Central government administration (4%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Climate change 
(33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.00 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
8.00
12.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
An additional activity (item ii below) is added and the revised project development 
objective will now be as follows: The development objectives of the project are (i) to 
assist in reducing the commercial losses in the electricity and gas systems; and to lay the 
foundation for the improvement of the financial viability of the electricity and gas 
utilities in a socially responsible manner; and (ii) to assist in the viability assessment of 
the proposed Rogun Hydroelectric Project (HEP) in Tajikistan.   
 
3. Project Description 
The ELRP was approved by the Board on June 30, 2005 and became effective on 
December 7, 2005. There are three components, namely Electricity Component, Gas 
Component and Technical Assistance Component. The ELRP is being implemented by 
two state owned entities, OSHPC Barki Tajik (BT) and OJSC Tajiktransgaz (TTG). BT is 
responsible for the Electricity Component and part of the Technical Assistance 
Component. TTG is responsible for the Gas Component and part of the Technical 
Assistance Component. Overall, implementation  has been satisfactory with about 73 % 
of IDA funds disbursed.  
Page  2
.
The scope of the Technical Assistance Component is to be expanded with the inclusion 
of the Assessment Studies for the proposed Rogun HEP.  Barki Tajik will be the entity 
responsible for implementation of this sub-component. There are two studies 
(Assessment Studies) that are planned to be undertaken for the assessment of the 
proposed Rogun HEP. These are:  
 
a) Techno-economic Assessment Study (TEAS); and  
 
b)
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Study (ESIA).  
 
The TEAS will assess the overall design, operations and economics of the proposed 
Rogun HEP. The study will address key issues such as seismic risk, reservoir filling and 
geological integrity. The ESIA will review resettlement, water management implications 
(with specific reference to ecological needs and security of water availability to 
downstream countries), and construction and operations-related environmental and social 
impacts.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Rural and Urban Tajikistan - The locations for the Electricity and Gas Components are in 
Dushanbe as well as various municipalities throughout the territory of Tajikistan.  
 
The prospective site of the proposed Rogun HEP is located about 110 km East North 
East of Dushanbe, the capital of Tajikistan (by road M41) on the Vakhsh River, an 
international waterway as defined by the Bank policy. The Vakhsh River in Tajikistan 
joins the Pyanj River from Afghanistan to form the Amu Darya River that subsequently 
flows to Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.  
 
Construction of the Rogun HEP started during Soviet times. Thus the proposed location 
is defined by already existing assets (such as underground works) and auxiliary 
infrastructure, such as office buildings, construction camps and access roads.  
 
According to the current conceptual design the proposed Rogun HEP would be a 
reservoir type project  with a dam height of about 335 m. The reservoir would have a 
total storage volume of 13.3 km3 and an active storage volume of about 8.6 km3. It 
would extend upstream over a distance of about 70 km. The installed capacity would be 
6x600 MW (totaling 3,600 MW). The proposed Rogun HEP will help regulate a cascade 
of hydropower stations downstream. The selected dam location is in a narrow gorge with 
steep flanks, which could minimize material demand for dam construction. The site 
geology is complex, being characterized by highly heterogeneous sedimentary layers (in 
terms of strength and permeability) including haline, soluble strata that necessitate careful 
investigation and analysis. The facility's design life would be 150-200 years. 
Construction of the proposed Rogun project is envisioned to proceed in stages, with an 
initial 70 m dam (stage-1) to produce about 240-MW of electricity.  
 
Page  3
The proposed Rogun HEP was initiated under the Soviet regime in 1980 to provide both 
energy and water regulation for the Central Asia region, but was left effectively 
abandoned in the early 1990s following the Soviet Union#s disintegration. In 1993 
several consecutive flood events led to heavy damage and collapse of the tunnels, 
blocking of the diversion flow and subsequent overtopping and destruction of the coffer 
dam. Rehabilitation of existing (damaged) works is underway and is being financed by 
the Government of Republic of Tajikistan (GoRT).  Rehabilitation works to date have not 
affected water regulation in terms of diversion or storage. In 2008 the pace of the works 
was accelerated and currently most of the site repair and preparation works as well as 60-
70% of the underground works (access tunnels, diversion and outlet tunnels, chambers 
for turbines / generators and transformers) have been completed, thus re-establishing the 
status from 1993 before significant flood damage occurred.  
 
A
key safeguards issue is the resettlement of 63 villages from the reservoir area. 
Resettlement commenced during the Soviet period and part of the reservoir areas 
residents have already moved to new housing provided by the GoRT  in the cities of 
Rogun, Obigarm and other parts of Tajikistan.  However, the resettlement has not taken 
place in a phased manner with the result that some relocatees belonging to later 
submergence zones have been relocated whereas others in early submergence zones 
remain in their original sites.  A further issue is that a clear policy, procedures and 
entitlement matrix is currently lacking, contributing to this uneven approach to 
implementing resettlement. It should be noted that resettlement continued in the project 
area until late 2010.  During negotiations the Bank agreed with the GoRT that no further 
resettlement will take in the reservoir area until completion of these studies and 
preparation of a RAP.  However, resettlement of families within the vicinity of dam site  
may continue as some of these families are already partly relocated and some are likely to 
be affected by the impacts of the construction.  
 
Known physical cultural resources include sacred sites, graveyards and burial sites. 
While no sites of major archeological and historical importance have been reported it 
should be anticipated that the project area contains some sites to be identified, 
documented and secured on the basis of a field survey by qualified specialists.  
 
Environmental due diligence during project preparation has started with several volumes 
of environmental studies in the original first design commenced during Soviet times. 
They focused on the environmental impact on the downstream river system, local flora 
and fauna, local microclimate, population, and the environmental quality of the reservoir 
area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (ECSS4) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSS3) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the World Bank's safeguard policies and procedures, including 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, the original project was classified as 
safeguards Category C for environmental assessment purposes.  Any planned physical 
investments were so minor, that separate environmental instruments, such as EIA or 
EMP, were not considered necessary.  
 
This situation has in principle remained valid, as still no significant physical 
investments are planned to be financed under the project. However, the safeguards 
aspects of the project have become more complex due to the inclusion of the assessment 
of the proposed Rogun HEP, for which GoRT has requested Bank support.  
 
Although the project does not envisage financing any physical activities (especially for 
the proposed Rogun HEP) a safeguards category A is proposed to recognize and address 
the potentially significant environmental, social and riparian issues associated with the 
inclusion of the proposed Rogun HEP assessment studies.  
 
The social issues to be addressed will include involuntary resettlement, support to 
vulnerable groups, impacts of labor influx, inclusion of host communities, consultation 
and grievance channels etc. The studies will also include the development of a socio-
economic baseline, a detailed Resettlement Policy Framework for the entire reservoir 
area, a Resettlement Action Plan for Stage 1 of project and a Resettlement Audit to cover 
the completed and ongoing resettlement.  The Assessment studies would be reviewed by 
two International Independent Panels of Experts (PoE), one for techno-economic and 
dam safety, the other for environmental/social aspects.  
 
In the course of project preparation, Terms of Reference (TORs) for the TEAS and 
ESIA have been prepared.  
 
The Borrower disclosed the TORs for ESIA and TEAS, and organized public 
consultations in the project area and in Dushanbe on the ESIA TOR. This was undertaken 
in lieu of the documents conventionally required under OP4.01 (such as EIA, EMP, RPF, 
RAP etc., which will be the outputs of the Assessment Studies),  as these best document 
how safeguards concerns are and will be addressed by the project. This is reflected in 
Section II B below.  
Page  5
Agreements were reached with GoRT to limit the scope of the ongoing rehabilitation 
works and their associated environmental impacts.  Foremost, the GoRT will ensure that 
no actions are taken which lead to or result in the diversion of waters along the Vakhsh 
River unless a number of due diligence procedures have been completed: the assessments 
relating to coffer dam and a stage 1 (70 m) dam facility, as part of TEAS and ESIA, have 
been completed; the draft reports of these assessments have been shared with the 
Riparian States; said Riparian States have been afforded an opportunity to comment on 
said assessment within a reasonable period of time; and such assessment has been 
reviewed with the Panels of Experts to determine viability of constructing any dam 
facility within the proposed Rogun HEP.  
 
OP4.04 is triggered due to a potential impact on natural habitats in the project area. This 
potential impact is recognized by the ESIA TOR and will be thoroughly investigated in 
the course of the planned environmental assessment study.  
 
OP 4.11: It has been recognized that physical cultural heritage is likely to be 
encountered in the proposed Rogun HEP project area, and consequently detailed 
provisions have been included in the ESIA TOR, providing guidance to the future 
analytical and planning process how to address PCR, chance finds and salvage operations 
for cemeteries and places of cultural or religious significance. Some cemeteries and 
burial sites have been relocated during the works implemented to date, mostly during the 
Soviet Era.  No major archaeological sites or objects were destroyed  
 
OP4.12: During the lifetime of the project the measures to be additionally financed 
involve only studies, hence in themselves require neither land acquisition, nor the 
resettlement of people or businesses, nor will they negatively impact livelihoods. 
However, the inclusion into ELRP of a techno-economic assessment study (TEAS) and 
an environmental-social impact assessment (ESIA) for the proposed Rogun HEP has 
created a strong relevance of OP4.12. Issues of potential social impacts and the need for 
land acquisition and resettlement on large scale associated with any future development 
of the proposed Rogun HEP are reflected in detailed sections in the TOR for the ESIA, 
with the intention of mainstreaming and diligently addressing resettlement and livelihood 
restoration in any further project development.  
 
Some resettlement associated with the rehabilitation of the Rogun HEP is underway, 
which is being undertaken by the GoRT. Based on recent site visits by Bank#s social 
development specialists, the approach of the GoRT shows elements of good resettlement 
practice; at the same time there are some gaps relative to good practice.  Agreement has 
been reached, whereby GoRT will: (i) ensure that there is no relocation of residents from 
the proposed Rogun dam future reservoir area, unless and until the GoRT  has prepared, 
disclosed and published a Resettlement Policy Framework, Resettlement Action Plan and 
Resettlement Audit Report, all satisfactory to the Bank, and as required under ESIA; (ii) 
make best efforts to avoid relocation of residents in the vicinity of the proposed Rogun 
dam site until the documents referred to in (i) above  have been prepared; and (iii) in case 
continued resettlement of remaining residents in the vicinity of the proposed Rogun dam 
Page  6
site takes place (to protect them from hazardous or otherwise adverse conditions, such as 
operation of quarries including use of explosives, dust, noise, vibration, and operation of 
heavy machinery), the GoRT will carry out such resettlement with due care and in 
accordance with the applicable legal and institutional framework in Tajikistan, as well as 
with  international good practices (including but not limited to adequate grievance 
mechanism) and acceptable to the Bank.  
 
GoRT also indicated its commitment to continue supporting those persons who have 
already been relocated, through provision of community infrastructure and services in 
resettlement areas, through continued payment to those already resettled for construction 
of replacement housing, or through other means.  
 
OP4.37: The dam safety studies are a significant topic in the TEAS. There will be an 
independent Engineering and Dam Safety Panel which will include expert(s) on dam 
safety, geotechnical engineering and hydropower engineering. No formal dam safety 
report has been prepared, as the financing of physical investments is not included in the 
project.  
 
OP7.50: The Assessment Studies will not have any physical hydrological impacts on 
international waterways crossing Tajikistan's boundaries and flowing into the territory of 
riparian countries such as Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and eventually the Aral 
Sea (which effected the inclusion of Kazakhstan as a riparian)  . However, in parallel to 
the development of the TOR for the TEAS and ESIA for the proposed Rogun HEP, the 
following actions were undertaken:  
 
a) 
riparian countries were notified and  
 
b)
consultations with all riparian countries (including upstream Kyrgyzstan) were 
organized and carried out. The purpose of the consultations was to give riparian states 
basic information about the proposed Rogun HEP and discuss the content of the TORs 
for TEAS and ESIA.  
 
Disclosure and consultation on the draft ESIA reports will follow Bank#s operational 
policies under OP4.01, and will include riparians. In addition to disclosure and 
consultation on ESIA of the full project, and by agreement with the Borrower, an interim 
ESIA report assessing the Stage 1 (70m dam) project will be shared with stakeholders 
and riparians.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The ESIA study proposed to be funded by the project has the key purpose to generate the 
necessary information to assess these impacts and design ways for avoiding, minimizing 
or mitigating any potential indirect and / or long term impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Dam site and reservoir contours were finalized during the Soviet Era, and construction 
started about 25 years ago, thus the general siting is largely predetermined.  As part of the 
Page  7
Central Asia Energy-Water Program, the Bank will include an assessment of alternatives 
to the proposed Rogun HEP covering alternative sources such as demand side 
management, hydropower of alternative size and configuration, other renewable sources, 
and domestic sources of thermal energy.  This assessment is being undertaken in parallel 
with the Assessment Studies (TEAS and ESIA).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has shown strong commitment to address safeguard policy issues by 
seeking the Bank support to carry these studies, and ensure their objectivity and quality 
through an international Panel of Experts.  Borrower capacity is, however, not very 
strong and it is expected that these studies will serve the purpose of building capacity and 
exposure within the country on environmental and social issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are the potential Project Affected Persons in the project area and in 
Tajikistan in general, as well as (downstream) riparian countries. Consultations were 
undertaken on the TORs for the TEAS and ESIA with the riparian countries, whereas 
public consultations on the TOR for ESIA were organized within the Republic of 
Tajikistan. The TORs were disclosed by the GoRT and by the Bank at Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/17/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/04/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/17/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/04/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  8
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
No 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  9
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Imtiaz Hizkil 
12/23/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
12/23/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
12/23/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
12/23/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
12/23/2010 
Comments:  Approved 4:00 pm Dec 23rd 
