Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/04/2011 
Report No.:  60815
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P118196 
Project Name:  Dushanbe Water Supply Project II 
Task Team Leader:  Pier Francesco Mantovani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00
3.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve utility service and performance, 
through better water quality and increased revenue collection in selected areas of 
Dushanbe.   
 
3. Project Description 
The DWSP 2 supported components are summarized below:  
 
Component 1. Metering and Demand Management (US$ 5.76m of which IDA US$ 
4.03m): Consumption metering and bulk metering of water, for increased revenue, 
reduced wastage, and better tracking of losses, including: (i) supply and installation of 
65,000 residential meters (i.e. approximately 40% of DVK users) and installation of 
1,500 apartment building master meters in selected areas of the city; (ii) rehabilitation of 
1500 apartment building service connections; (iii) supply and installation of bulk flow 
meters at water production facilities; (iv) supply and installation of a Network 
Information System (NIS); and (v) communication strategy and public awareness 
campaign to promote metering and demand management.  
 
Page  2
Component 2. Water Quality Improvement (US$ 4.2 million of which IDA US$ 2.93 
million): System upgrades for improved quality of water, including: (i) partial renewal of 
filtration capacity at Samatechnaya WTP (SAM); (ii) network cleaning; (iii) installation 
of network rechlorination systems; and (iv) equipment for water quality monitoring units.  
 
Component 3. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$ 2.46 million of 
which IDA US$2.46 million): Technical assistance, studies and training towards 
strengthening DVK#s capacities and performance, including: (i) institutional assessment 
of DVK organizational and capacity building needs; (ii) modernization of accounting 
and, billing and collection systems; (iii) technical assistance for corporate development 
and financial performance; (iv) technical assistance and studies for improved DVK 
operations (including a seismic safety assessment of key DVK facilities, and the 
operational optimization of sedimentation performance at SAM), and (v) training.  
 
Component 4. Implementation Support (US$ 1.65 million of which IDA US$ 1.65 
million): Project Implementation support including (i) design and supervision of works; 
(ii) project management operating costs, and (iii) annual project audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Dushanbe, capital city of the Republic of Tajikistan. The project will finance works on 
the premises of Dushanbe VodoKanal - Intakes, treatment plants - and on public areas for 
pipe replacing.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (ECSS4) 
Mr Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed repeater project would support only rehabilitation of water supply and 
sanitation network activities (for pumping station facilities and water reservoirs; 
renovation of the chlorination facilities and of rapid sand filters; replacement of 
distribution network; and rehabilitation, replacement or installation of production water 
meters) which are not expected to generate significant environmental and social impacts.  
 
Potential environmental adverse impacts of the project would relate to: (i) inappropriate 
disposal of water treatment sludge; (ii) safety hazards from chlorination process; (iii) 
pollution by construction run-offs; (iv) disturbance during construction including dust, 
noise, vibration, access restriction, closure of roads, and increased traffic; (v) improper 
disposal of demolition debris; (vi) damage to existing utility services during pipe repairs 
and installation; (vii) safety hazards from construction activities; (viii) spillage of fuel 
and oil from construction; and (ix) damage to trees and vegetative cover. At the same 
time the project is expected to bring significant environmental and health benefits, such 
as improvements in public health through better quality and availability of treated water, 
and improvements in the sustainability of raw water sources through reductions in losses 
and wastage. Based on mentioned above the project is qualified as Category B for which 
a
partial EA and a simple EMP should be prepared and applied during the project 
implementation.  
 
Social Impacts: The completed pre-feasibility studies indicate that the project will 
largely be limited to rehabilitation of existing structures.  The planned new pumping 
station and reservoir of the Napornaya water treatment plant will be built on the premises 
of the authority, where there are no activities or residences.  However, as project design is 
further detailed, there is a possibility that some construction may exceed available land 
and may have to take place on sites not yet identified.  Further, some land within 
residence compounds may have to be temporarily occupied for works such as excavation 
of trenches.  In addition, DWPS2 may establish a sanitary protection area along the 
upstream reaches of the Varzob river and canal, to avoid contamination of the water 
source of the NAP and SAM water treatment plants.  In this case, the identified areas will 
need to be cleared of settlements (if any), and existing structures.  Further, certain 
polluting/quality threatening activities will be restricted (e.g. livestock access).   This 
activity will also include some mitigation measures such as installation of fences, septic 
tanks and drains.  
 
Aside from above, there are no major adverse social safeguard impacts expected 
through this project.  Other social issues such as identification of vulnerable groups, 
consultation with water users and their inclusion in the social analysis and customer 
satisfaction study which will feed into project design and also  become part of the M & E 
framework.  The project will also establish a usable complaint system which will serve to 
monitor project progress and impacts.  
 
Page  4
As all proposed activities will be implemented within the city#s boundaries the project 
will not have impact on wildlife and natural habitats and thus OP 4.04 #Natural habitats# 
is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impacts on physical cultural resources 
which are not placed in the vicinity of the water supply and sanitation infrastructure and 
respectively OP 4.11 #Physical/Cultural Resources# is not triggered.  
 
OP 7.50 was triggered for the original project and continues to be for the repeater 
project.  The project continues to finance investments in rehabilitation of Dushanbe water 
supply and sanitation infrastructure which is part of the Amu Darya river watershed 
which extends into Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.  However, the project consists only of 
rehabilitation activities, will not modify nor increase the volume of water abstraction 
from the surface or ground water reservoirs, nor affect the rights of other users and 
improve efficiency of water use it aims to substantially reduce participating 
municipalities# high water consumption rates.  An exemption from the notification 
requirement was obtained on the basis that the works involve rehabilitation of an existing 
scheme, with no extension or new construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected long term and cumulative impacts of the proposed activities are mostly 
positive and include improved water supply and sanitation infrastructure as well as 
improved health and livelihood of the local population.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The required mitigation measures for the project activities are standard and widely use in 
construction practices. They are well prescribed in the Environmental Management and 
Monitoring Plan, which was prepared for the initial project. As the new project will 
support same types of activities as under the initial project it is proposed the exiting 
EMMP to be applied also for the new project. The EMMP stipulates all contracts for 
construction works will include requirements for implementation of the specific measures 
as per EMMP provisions and good construction practices. Furthermore, daily control and 
monitoring of construction works will be part of responsibilities of the utility operator. 
The quality of drinking water supply will be monitored according to international and 
local standards using new laboratory equipment to be financed by the project.  
 
The Borrower, including the Municipality of Dushanbe, the Dushanbe Vodokanal and 
the Project Cordination Unit, have managed the ongoing Dushanbe Water Supply Project 
and are familiar with the World Bank's Safeguard Policies. Application of environmental 
policies has improved in the last 2 years, following specific supervision and advice 
provided by the Task Team. The WB team will continue closely monitor EMMP 
implementation, providing relevant assistance and capacity building. A Resettlement 
Policy Framework and/or Action Plan has not been necessary in the previous project as 
Page  5
all activities were limited to publicly owned, well delimited land, where no settlement 
was identified.  
 
Since these detailed impacts will only be known once project implementation 
commences, and the possibility of land acquisition and restrictions in access cannot be 
ruled out at this stage, the borrower has agreed to develop a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF). The RPF will identify the possible impacts from project activities, 
describe the range of potential impacts (temporary and permanent) to land use/access and 
structures and specify the compensation rates and procedures for the same.  Where there 
is a gap between national and World Bank procedures, the latter will prevail for all 
activities financed under this project.  The RPF will serve as a screening device to 
ascertain if there will be any impacts resulting from project activities.  If any impacts are 
identified, the Borrower will develop relevant Resettlement Action Plans as described in 
the RPF which will detail the specific impact and compensation, and present it to the 
World Bank for approval.  No civil works will commence until such plans are approved 
by the World Bank.  The RPF will be implemented through the main Project 
Implementation Unit, with assistance from the Municipality.  Appropriate technical 
training will be provided.  
 
EMMP updated and disclosed in country and in Infoshop (January 14 and 25 2011.  
 
RPF prepared and disclosed in country and in Infoshop (January 25 2011)   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main beneficiary groups are the customers i.e. the inhabitants of Tajikistan.  The 
project will involve and consult with these stakeholders through the detailed social 
analysis and customer satisfaction study which is in progress and will be an important 
input to the project design.  This study includes a range of quantitative and qualitative 
instruments such as questionnaires, focus group discussions and case histories which will 
serve as an important tool to get the beneficiary's perspective on needs and priority.  The 
study will disaggregated different user groups based on residence type, water source and 
socio-economic criteria, with a focus on identifying vulnerable groups.  This study will 
serve as the baseline for project M & E. It is planned that repeater/quick versions of the 
study will be done through project implementation to verify the effectiveness of project 
activities. An end of project evaluation will also be done keeping the same design in 
mind.Per WB requirements the EMMP was disclosed and consulted inthe country as well 
as in the WB Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/14/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/14/2011 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/31/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/02/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
Page  7
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pier Francesco Mantovani 
03/31/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadii Capcelea 
02/03/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
02/03/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
04/01/2011 
Comments:  Only PDO wording, co-financing and arrangements of components have been updated 
on safeguards and disclosure all remains the same. Details on OP 7.50 added. 
