Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5651 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/17/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tajikistan 
Project ID: P123704 
Project Name: Tajikistan Government-implemented grant for targeting and payment of 
social assistance 
Task Team Leader: Menahem M. Prywes 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2010 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Social safety nets (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.19 
 
EC: European Commission 
1.14 
 
Rapid Social Response Program 
2.20
4.53 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the RSR grant are to help the GoT to launch a reform that:  
 
(a) Targets the poor more accurately (with lower leakages to the non-poor);  
 
(b)  Protects the poor more effectively in times of crisis and beyond; and  
 
(c)  Becomes a vehicle through which donors can channel additional benefits and services to the 
poor (particularly in times of crisis).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The RSR grant is divided into a government-implemented part (USD 2.2 million) and a Bank-
implemented part (USD 300,000).  This ISDS concerns the government-implemented part, the 
Bank-implemented part concerns studies and is already active.  The government-implemented 
part will support:  
 
--Piloting of poverty-targeted social assistance in two districts (rayons), to start in January 
2011;  and  
Page  2
--Building the capacity of the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection (MLSP) to roll-out a 
national reform through training, provision of equipment, and minor refurbishment of offices.  
This refurbishment will not include reconstruction or rehabilitation of a scale which would 
warrant requiring preparation of an Environmental Management Plan.  There will be no new 
construction or any activities requiring land acquisition.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located in the Republic of Tajikistan.  The pilot of poverty-targeting of social 
assistance will be in Istarafshan and Yavan rayons (districts).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project Coordinatoin Group (PCG) at the Executive Office of the President will implement 
all procurement of goods and services (USD 1.7 million of the grant) and will monitor outcomes.  
At present, this PCG implements the Civil Service Reform Project.  This PIU successfully 
implements the procurement, financial management, and safeguards aspects of that project, 
according to rules defined in its Operations Manual.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/05/2010 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard-related studies are required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Menahem M. Prywes 
08/30/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
08/31/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Kathy A. Lindert 
12/17/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
