Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
RESTRUCTURING STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/03/2011 
Report No.:  AC6093
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P079027 
Project Name:  Municipal Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Pier Francesco Mantovani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 21, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 19, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (40%);Solid waste management (35%);Sub-national government 
administration (23%);Sewerage (2%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (40%);Access to urban services and housing 
(20%);Municipal finance (20%);Municipal governance and institution building (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50
1.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (MIDP) 
will remain the same as for the initial project and is to improve the availability, quality 
and efficiency of the delivery of basic municipal services to the population of the towns 
which participate in the project. This objective will be achieved through (a) financing the 
rehabilitation and repair of infrastructure and installations and/or the replacement of 
equipment of KMK local subsidiary utility enterprises, and (b) assisting KMK and its 
local subsidiary utility enterprises and, where and when appropriate, local government 
authorities in their efforts to improve the management of the delivery of basic municipal 
services. Ensuring access of the population to basic municipal services will be an 
important factor in supporting local economic growth and poverty reduction.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project objective will be achieved by the same activities as within the initial project: 
(a) financing the rehabilitation and/or repair of basic infrastructure and utility service 
installations and equipment, and, (b) assisting local utility enterprises in increasing the 
Page  2
effectiveness of the management of local infrastructure services. The Restructuring 
Project consists of the following three components: (a) Municipal Infrastructure 
Rehabilitation; (b) Technical and Institutional Support; and, (c) Implementation Support. 
The changes to the Project are related to: (i) re-allocation the Grant proceeds from the 
unallocated category to other categories to finance activities which are originally 
envisaged under the project but were not sufficiently covered under the original scope; 
and, (ii) to trigger a new safeguard policy on Involuntary resettlement as it will 
necessitate some land acquisition under the Project which was not originally envisaged 
during initial project appraisal.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project is being implemented in 8 towns: Dangara, Istaravshan, Kanibadam, Kulyab, 
Kurgan-Tyube, Rasht, Vahdat, and Vose.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (ECSS4) 
Mr Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In accordance with the Bank#s safeguard policies and procedures, the restructured project 
is qualified as category B as the supported activities are not expected to generate 
significant environmental and social impacts. As the nature of the works to be financed 
under the restructured project will not change, existing Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) for the initial project will be applied also for the restructured project.  
 
Since all proposed investments are related only to rehabilitation of water supply and 
sanitation systems, and solid waste collection and disposal, installation of new power 
lines, the environmental  issues associated with their implementation are minor, short-
lived, and primarily limited to the facility sites (except for movement of equipment and 
materials to/from the site). These issues are primarily: dust, noise, disposal of waste 
Page  3
material and/or older equipment, possibly traffic disruption (depending upon specific 
location), worker safety (e.g. welding operations) etc. All these issues can be addressed 
with good engineering and construction practices. Long term impacts would be positive 
in nature including improved water supply and sanitation services, which in turn should 
lead to improved health conditions for the population in the service areas.  
 
As all proposed activities will be implemented within the cities# boundaries the project 
will not have impact on wildlife and natural habitats and thus OP 4.04 #Natural habitats# 
is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impacts on physical cultural resources 
which are not placed in the vicinity of the water supply and sanitation systems and/or 
electrical transmission lines and respectively OP 4.11 #Physical/Cultural Resources# is 
not triggered.  
 
At the same time, the laying of 10 kV high voltage lines to connect substations to 
pumping stations in Istaravshan, Kurgan Tube and Vahdat will necessitate some land 
acquisition under the Project. There will be no significant or irreversible impacts related 
to l and acquisition, since Tajikistan law does not require the permanent acquisition of 
land for 10 kV lines. This impact will be limited to: (a) temporary acquisition of sections 
of fields during installation of poles for electric lines, (b) removal and reconstruction of 
(one) illegal fences encroaching onto the right of way of a public street where poles will 
be installed, (c) cutting of six trees where unavoidable. To the extent possible, impacts 
will be minimized through installation of poles in fields during fallow period and re-
alignment of exact pole locations to avoid disturbing fences. As long as the height of the 
wire is 4 meters or more, there is no restriction in the use of the land below the wires or 
around the poles. The law also states that the poles should be at least 3 meters from a 
residence and 1.5 meters from a public street. There can be other structures (fences etc.) 
below the wires as long as they are not made of inflammable material.  
 
OP 4.37 was triggered for the original project and continues to be for the restructured 
project.  The project continues to finance investments in rehabilitation of water supply 
and sanitation systems which are part of the Amu Darya river watershed which extends 
into Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.  However, the project consists only of rehabilitation 
activities, will not modify nor increase the volume of water abstraction from the surface 
or ground water reservoirs, nor affect the rights of other users and improve efficiency of 
water use it aims to substantially reduce participating municipalities# high water 
consumption rates.  An exemption from the notification requirement was obtained on the 
basis that the works involve rehabilitation of an existing scheme, with no extension or 
new construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected long term and cumulative impacts of the proposed activities are mostly 
positive and include improved water supply and sanitation infrastructure and practices as 
well as improved health and livelihood of the local population. Impact of the land 
acquisition will be limited to (a) temporary acquisition of sections of fields during 
installation of poles for electric lines, (b) removal and reconstruction of (one) illegal 
Page  4
fences encroaching onto the right of way of a public street where poles will be installed, 
(c) cutting of six trees where unavoidable. To the extent possible, impacts will be 
minimized throughinstallation of poles in fields during fallow period and re-alignment of 
exact pole locations to avoid disturbing fences.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are no alternative project options.  The project will involve rehabilitation of 
essential existing infrastructure assets only.  However, the alternative routes for 
construction of the power lines were considered to minimize impact related to temporary 
land acquisition. There will be phasing construction to minimize any disruption on 
livelihoods.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The SUE Khochagii Manziliu Komunali (the KMK), implementing agency, and the 
Project Management Unit (the PMU) prepared an Environmental Management Plan for 
each investment, detailing likely impacts (including the social ones) and the mitigation 
measures. Provisions for Environmental screening was included in the Operational 
Manual and the subproject specific EMPs. The PMU and the KMK have also developed 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) compliant with the OP 4.12 for each of the towns 
(Vahdat, Istaravshan and Kurgan Tube) where land acquisition will take place. Each RAP 
has been cleared by the World Bank and disclosed in the Infoshop and in country as per 
the requirements of the World Bank. Each RAP details the list of affecte d persons, 
describe in detail the impacts resulting from the loss or restriction of access to land or 
assets (in this case crop land, fences and trees), the compensation for each asset at full 
replacement value (market value for standing crops) an d the implementation procedures, 
grievance mechanisms and monitoring arrangements. Investments will also need to 
obtain clearances as per Tajikistan national legislation before start of any civil works.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the KMK, a central government utility agency, local 
municipalities, and the beneficiaries. As part of the social assessment consultations were 
carried out during appraisal with consumers to determine their needs and ensure that they 
are taken into account in project design. The EMP was discussed at public consultation 
meeting. Periodic consultations with public will continue during project implementation. 
The PMU also hired a Monitoring & Evaluation Consultant to assess different aspects of 
the impact of investments the Pr oject in 8 participating towns. There will be 
consultations with the public after project completion to determine the level of 
beneficiary satisfaction with the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/29/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/12/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/11/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/11/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
Yes 
Page  6
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pier Francesco Mantovani 
03/28/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadii Capcelea 
03/28/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
03/17/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/28/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
03/29/2011 
Comments:   
