Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/10/2011 
Report No.:  AC5517
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P107722 
Project Name:  Development of a National Statistical System for Tanzania 
Task Team Leader:  Thomas Danielewitz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTP2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (80%);Public administration- Other social 
services (20%) 
Theme:  Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (50%);Poverty strategy, analysis 
and monitoring (40%);Other public sector governance (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 4.89 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  16.17 
 
EC: European Commission 
7.11 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.22
34.39 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To develop a national statistical system that delivers reliable and timely statistics in 
accordance with international standards and best practices   
 
3. Project Description 
The project aims to support the implementation of the Tanzania Statistical Master Plan 
(TSMP) and comprises six components:  
 
The project represents a total investment of an estimated $64.4 million, of which $30 
million will be financed by IDA. Each component is described below.  
 
Page  2
Component A: Legal and Institutional Development.  This will support a comprehensive 
organizational restructuring of the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) and the Office of 
the Chief Government Statistician (OCGS) of Zanzibar. Key elements are improvements 
in management and administration practices, including financial management, human 
resource management, and communications across Ministries, Departments and Agencies 
(MDAs) and Local Government Authorities (LGAs); and the revision of existing 
statistics legislation and regulations, so that NBS becomes an autonomous government 
agency. The legal reform will change the status of NBS from an Executive Government 
Agency under the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs to an Independent Public 
Office governed by an Executive Board of Governors. The primary role of the Board will 
be to safeguard the professional and technical independence and integrity of the National 
Statistical System and to hold the Director General of NBS accountable for his/her 
performance. The Board will also ensure that statistical activities across the National 
Statistical System (NSS) are harmonized and coordinated. These improvements will 
enhance coordination of the activities of NSS and result in a better and improved 
dissemination of statistical outputs to decision- makers, researchers and the general 
public. The changed status will also allow NBS to develop and implement a new staff 
scheme of service whereby staff compensation will rest more on a competitive, 
performance-based core salary and less on arbitrary allowances. This has been identified 
as a prerequisite for any lasting improvements in HR management as described in 
Component B.  
 
Component B: Human Resource Development. The lack of skills needed to manage and 
operate an effective and efficient statistical system has been identified as major 
constraints in the NBS, OCGS and most MDAs. Activities will be the development of a 
human resources management strategy, implementation of new job profiles and salary 
scales for NBS and OGCS, implementation of a new career structure and a performance 
management system that provides rewards and incentives for good performance, 
improvement of management skills for statisticians and others with managerial 
responsibility, and improvement of skills of staff responsible for budgeting and 
procurement. A professional statistical training program will be developed and 
implemented for statistical staff, utilizing local universities and training centers.  
 
Component C: Development of Statistical Infrastructure. This component will improve 
the underlying systems needed to maintain a National Statistical System. The project will 
invest in the central business register of establishments and enterprises; the national 
master sampling frame for household-based censuses and sample surveys; a compendium 
of concepts, definitions, and methodologies for application in statistical data collections 
and analysis; a spatial Geographical Information System (GIS) for providing maps for 
survey field work and for providing the basis for dissemination of geographically-
disaggregated and referenced statistical data; and national classifications of economic and 
social statistics. The infrastructure developed in this component will be used to ensure 
standardized concepts, definitions, and methods are applied by NBS, OGCS and MDAs. 
The GIS activities will build on existing work, and will establish a GIS unit in OCGS, as 
well as improve the GIS database in use in NBS.  
 
Page  3
Component D: Data Collection, Development and Dissemination.  This component 
focuses on improving the quality, use and timeliness of socio-economic data. The data 
sources of these data (either surveys or routine data systems) will be improved. Equally 
important, improvement of user access to available socio-economic statistics using new 
technologies will be established. To achieve this, the project will strengthen routine data 
collection, storage, compilation, statistical analysis, reporting and communication within 
the NSS; and improve (macro and micro) social and economic statistics within the NSS.  
It includes activities to improve the use of statistical data by policy-makers and other key 
users, and to develop and implement a data access and dissemination policy, consistent 
with relevant legislation and international best practice.  
 
Component E: Physical Infrastructure and Equipment.  The existing accommodation for 
both NBS and OCGS offices are dilapidated and extremely cramped, and severely 
constrain the ability of staff to perform their duties effectively. New office buildings will 
be constructed for NBS and OCGS; the NBS building will aim to accommodate 200 staff 
and the new OCGS head office is planned to accommodate 80 staff. Both buildings will 
contain a computer centre, conference and training rooms and library facilities. Renting 
new office space has been considered but has been found to be uneconomical in the long-
term. Investments will also be made in upgraded information technology and 
communications infrastructure - primarily computers and networking equipment, and 
appropriate vehicles and other equipment needed to collect, process and disseminate of 
statistical data in NBS, OGCS, MDAs and LGAs.  
 
Component F: Project Management. This component will finance project management, 
monitoring and evaluation activities. DPs have agreed to set up a TSMP Basket Fund to 
be managed by a TSMP Coordination Team comprising core NBS staff under overall 
responsibility of the Director General.  Basket fund management will be a new function 
for NSB at a time when it is lacking adequate capacity and experience in sector-wide 
project management. The project will therefore finance few temporary posts under 
technical assistance arrangements for an experienced statistics management expert 
familiar with national statistics systems in Africa region.  This consultant will work with 
the TSMP coordinator in the areas of strategic management, NSS coordination, and on 
reporting to the Joint Government/Statistics DPs Steering Committee (JSC).  Other 
temporary staff may also be financed from Basket Fund to work on the project on full 
time basis during its initial phase, including a procurement specialist, financial 
management specialist, and IT specialist. These specialists are expected to ensure 
compliance with the procurement, disbursement, and FM policies and procedures, as well 
as train staff across NSS on fiduciary practices and good use of IT facilities. Within the 
first two years of the project implementation, core NBS staff will take over these 
responsibilities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is national in scope. However, the only activities with possible environmental 
impacts stem from the construction of two new office buildings of the National Bureau of 
Statistics (NBS) in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania and Office of Chief Government Statistician 
Page  4
(OCGS) in Unguja, Zanzibar. These buildings are both being constructed within well-
developed urban areas. In Dar es Salaam, the site is currently occupied by an unused 
building that will be demolished. In Unguja, the site is undeveloped.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (AFTEN) 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
Mr Juma Kayonko (AFTPR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The anticipated impacts of the TZ STATCAP will solely come from the construction of 
new office buildings of the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) in Dar es Salaam, 
Tanzania and Office of Chief Government Statistician (OCGS) in Unguja, Zanzibar. The 
impacts are expected to be short term, site specific, confined and reversible and can be 
managed through well defined mitigation and monitoring measures. Potential negative 
impacts that could arise during construction include creation of debris during demolition 
and site clearing; pollution of air, land and water resources arising from equipment 
emissions, workshops, and waste disposal during and after construction, soil erosion and 
improper drainage of storm water. Potential social impacts that may arise include 
negative effects on health due to air pollution and noise during construction; and 
blockage of access during construction. These will be short-lived and localized impacts, 
all of which are addressed through the project Environmental Management Plan.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In accordance with Government of Tanzania requirements, the project undertook a full 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for each building. The EIAs include an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) outlining the specific measures to be 
implemented to mitigate against identified impacts. In the project instance, the EMPs are 
focused on managing the direct construction impacts associated with construction in an 
urban area.  
 
The EIA report will be disclosed in-country and through the Bank#s Infoshop. It will 
also be subject to public consultation prior to finalization.  
 
A
review of the institutional capacities of the implementing institutions revealed that 
there is adequate institutional and regulatory capacity for environmental management at 
national level. The national legal framework for environmental management in Tanzania 
spells out the roles and responsibilities of different government Ministries, Departments 
and Agencies (MDA) and other stakeholders. The Environmental Management Act 
(EMA), 2004 (Act No. 20 of 2004) represents a comprehensive framework law on 
environmental protection and management in Tanzania. Among other things, the Act 
provide for legal and institutional framework for sustainable management of 
environment; principles for management, impact and risk assessments, prevention and 
control of pollution, waste management, environmental quality standards, public 
participation, compliance and enforcement; and implementation of international 
instruments on environment. It also provide for the National Environment Management 
Council (NEMC), which is the national body for enforcing environmental legislation and 
compliance.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
review of the institutional capacities of the implementing institutions revealed that 
there is adequate institutional and regulatory capacity for environmental management at 
national level. The national legal framework for environmental management in Tanzania 
spells out the roles and responsibilities of different government Ministries, Departments 
and Agencies (MDA) and other stakeholders. The Environmental Management Act 
(EMA), 2004 (Act No. 20 of 2004) represents a comprehensive framework law on 
environmental protection and management in Tanzania. Among other things, the Act 
provide for legal and institutional framework for sustainable management of 
environment; principles for management, impact and risk assessments, prevention and 
control of pollution, waste management, environmental quality standards, public 
participation, compliance and enforcement; and implementation of international 
instruments on environment. It also provide for the National Environment Management 
Council (NEMC), which is the national body for enforcing environmental legislation and 
compliance.  
 
The Environmental Impact Assessment and Audit Regulations No.349 of 2005 made 
pursuant to Section 82 (1) and 230 (h) and (q) of the EMA, prescribes the stages and the 
EIA process, which are in principal managed by the NEMC. The regulations provide the 
Page  6
procedures and requirements for undertaking ElAs for various types of development 
projects with significant environmental impacts. NEMC is expected to have necessary 
environmental capacity to coordinate and oversee environmental management issues in 
the country.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders related to the construction of the two office buildings are the owners 
and residents of nearby properties. The EIAs outline the measures taken to consult with 
such persons. The EIAs are also being publically consulted prior to finalization.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/08/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/15/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Thomas Danielewitz 
12/14/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber 
12/13/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Juma Kayonko 
12/13/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
12/13/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Kathie L. Krumm 
12/15/2010 
Comments:   
