Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/02/2011 
Report No.:  AC6257
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P101645 
Original Project Name: TZ-Energy 
Development & Access Expansion 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P125824 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for the Tanzania Energy Development and Access 
Expansion Project 
Task Team Leader:  Robert Schlotterer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 27, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (86%);Renewable energy (11%);Central government administration (3%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%);Other urban 
development (20%);Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Climate change (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
27.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.50
15.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective, as slightly reformulated by the 2010 Additional 
Financing to highlight project#s enhanced focus on renewable energy development, is to 
improve the quality and efficiency of electricity service provision in the three main 
growth centers of Dar es Salaam, Arusha, and Kilimanjaro, and to establish a sustainable 
basis for energy access expansion and renewable energy development in Tanzania.  The 
Project#s Global Environmental Objective is to abate greenhouse gas emissions through 
the use of renewable energy in rural areas to provide electricity.   
 
3. Project Description 
TEDAP consists of three components: (A) a grid component of about US$86 million 
focusing on urgent investments in national utility#s transmission and distribution 
network; (B) an off-grid component (Small Power Project Component) of about US$48 
million (including US$6.5 million from GEF and a US$25 million Credit Line introduced 
by the AF approved in 2010 to support an institutional set-up for the newly established 
Page  2
Rural Energy Agency (REA) and to develop and test new off-grid electrification 
approaches for future scale up; and (C) a technical assistance component of US$3 
million.  
 
The proposed Additional Financing will not change the current structure and scope of 
the Project. The Additional Financing relates mainly to Component A cost overruns. 
TEDAP´s Component A supports investments in TANESCO#s transmission and 
distribution networks in Dar es Salaam, Arusha, and Kilimanjaro.  This grid component 
will improve the capacity of existing networks, thus improving the service quality for 
existing customers and allowing new customers to connect to the grid in the three main 
growth centers of Tanzania.  Furthermore, these investments will improve the capacity of 
existing networks, thus improving power system performance by reducing system losses, 
frequent outages due to overloaded transformers and old equipment, low and fluctuating 
voltage conditions and poor system power factors.  The investments will include adding, 
replacing or upgrading transmission and distribution lines and substations and medium 
and low voltage equipment, meters, spare parts, and tools. Component A is being 
implemented by TANESCO. 
 
Additional funds are also needed to cover some cost overruns under Component C. Due 
to some higher than anticipated bid prices under Component C, a procurement advisory 
added to this Component two years ago, and a small additional capacity building measure 
now proposed under this Component, Component C will need an additional US$430,000 
after some of the originally Unallocated funds where recently added to this Component.  
 
This Additional Financing will not entail restructuring of any of the Project#s 
components or its implementation arrangements.  The current Project Development 
Objective will remain unchanged and the current closing date will not be extended.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The transmission and distribution projects supported by the Additional Financing are the 
same ones that were originally identified for Component A and are located in Dar es 
Salaam, Arusha, and Kilimanjaro.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (EASNS) 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project remains Category B for environmental assessment, and the additional 
financing does not present potential environmental impacts other than those originally 
identified in the EIA for Component A and in the environmental audits of sub-stations.  
With much of the transmission and distribution system work to be carried out in or 
parallel to existing rights of way, at existing substations, and in urbanized areas, and with 
access roads already existing at nearly all locations, potential negative impacts of 
Component A are not extensive.  Vegetation clearing is identified as the most significant 
activity that could cause environmental impacts, including soil erosion and air pollution 
from burning.  No undisturbed natural habitat will be affected. No rare or endangered 
biota has been found in the affected area.  The EIA recommends minimizing clearing and 
prompt re-vegetation of disturbed sites, including equipment and materials storage areas, 
upon completion of activities.  Impacts on soil erosion, surface water quality, air quality, 
noise, and solid waste management will be local and of short duration, and they can be 
readily mitigated through adherence to good construction practices.  The transmission 
and distribution contractor has prepared a project-specific EMP as required in the EIA, 
and it has been approved by the owner#s engineer. 
 
In one transmission line segment in Dar es Salaam, approximately seven houses 
originally not thought to be in the right-of-way are actually within its limits, and 
TANESCO is revising the related RAP accordingly. Transmission tower design is being 
modified to avoid or minimize new resettlements. Once the technical work is finalized, a 
RAP Addendum will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed. Civil works will not 
commence until the RAP Addendum is implemented.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project 
area are foreseen.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower's compliance with safeguards policies under the existing TEDAP components 
has been satisfactory.  
 
The Additional Financing does not trigger any additional safeguards policies and only 
relates to Components A and C. The investments in Component A are unchanged, and 
TANESCO will therefore apply the same instruments and procedures already in place for 
the component.  These include an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), a 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and an Environmental Audit of 18 Substations. 
 
An ESMF and RPF have also been prepared in 2007 for Component B  of this project.   
These documents were disclosed in July 2007 in country and the World Bank Infoshop.  
 
TANESCO is adequately staffed for environmental and social management, having 
acquired one social scientist since TEDAP was appraised.  Because of its expanding 
workload, including BTIP, TANESCO is recruiting four additional staff for its 
environmental and social unit, including another social scientist and another 
environmental engineer.  Contractors and TANESCO (directly or by consultants) have 
the majority of the monitoring responsibilities, except for overall compliance with 
environmental regulations and certain other specialized monitoring and reporting 
activities that are assigned to NEMC.  The cost of mitigation measures not included in 
construction contracts will be borne by TANESCO, and the cost of monitoring will be 
supported by NEMC's operating budget.   
 
Management of physical cultural property and mitigation of any Natural Habitat under 
this Component A is addressed in the EIA and to date no physical cultural property issues 
or natural habitat issues have been identified under this component. 
 
During implementation of the original project, additional households have been 
identified that may need to be resettled. Once the feasibility study and technical work on 
the alignment has been completed and the numbers of project-affected persons finalized, 
a
RAP Addendum will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed. Civil works on the 
affected line segment will not commence until the RAP Addendum is implemented. 
 
Under Component B, not affected by this proposed Additional Financing, safeguards 
implementation has been satisfactory to date.  
 
OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) and OP/BP 7.50 (International Waterways) were 
originally triggered under this project. These policies were triggered since Component B 
was expected to involve mini-hydro development. Consequently riparian notification in 
accordance with OP 7.50 was carried out by the Bank in 2007 (at the request of the 
Page  5
Government) and no comments were received opposing the project.  OP 4.37 was 
triggered as a precautionary measure, as only small, run-of-river dams were expected and 
have been proposed to date.  The ESMF prepared for Component B explains the 
application of dam safety to the small dams, and the review of proposed mini-hydro 
projects includes ensuring that designs are prepared by engineers qualified to incorporate 
standard dam safety measures. 
 
Following outreach and consultations by the Task Team with local communities and 
mini-hydro project developers during the initial years of project implementation, the Task 
Team determined at Mid Term Review that there would be additional value created by 
preparing summaries of the ESMF and RPF (for Component B) so that the documents are 
more easily accessible and understood by stakeholders who are both benefitting from and 
being affected by the mini-hydro sub-projects.  GOT through the Rural Energy Agency 
(REA) has engaged a local consultant and an international advisor to reformat these 
documents, which will also be disclosed in-country (in English and Kiswahili) and 
through the Info Shop, once finalized.  
 
In addition TANESCO recently approached the Bank to consider including an 
additional capacity building measure under this Sub-Component C.1, which relates to 
TANESCO#s Environmental unit and foresees strengthening of the utility#s capacity for 
environmental management.  
 
This proposed additional capacity building activity relates to a follow up action for 
which TANESCO is responsible after the closure of the IDA financed (Credit 3546 -1-
TA) Lower Kihansi Environmental Management Project (LKEMP, P105220). This 
separate project will close on June 30, 2011. As per the objective of the LKEMP an 
updated Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was agreed and approved in 2004 in the 
context of the IDA financed Lower Kihansi Hydropower Plant (LKHP).  According to 
this EMP, TANESCO is legally responsible to implement environmental mitigation 
measures from the operation of the LKHP. The EMP prescribes a series of actions to be 
implemented by TANESCO during the life of the LKHP facility. The proposed activity to 
be included under the TEDAP will target the monitoring and environmental auditing 
responsibilities of TANESCO under the LKHP EMP. Through additional support to 
Component C, TANESCO will build its capacity for mitigating environmental impacts in 
the operations of LKHP and to protect, minimize and mitigate adverse environmental 
impacts on future hydropower plants.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EIA and RAP have been disclosed in the country and are available at TANESCO#s 
Headquarters and regional offices. In addition, during preparation and up to appraisal of 
this Additional Financing, the Task Team held several consultations with affected project 
stakeholders including the transmission line contractor under Component A, the Ministry 
of Energy and Minerals, TANESCO and the implementation supervision consultants of 
TANESCO. With regard to the proposed activity relating to the LKEMP, several 
consultations have been held with the communities adjacent to the LKEMP sites, Non 
Page  6
Governmental Organizations (NGO) and other project stakeholders, including the 
National Environment Management Council (NEMC), University of Dar es Salaam and 
TANESCO. Information provided during those consultations has been included in the 
Additional financing design at appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/18/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/10/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/28/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/26/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
As this Additional Financing does not propose any changes to the existing components 
and the underlying safeguards documents were already disclosed in country before 
original approval of the Project, no need to re-disclose in country was identified. 
However, once the Addendum to the RAP is completed, the Addendum RAP will be 
disclosed.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  7
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
N/A 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  8
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Schlotterer 
05/02/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
05/02/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
05/02/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
05/02/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
05/02/2011 
Comments:   
