Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3831 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/16/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P107722 
Project Name: Development of a National Statistical System for Tanzania 
Task Team Leader: Thomas Danielewitz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2011 
Managing Unit: AFTP2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (80%);Public administration- Other social 
services (20%) 
Theme: Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (50%);Poverty strategy, analysis 
and monitoring (40%);Other public sector governance (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
CANADA: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 4.89 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  16.17 
 
EC: European Commission 
7.11 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.22
34.39 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to develop an effective and efficient 
National Statistical System (NSS) that provides reliable and timely statistics in a cost-effective 
manner and in accordance with international standards, and that is responsive to the needs of data 
users. To achieve this the project will focus on: (a) carrying out legal, institutional and staff 
incentive reforms that promote statistical production; (b) strengthening the capacity of the 
relevant statistical agencies through training and adoption of new information and 
communication technology; (c) establishing linkages among statistical data producers; (d) 
promoting statistical information sharing among data users to strengthen the quality of decision 
making; and (e) developing a data access and dissemination strategy in conformity with relevant 
Page  2
legislation and international good practice.  The project will complement the efforts previously 
undertaken by Government of Tanzania (GOT) and Development Partners (DPs), and support 
actions that are specified in Tanzania Statistical Master Plan (TSMP).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project is a 10-year APL with two phases of five years each. The first phase will deal with five 
major areas: (a) institutional, legal and staff incentive reform, (b) capacity building and enhanced 
professionalism; (c) improving physical infrastructure; (d) data development and (e) coordination 
and harmonization of official statistics activities across the NSS. The first phase of the APL will 
emphasize components (a)-(d) while the second phase of the APL will consolidate progress 
made and shift focus to coordination across the NSS (component e).  
 
Specific components of the first phase are being developed together with the Implementation 
Plan (IP).  To ensure participation and collaboration of the line ministries and agencies within the 
NSS, but also to avoid overburdening already constrained central agencies, the IP will give 
priority to agencies that produce sectoral statistics relating to growth and poverty reduction, 
including health, education, national accounts, employment, and agriculture.  
 
In the preparation of the TSMP, the WB and various bilateral and multilateral DPs have 
committed to strengthening their coordination and technical ability and to adopting an 
appropriate financing and implementation mechanism that does not place undue demand on 
National Bureau of Statistics# (NBS) capacity. Agreement has been reached to facilitate this 
through a DPs secretariat (preferably to be housed in the Bank#s Tanzania office) that will also 
manage a pool of DP grant-funding, probably through a multi-donor trust fund.  Further 
discussions and consultations will be needed to establish the specific modalities for managing the 
funds.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be located in the premises of the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) in Dar es 
Salaam and the office of the chief Government Statistician (OCGS) in Zanzibar.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While NBS is to be congratulated with the leadership it has demonstrated in preparing the 
TSMP, institutional capacity to implement safeguard policies will be assessed during project 
preparation and is expected to vary between the implementing agent in Zanzibar and the 
Mainland. The assessment will focus on institutional set-up, staffing, and training programs 
related to safeguard implementation and monitoring.  Capacity needs assessment will be 
discussed during pre-appraisal and a coherent training program for implementing and 
supervision of safeguards management will be conducted during implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
To be decided   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/23/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be decided during the pre-appraisal mission.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Thomas Danielewitz 
08/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
08/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Kathie L. Krumm 
08/14/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
