Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6258 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/04/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P125728 
Project Name: Tanzania - Southern Agriculture Growth Corridor Investment Project 
Task Team Leader: Michel Noel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 12, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2012 
Managing Unit: AFTFE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (75%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(25%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Small and medium enterprise support 
(50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand investment in agribusiness 
leading to income growth among smallholders and employment generation across agribusiness 
value chains in the Southern Corridor.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project contains three components: (i) Support to the SAGCOT Secretariat; (ii) Support to 
the Kilimo Kwanza Catalytic Fund; and (iii) Support to access to finance by MSMEs in agri-
business value chains.  
 
Support to SAGCOT Secretariat  
 
The objective of the SAGCOT Secretariat is to support competitiveness partnerships between 
the private and public sector along selected agribusiness value chains in the Corridor. Under this 
concept,  the public and the private sectors agree to work together to systematically remove the 
policy, regulatory, administrative, access to infrastructure and access to finance constraints 
Page  2
facing the value chain with the objective to drive the value chain to international 
competitiveness.  
 
The SAGCOT Secretariat will provide an institutionally neutral, professionally competent 
platform for SAGCOT planning, coordination, facilitation and monitoring and evaluation. The 
Secretariat will have six primary functions:  (i) promoting the SAGCOT partnership; (ii) 
identifying business opportunities; (iii) assisting access to finance; (iv) promoting public-private 
partnerships; (v) facilitating the resolution of policy constraints; and (vi) monitoring and 
evaluation. The proposed draft terms of reference of the Secretariat are presented in Technical 
Annex 3.  
 
The Project will support the Secretariat through a grant for (i) administrative and management 
costs; (ii) diagnostic studies; (iii) technical assistance; (iv) training; and (v) monitoring and 
evaluation.  
 
Support to Kilimo Kwanza Catalytic Fund  
 
The objective of the Kilimo Kwanza Catalytic Fund is to provide social venture capital to 
support the establishment and expansion of commercially viable agribusinesses in the Southern 
Corridor - particularly those building commercial relationships with smallholder out growers.  
 
The Fund will be established as a new private company limited by guarantee. The Fund will be 
led by a Board of Directors appointed by the Kilimo Kwanza Executive Committee. The Board 
of the Catalytic Fund will be strictly independent of the Board of the Secretariat and its members 
subject to a fit and proper test administered by a specialized company. The Project will support 
the Catalytic Fund through a grant.  
 
The support of the Catalytic Fund to agri-businesses in the corridor will be channeled through 
three possible windows:  
 
#
start-up equity for new small to medium size agribusinesses;  
 
#
capital grants to new and established agribusinesses to help expand and strengthen links 
with larger numbers of out growers;  
 
#
capital grants for infrastructure to strengthen out grower links with agribusiness value 
chains; and  
 
#
support to access to finance for MSMEs in agribusiness value chains  
 
The Bank of Tanzania (BOT) will provide as Apex institution long-term lines of credits and/or 
partial credit guarantees to the Tanzania Investment Bank (TIB) and to participating commercial 
banks to extend (i) short-term loans backed by warehouse receipts; (ii) medium-term leasing 
finance; and (iii) medium and long-term loans to MSMEs in agribusiness value chains.  
 
The Project will support BOT through a long-term line of credit and through a partial credit 
guarantee facility that will allow it to refinance its loans and counter-guarantee its partial credit 
guarantees to TIB and participating banks.  
 
The design of the line of credit and partial credit guarantee to agribusiness MSMEs will be 
carried out by BOT in collaboration with the SAGCOT Secretariat and the Bank team before 
Page  3
appraisal. A detailed financial analysis of the LOC/PCG will be carried out by the Team as part 
of appraisal. A detailed pipeline of possible MSME finance transactions will be developed by the 
SAGCOT Secretariat before appraisal.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Tanzania has experience with Bank Safeguard Policies through a number of ongoing investments 
in various sectors, including agriculture. For example, the Agricultural Sector Development 
Program and the Accelerated Food Security Project both under implementation include 
comprehensive safeguards management plans (e.g. ESMF, Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment, Pest Management Plans), which have been adequately implemented to-date, and are 
supported by safeguards capacity building programs. The national legal requirements for 
environmental management - including EIA -- are considered adequate for large-scale 
investments, and the National Environment Management Council (NEMC) that is the regulatory 
agency with oversight of environmental licensing is sufficiently knowledgeable of the Bank's 
safeguard policies, and its staff have benefited from training on the bank's safeguard policies. 
There is opportunity for improving environmental management within the various related 
sectoral agencies.  In addition, related implementing agencies at the central and local level, 
including the Sagcot secretariat will be strengthen with regards to the preparation and 
implementation of needed safeguards polices that are triggered by the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS) 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is promoting expanded investment in agribusiness leading to income growth 
among smallholders and employment generation across agribusiness value chains in the 
Southern Corridor. Given the project#s scale, and its location within an environmentally 
sensitive area with high biodiversity and numerous Critical Natural Habitats, the project is 
proposed as a Category A and a Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) is proposed as part 
of project preparation. The REA will include an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), laying out the procedures for ensuring the appropriate due diligence for 
each subproject proposed under the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The REA will address Natural Habitats issues, including definition of screening criteria to 
avoid impacts to Critical Natural Habitats, and mitigation measures to identify and offset impacts 
to other non-critical habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The REA will address Forest issues.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
In accordance with OP 4.09, and building upon experience of the Africa Stockpiles Project, 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the REA will assess Tanzania#s capacity for Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and set forth 
measures to ensure that the project encourages IPM.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The REA will assess whether the policy is triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
At this stage it is not clear if there are  indigenous people living in the project area.  As part 
of the project preparation a social assessment will be undertaken to explore, among other things, 
whether there are indigenous people in the project area based on the Government definition as 
well as the WB OP. 4.10   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
A
number of sub-projects will require land acquisition or even resettlement. A Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) for the entire project will be prepared which will be the basis for the 
sub-projects specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) when land or other assets are involved.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The REA will assess whether the policy is triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The REA will assess whether the policy is triggered.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/31/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The government is currently drafting TORs for the REA and Social Assessment. The studies 
are expected to be completed by August, 2011 and will be disclosed in the country and at the 
Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel Noel 
05/03/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
05/04/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michael J. Fuchs 
05/03/2011 
Comments:   
