Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6015 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/09/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P118152 
Project Name: Tanzania: Second Local Government Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Barjor E. Mehta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 11, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: January 31, 2012 
Managing Unit: AFTUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (60%);Municipal governance and institution building (40%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective of the project is to strengthen the local government fiscal 
and institutional system in Tanzania, particularly in urban areas.  The higher level goal this PDO 
supports are increased urban economic productivity, service-delivery and governance in these 
areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project may consist of four components: (1) LGDG Support, which will focus on supporting 
and enhancing the existing performance-based development grant financing mechanism for all 
LGAs in Tanzania; (2) Urban Infrastructure Grant (UIG), which will focus on supporting the 
specific infrastructure financing needs of Tanzania's Municipal and Town Councils; (3) 
Institutional Strengthening of LGAs, which will provide the inputs required by LGAs covered by 
both LGDG and UIG to enhance their institutional capacities; and (4) Program Support, which 
will provide PMO-RALG with the resources required to manage the LGDG, UIG and LGA-CB 
effectively.   
 
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
Under Component 1#Support to D by D, all local governments (urban as well as rural) will 
receive support.  
 
Under Component 2#Urban Infrastructure Grant, will be open to urban LGAs of the country 
except the three Dar es Salaam Local Authorities and the seven LGAs which are currently 
receiving support under the Bank-supported Tanzania Strategic Cities Project. The list of 
participating urban LGAs will be finalized during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
LGSP 2 is designed to be an Environment and Social Category B project. This is because it will 
follow and build on systems and implementing arrangements established under LGSP and TSCP 
(which are both category B projects). However, all participating LGAs have to adhere to: (a) an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (b) a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF); and (c) alignment with national procurement requirements. Capacity to 
undertake these activities is variable. Therefore, the project will provide for supportive and 
LGA-focused institutional strengthening inputs.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS) 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental and social safeguards framework will be prepared during preparation to 
guide urban LGAs in identifying, designing and implementing their respective urban 
infrastructure projects. The framework will also include approaches towards any other likely 
issues related to the physical, social, natural and cultural environment.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
To be determined.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
An involuntary resettlement framework will be prepared during preparation to guide urban 
LGAs in identifying, designing and implementing their respective urban infrastructure projects.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/01/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguards documents will be disclosed prior to appraisal in the country and at the Bank's 
InfoShop.  
 
The Sector Management Unit has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards 
responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Barjor E. Mehta 
03/08/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/08/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
03/08/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
