Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5857 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/10/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Timor-Leste 
Project ID: P125032 
Project Name: Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Project 
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASNS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (60%);Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Regional 
integration (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective is: "the project will deliver climate resilient road 
infrastructure to the beneficiary communities on key road links and facilitate emergency 
responses to tackle natural disasters."   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A: Climate Resilient Road Infrastructure: This component will invest in the key road 
infrastructure to improve their climate resilience. The objective is to reduce the impact of the 
forecasted increase in the volume and intensity of rainfall on the road infrastructure in 
mountainous areas. The project will invest in selected corridors based on the Government#s 
Strategic Development Plan and the Core Network Development Plan. The proposed initial 
investment program is on the road corridor south from Dili to Ainaro . Future investment 
activities will be on other corridors from the core network.  
 
The project will: (i) increase the longitudinal and transverse drainage to accommodate the 
forecast future rainfall volumes and intensities; (ii) provide new or increased capacity culverts; 
(iii) construct new, or reinforce existing, slope stabilization structures such as gabions; (iv) use 
Page  2
bio-engineering techniques to improve slope stability and decrease runoff; and, (v) repair the 
pavement surfaces where they have been damaged. Where practical, the project will use labor 
based construction approaches to maximize the potential for job creation. This component 
includes a design and supervision consultancy for the civil works, which will also identify the 
future investment priorities. It is anticipated that the works on each corridor will take at least two 
years to complete to allow time for the bio-engineering to become established and functional, 
and to ensure adequacy of other remedial measures.  
 
Component B: Emergency Planning and Response Systems: To help mitigate the impact of any 
disasters to the road network, an emergency response plan would be developed that considers: (i) 
currently available resources and existing plans the MOI has to support affected communities; 
(ii) the resources and actions the MOI needs to repair a damaged road (even if temporarily) as 
soon as possible after an event; (iii) the actions the community can take maintain and protect the 
road as well as repair it in the event of a disaster (community response plan); and, (iv) how the 
MOI is integrated into the national disaster risk management framework and its business 
continuity arrangements. One consideration will be the establishment of small local enterprises 
with performance based contracts to do routine maintenance on the road network with an 
emphasis on drainage.  
 
Component C: Project Support and Training: (i) Support to the Project Management Unit 
(PMU); and, (ii) training program for MOI staff and contractors as necessary.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Key north-south corridors on Timor Leste from the core network. The first year work program is 
on the Dili-Ainaro corridor.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The National Directorate of Environmental Services will review and clear the EMP before 
bidding documents for civil works are issued. They have the capacity to do this. The 
environmental management capacity of the Ministry of Infrastructure is being strengthened 
through on-the-job training in EMP implementation and compliance monitoring on the existing 
ADB financed road project. Should these skills not be sufficient for the proposed World Bank 
financed project, additional training will be supplied. The responsibility for day-to-day 
monitoring of the implementation of the EMP will fall upon the international design and 
supervision consultant who will have strict reporting and monitoring requirements. There is 
experience in preparing and implementing resettlement plans and undertaking consultations, 
particularly under the ADB-financed road project. This experience will prove useful when 
implementing the WB project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASNS) 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will undertake civil works. An environmental management plan (EMP) will be 
prepared and disclosed. The EMP will summarize all the anticipated environmental impacts and 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
their associated mitigation measures during the design, construction and operational phases. It 
will refer to the relevant law and contract documents, approximate location, timeframe, 
mitigation costs, and the responsibility for its implementation and supervision. A field 
monitoring checklist will be prepared based on the EMP and monitoring plan. The field 
monitoring checklist will be used by the supervising engineers. The signed checklists will be 
provided to the Ministry of Infrastructure who will be responsible for the appropriate follow-up 
and compliance reporting.  
 
The subsequent year projects are expected to be similar to the first year project. The EMP 
will include an Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) including good engineering and 
environmental management practices for small construction works and routine maintenance of 
the road. This will be applied for all future works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The first year project will be undertaken on the existing road alignment and will not affect 
natural habitats. Subsequent year projects will also be based on the existing alignments and are 
not expected to impact the natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The first and subsequent year projects will be undertaken on the existing road alignment and 
will not affect forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will have no impact on pest management.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The civil works activities will be on existing alignments so the project will not impact 
physical or cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
In Timor-Leste, ethnic association is bound up with language. Seventeen languages, derived 
from one of two broad language groups - Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian) and Papuan 
(Melanesian) - are spoken across the country. On the basis of a recent social assessment for the 
ADB financed road project, it is concluded that no significant differences in cultural and social 
identity exist among the people who speak different languages.  The ADB assessment also found 
that no one particular group is vulnerable as a result of belonging to a one or other language 
group. The Timorese constitution respects and preserves language and religious differences in 
society. All Timor-Leste citizens have the same status and have the same opportunity to access 
services provided by the State. Timorese do not self-identify (nor do others identify them) as 
members of a distinct indigenous cultural group. There are no dominant societies in Timor-Leste. 
The affected people are therefore not considered by to be Indigenous People according to OP 
4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The civil works under the project will be conducted within existing road alignments; 
therefore, only minimal temporary impact on land or resettlement impact is expected. The 
number of households that may experience incidental impact from civil works will be small, and 
the magnitude of the impacts is minimal. Steps will be taken during implementation to mitigate 
these impacts. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is being prepared in case there are any 
land or livelihood impacts. This Framework will be the basis for any compensation payments 
should they be needed.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project addresses roads, not dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project does not involve international waters.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not in a disputed area.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EMP and resettlement policy framework will be prepared in January/February 2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
12/22/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
01/10/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
12/24/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
