Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2011 
Report No.:  60611
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Timor-Leste 
Project ID:  P125032 
Project Name:  Timor Leste Road Climate Resilience Project 
Task Team Leader:  Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASNS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (60%);Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Regional 
integration (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will deliver sustainable climate resilient road infrastructure on the Dili-
Ainaro corridor.   
 
3. Project Description 
A. 
Project components  
 
Component A: Climate Resilient Road Infrastructure (US$ 15.13 million including 
contingencies).  
 
1.
This component will invest in the key road infrastructure to improve its climate 
resilience. The objective is to reduce the impact of the high volume and intensity of 
rainfall on the road infrastructure in mountainous areas. The proposed investment 
program is on the road corridor south from Dili to Ainaro. The physical works will 
include: (i) construction or reinforcement of slope stabilization structures; (ii) 
improvement of drainage structures to meet forecasted rainfall volumes and intensities; 
(iii) pavement repairs.  
 
2.
The Dili-Ainaro works will be done in two phases:  
Page  2
#
Phase I: Urgent Road Infrastructure Repairs. The objective of this phase is to 
repair badly damaged road and drainage structures to prevent the failure or further rapid 
deterioration of the asset and to allow more extensive rehabilitation to be designed, 
procured and mobilized. It is envisaged that it will be implemented immediately after the 
start of the project. This will be done using National Competitive Bidding (NCB).  
 
#
Phase II: Road Improvement. This will be done using International Competitive 
Bidding (ICB).  
 
3.
This component includes design and supervision of civil works by international 
consultants supported by local staff. It is proposed that there be two consultancies: one 
for the urgent road stabilization (Phase I of Component A); and a second for Phase II.  
 
Component B:  
Climate Responsive Maintenance and Emergency Planning and 
Response Systems (US$ 6.88 million including contingencies).  
 
This component will ensure the sustainability of road infrastructure investments through 
maintenance and emergency response systems. There will be four distinctive 
subcomponents:  
 
#
Performance-based maintenance contract with the ICB contractor for the Dili-
Ainaro road during the civil works construction and warranty period.  
 
#
Extension of the pilot ADB Road Maintenance Program (RMP) to Alieu and 
Ainaro districts, including first emergency response contracts.  
 
#
Design of Emergency Planning and Response Systems.  
 
#
Pilot Testing of Emergency Planning and Response System on the Dili-Ainaro  
 
road  
 
Component C:  
Project Support and Training (US$ 0.99 million including 
contingencies).  
 
4.
This component would include: (i) support to the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) established by the ADB for their RNDP in order to enable it to meet the 
additional World Bank project#s requirements; and, (ii) a training program for MOI staff 
and contractors aimed at bridging the capacity gap on maintaining mountainous roads and 
emergency responses. This will be done in co-ordination with existing MOI project(s) on 
capacity development supported by JICA and the Government of Indonesia and training 
for contractors developed under the ADB road maintenance project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located on in key north-south links. The proposed first year 
investment in the 110 km long Dili-Ainaro corridor addresses a key cross country link 
between the north and the south of the country. The government has prioritized support 
of oil and gas development services along the south coast. This road will serve as one of 
the most direct links between that service area and the main commercial centre in Dili.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASNS) 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project triggers the Environmental Assessment policy (OP 4.01) and is rated as a 
Category B project. The project is not expected to have long-term direct, induced or 
cumulative impacts on the environment including on natural or critical natural habitats.  
 
Two protected areas (one designated and one proposed) are located along the southern 
part of the road corridor, past Maubisse. No boundaries have been fixed but near the road 
corridor the boundaries are expected to be about 10 km (plus or minus) away from the 
road. The EMP concluded that #the proposed project #Rehabilitation of Road Link Dili to 
Ainaro# is unlikely to result in any direct or indirect significant adverse environmental 
impacts. In fact, if properly implemented, the project could improve existing 
environmental conditions such as slope failures and insufficient drainage#.  
 
The adverse environmental impacts associated with the civil works are expected to be 
mostly limited to construction related impacts only. The impacts are expected to be short 
lived, occurring mostly along the alignment of the selected road segments and mostly 
confined to the right of way. Some impacts are expected to occur at offsite locations such 
as quarry sites and spoiled material disposal sites. These impacts can be avoided or 
minimized through careful designs and good construction practices, or otherwise 
effectively mitigated during construction by use of appropriate mitigation measures and 
effective environmental supervision. The main potential impacts identified include: (i) 
disturbance from noise and dust arising from loading, unloading, and transportation of 
construction materials (aggregates and bitumen) by trucks; (ii) noise and dust arising 
during construction of landslide retaining structures, construction of the new road base 
and construction of the new surface in selected road segments; (iii) erosion and 
sedimentation from exposed surfaces that may affect the nearby farms and water bodies 
during the construction phase; (iv) risks from the use and improper disposal of hazardous 
materials such as used fuel and lubricants; and, (v) potential increase in accidents during 
construction and operation from increased vehicle movements.  
Page  4
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and disclosed before 
appraisal during the week of March 14 2011. The EMP summarizes the anticipated 
environmental impacts and its associated mitigation measures during the design, 
construction and operational phases of the project. It makes reference to the relevant law 
and contract documents, approximate location, timeframe, mitigation costs, and the 
responsibility for its implementation and supervision. A field monitoring checklist has 
been prepared based on the EMP and monitoring plan. The field monitoring checklist will 
be used by the supervising engineers. The signed checklists will be provided to the 
PMU/MOI who will be responsible for the appropriate follow-up and compliance 
reporting.  
 
The project is triggering the Bank's Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP 4.10). The Timorese 
population is indigenous because it has: (i) collective attachment to geographically 
distinct territories; and (ii) descent from groups present in specific areas prior to the 
establishment of modern states and relative borders, due largely in respect of Timor Leste 
being established as a sovereign nation in 2000. Ethnicity in Timor is bound by language. 
Seventeen languages, derived from one of two broad language groups - Austronesian 
(Malayo-Polynesian) and Papuan (Melanesian) - are spoken across the country. While the 
social assessments undertaken by the ADB road project indicate that no significant 
differences of cultural and social identity exist among the people who speak different 
languages, except for a small number of Muslims in an overwhelmingly Roman Catholic 
society, Timorese people are considered indigenous due to the two points raised above.  
 
Since essentially everyone in Timor Leste is considered indigenous, an Indigenous 
People's Plan (IPP) is not required but elements of the plan will be integrated into the 
PAD. Consistent with the requirements of OP 4.10 (Annex B), during project preparation 
free, prior, and informed consultation with the affected communities along the Dili-
Ainaro road corridor were carried out in three major sites. These consultations confirmed 
broad community support for the project. In addition, the World Bank#s Social 
Safeguards Specialist conducted informal consultations along the length of the road in 
early March 2011 to assess community support for the project and any concerns from 
stakeholders. The PAD and the project#s Operational Manual will put in place a 
Consultations Framework for the implementation of the project. Given the existing, 
thorough and informative Social Assessment carried out for the ADB road project, this 
project will draw from it rather than prepare a new one.  
 
The Bank#s Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP 4.12) is triggered. The civil works 
under the project will be conducted within existing road alignments; therefore, only 
minimal temporary impact on land or resettlement impact is expected. The number of 
households that may experience incidental impact from civil works will be small, and the 
magnitude of the impacts is minimal. Steps will be taken during implementation to 
mitigate these impacts. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and 
disclosed prior to appraisal. This Framework will be the basis for any compensation 
payments should they be needed.  
 
Page  5
Consultations were undertaken at Alieu, Maubisse and Ainaro on March 17 and 18, 
2011.  Both the EMP and RPF summaries in Tetum were disclosed at the three sites. The 
stakeholders consulted confirmed support for the project. The project will undertake 
further consultations during the design stage before construction commences.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
It is anticipated that the design and construction of the proposed project will make the 
road more climate resilience and will reduce long term impact from rain and the resulting 
flood damage to the roads. This will be achieved through engineering and bio-
engineering methods; this should have a positive overall impact on water management 
and runoff in the areas around the road. Bio-engineering methods will be applied in 
consultations with landowners and as they could involve restrictions on land use in 
slopes. If there are impacts to people#s assets, the RPF will apply.  
 
The Dili # Ainaro road does not pass through any protected areas, but it is flanked by 
one designated and one proposed Protected Area (PA), located several kilometers away 
from the road. According to the EMP, the southern portion of the corridor, from just 
north of Maubisse to Ainaro, has the surroundings of a potentially high Biological Value. 
However, the two PAs are highly impacted with slash and burn cultivations, coffee and 
banana plantations, deforestation and small village settlements. The project will 
supplement the reforestation effort being implemented by the National Directorate of 
Forestry under the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, by planting trees, 
shrubs and generally revegetating the surrounding areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No road alternatives were considered as the project is aimed at improving the climate 
resilience of the existing roads and is specifically designed to minimize the adverse 
impacts of rainfall and runoff on the roads. The design will incorporate specific solutions 
based on the site specific needs. Alternative solutions will be considered before selecting 
the design.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The National Directorate of Environmental Services has the capacity to review and clear 
the EMP. This will be done before bidding documents for civil works are issued. 
Currently, the environmental management capacity of the Ministry of Infrastructure is 
being strengthened through on-the-job training during the EMP implementation and 
compliance monitoring on the existing ADB financed road project. Should these skills 
not be sufficient for the proposed World Bank financed project, then additional training 
will be provided. The responsibility for day-to-day monitoring of the implementation of 
the EMP and RPF will fall upon the international design and supervision consultant who 
will have strict reporting and monitoring requirements. The Project Management Unit 
established under the ADB project will be expanded to handle the World Bank activities. 
They will be responsible for monitoring the compliance of the EMP and RPF.   
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the residents along the roads to be improved. Public 
consultations were conducted during preparation at three locations along the first year 
work program Dili-Ainaro corridor. These consultations disclosed the EMP and RPF, 
assessed the overall community support for the project in accordance with OP 4.10, and 
noted community comments and concerns. During the design process, further 
consultations will be held and disclosures made to ensure that the designs meet the needs 
and expectations of the communities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/08/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/22/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/22/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/17/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/22/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/22/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The project triggers the Indigenous Peoples policy, but preparation of a separate 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework was not required.   
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
03/22/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Anil H. Somani 
03/21/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini 
03/21/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
03/22/2011 
Comments:  I don't agree with the triggering of OP4.10, and agree with the Social Safeguards 
Specialist's initial assessment.  There is a great inconsistency on the application of this policy in the 
Pacific. 
