Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/10/2011 
Report No.:  AC4715
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Togo 
Project ID:  P118045 
Project Name:  Togo Agricultural Sector Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Martien Van Nieuwkoop 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 19, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 12, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Crops (40%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (50%);Other rural development (20%);Rural 
services and infrastructure (15%);Rural policies and institutions (15%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.90 
 
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 
19.00 
 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
9.00
35.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective of the Bank-financed project is to reinforce productive 
capacities among target beneficiaries across selected value chains, and to foster an 
enabling environment for the development of the agricultural sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project provides both short-term emergency response to support livestock herders 
and the recovery of the livestock sub-sector, and long-term investments for agricultural 
development. It includes three components: (1) promotion of strategic food crops, export 
crops and freshwater fish production; (2) recovery of the livestock sub-sector; and (3) 
support for capacity building and sector coordination. The Project does not attempt to 
respond to the wide array of needs articulated in the PNIASA, even if there are presently 
no other donors available to finance. Instead, the Project will focus on activities to 
develop key productive sub-sectors, which are expected to generate results in the medium 
term and can be measured by the end of the project (Component 1), and will finance 
Page  2
immediate, short term investments to achieve quick results in livestock herd recovery 
(Component 2). Component 3 is aimed at building capacity in a weakened public service, 
with a medium to long-term perspective for establishing laying a sound institutional 
environment to support PNIASA implementation and prepare for a SWAp in the future.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be active in the five Togolese regions: Maritime, Plateaux, Centrale, 
Kara and Savanes.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social safeguard issues of the proposed project are associated with 
the activities of component 1 and 2, in particular. Specifically, Sub-component 1.1 
dedicated to support food crops development, Sub-component 1.2 for support to export 
crops, Sub-component 1.3 for support to freshwater fish production, and Component 2 
geared at the recovery of the livestock sector (re-stocking, disease control and animal 
housing support activities for poultry and small ruminants) and are likely to trigger OP 
4.01 (Environmental Assessment); Sub-components 1.1 and 1.2 are likely to trigger OP 
4.09 (Pest Management).  
 
The potential social impacts of components under the proposed project will be small-
scale and site-specific. The overall environmental impact of the project is positive, 
however some negative impacts may arise during project implementation, such as limited 
impacts on soil, air, water, noise environments, and surrounding communities, essentially 
during construction and/or agricultural and/or fisheries production. These impacts will be 
temporary and localized, and proper mitigation measures during construction and/or 
production could minimize or even eliminate them.  
Page  3
It is anticipated that project activities will not lead to land acquisition or major 
restriction of access to sources of livelihood. A Resettlement Policy Framework has been 
prepared for the project. In the event that people are physically or economically displaced 
because of the Project#s activities, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared in 
accordance with the requirements of OP4.12, before the commencement of any relocation 
activities. This plan will be subject to Bank approval, consulted upon, and disclosed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
This Project falls into Environmental category B, no adverse impacts are anticipated and 
the safeguards impacts identified are not expected to have any cumulative impacts. No 
long-term adverse impacts were identified in the prepared safeguards instruments: 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF); and Pest Management Plan (PMP). This Project will not fund 
activities that would cause an adverse effect on the environment or any form of land 
acquisition or restriction of access to sources of livelihoods.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n.a.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The appropriate social and environmental safeguards instruments (Environmental and 
Social Management Framework, Pesticides and Pests Management Plan, and 
Resettlement Policy Framework) were prepared and disclosed in-country on November 
17, 2010 and at the Infoshop on December 22, 2010.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the farming and fishing communities represented by producer 
organizations as well as the civil society, which has formal representation in Togo. An 
extensive consultation process with targeted stakeholders (such as producers and 
producer associations, trade associations, public and private agricultural services 
providers, small and medium sized agribusiness) was carried out for the preparation of 
the safeguards reports. No major issues related to safeguards were raised which may lead 
to changing the project design. Public consultation on the outcome of this process was 
solicited with the disclosure of the safeguards instruments through announcements made 
in two local newspapers and at the Info shop. Consultations and public meetings will 
continue during project implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  4
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/17/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/17/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/17/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2010 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  5
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christian Berger 
01/24/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
01/24/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
01/24/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
03/09/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
03/09/2011 
Comments:   
