Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/09/2011 
Report No.:  AC5753
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Togo 
Project ID:  P122326 
Project Name:  Togo - Private Sector Development Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 7, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTFW 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (60%);Central government administration 
(40%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (50%);Other financial and private sector 
development (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
13.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective is to contribute to an improved investment 
climate, in Togo and specifically in a new Togolese Free Zone, and to an improved 
performance of micro and small enterprises supported by the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of:  
 
Component 1: Support to investment climate reforms (US$3.0 million)  
 
This component aims at improving critical aspects of the Togolese investment climate, 
through focusing on two Doing Business indicators (starting a business and registering 
property).  
 
Component 2: Support to the development of entrepreneurial capacities (US$4.0 
million)  
 
This component targets micro and small firms (MSEs) that are the primary source of job 
creation in Togo and it aims at developing the entrepreneurial capacities of MSEs 
Page  2
through targeted and practical business training, coupled with matching grant for 
registered (formal) firms and mentoring for informal (also referred as traditional) ones.  
 
Component 3: Support to the development of a new Free Zone (US$3.0 million)  
 
This component will support the Government of Togo to develop a new Free Zone 
which will yield important economic benefits to the country (notably in term of revenue 
contribution and job creation).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Lome, around Lome and main urban centers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A.1.1. Existing Togolese Free Zone  
 
The situation of the existing Togolese Free Zone (TFZ) is unusual. One on side, the TFZ 
counts around 60 businesses. On the other side, the TFZ has two plots of land (72 
hectares and 35 hectares) in the port zone, the Togolese Government recently acquired 
around 140 hectares (undeveloped), 20 km North of Lome, and it also has a 30 ha. plot 
near Kara, in the north of the country.  
 
However, most of the TFZ businesses are not located within the plots of the existing 
Free Zone.  
 
The 35 ha. plot in the port area is used for storing imported cars (MAD, Magasins et 
Aires de Dedouanement, Shops and Customs Clearance) and space is rented to around 27 
enterprises. No business in the existing Free Zone is located in this plot. The 72 ha. plot 
Page  3
in the port area counts 4 Free Zone businesses. The 30 ha. plot near Kara counts 1 Free 
Zone business. The fourth plot (recently acquired) is undeveloped and no business is 
located on the plot. The vast majority of the businesses are therefore located outside of 
the physical existing Free Zones, but operate under the Free Zone regime (#point franc#).  
 
Project approach to strategically reposition the Free Zone  
 
Following the analyses undertaken for the CEM and during project preparation, there is 
a
consensus on the need to develop a new Free Zone model, as the current Free Zone 
model is unsustainable. However, in the present situation, it is not possible to make any 
concrete propositions on what and where will be the future strategic positioning of the 
new Free Zone, as there is first a need to undertake a number of diagnostics studies, such 
as:  
 
#
Cost benefit analysis of the Free Zone  
 
#
Togolese Free Zone competitiveness analysis  
 
#
Review of customs and external trade laws and regulations and of their 
implementation  
 
#
Institutional and organization diagnostic of the Togolese Free Zone  
 
#
Assessment of the Public Private Partnerships framework in Togo  
 
Based on this diagnostic, a strategy to develop a new Free Zone will be developed. In 
addition, the concept of Free Zone is relatively narrow and is becoming outdated (a free 
zone # zone franche # is a zone in which businesses do not pay customs for their 
imported inputs, as these enterprises focus on export markets), so there might be a need 
to move to the wider concept of Special Economic Zone. There is also the need to 
identify market segments where Togo would have a competitive advantage.  
 
This preliminary analysis would therefore allow the Government to identify the strategic 
focus of the new Free Zone (or Special Economic Zone). The new focus of the zone 
would then allow to identify the most appropriate geographical location of the new zone.  
 
As a result, the future site of the new Free Zone is not yet known.  
 
Relationship between the project and potential resettlement issues:  
 
The project will finance technical assistance to develop a strategy to establish a new 
Free Zone. The output of this technical assistance # at the end of the project # would be 
to have a development plan for a new Free Zone, validated by the Government of Togo, 
which would be presented to private investors. A Resettlement Policy Framework has 
been developed to provide guidance to the authorities on how to manage potential 
resettlement issues in the new Free Zone site.  
 
There is a risk that the World Bank may indirectly be associated with the existing Free 
Zone sites. Currently, there are occupants on some of the sites who do not have title to 
the land; in addition, former occupants with title are seeking compensation for the land 
that was expropriated for the Free Zone sites over 40 years ago. If the Free Zone 
Page  4
Management Company (SAZOF) undertakes resettlement activities in the existing Free 
Zone sites, this could arguably then be linked to the World Bank (despite the activities 
financed by the World Bank for this project being clearly limited to activities related to a 
contemplated new Free Zone).  
 
A.1.2. Togolese Free Zone: potential environmental issues  
 
The Togolese Free Zone counts around 60 businesses operating in various sectors, 
notably: agribusiness, wood and construction materials, textiles, medicines and 
cosmetics, services, plastic and wrapping and metal works. The operations of these 
businesses can have negative environmental and social impacts.  
 
The environmental audit concluded that the existing legal, regulatory and institutional 
framework is satisfactory. In addition, the audit notes that, overall, Free Zone enterprises 
are operating in an adequate environmental situation. In particular, these enterprises have 
implemented relatively sound waste management and have applied environmental good 
practices. The audit also highlighted a number of areas where there is limited compliance 
(on the side of Free Zone enterprises) with environmental good practices (such as the 
necessity to check the quality of wastewater once a month, the necessity to have 
wastewater treatment systems or the necessity to clearly identify recipients which contain 
used oils). The audit also provided detailed recommendations to improve compliance 
with environmental good practices. Finally, the audit recommends the development of an 
environmental management system as well as capacity strengthening in environmental 
good practices for key stakeholders.  
 
A.1.3. Other potential environment issues  
 
The project will fund the rehabilitation (very minor rehabilitation: painting, small 
electrical works and partitioning) of a building housing the one-stop shop for enterprise 
creation, the Project Coordination Unit will ensure that the firm handling the 
rehabilitation works has # as an annex to its contract # the environmental and social 
management clauses for construction works.  
 
The proposed matching grant under component 2 should not trigger any safeguards 
issues. The maximum matching grant amount is US$10,000. The matching grants can 
finance services for businesses (for up to 50%), such as market research, business 
planning, accounting, etc. The MSEs that can benefit from the matching grant will be 
based in and around Lome. A negative list of activities that cannot be financed will be 
included in the Operational Manual. This negative list will include activities such as 
works, alcohol production, weapons production, fur production, timber exploitation and 
any activity that is harmful to the environment.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The section above highlights potential environment and social issues in the Project # 
including potential indirect impacts, in particular with regard to resettlement.   
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Togolese Free Zone is already in activity and counts around 60 businesses. The 
project will provide technical assistance to the Government of Togo and the Free Zone to 
develop a new Free Zone / SEZ. This technical assistance will include guidance on social 
and environment issues (see following section).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared the following documents:  
 
#
Analysis of potential involuntary resettlement issues in the new Free Zone and 
elaboration of a Resettlement Policy Framework;  
 
#
Environmental audit of the Togolese Free Zone;  
 
#
Environment and Social Management Framework  
 
Analysis of potential involuntary resettlement issues in the Togolese Free Zone (stock 
taking);  
 
Section II.A.1. provides a summary of the involuntary resettlement issues in the TFZ.  
 
Elaboration of a Resettlement Policy Framework:  
 
The Resettlement framework provides guidance to the Togolese Free Zone Management 
Authority (SAFOZ) on how to undertake resettlement. This framework will apply to the 
new Free Zone / SEZ, once the site has been identified.  
 
In addition, if SAFOZ intends to undertake resettlement activities in the existing Free 
Zone sites during the life of the project, the Bank has included a remedy in the project 
legal documents to the effect that if SAFOZ does so and the Bank determines that the 
standards and measures to ensure the environmentally and socially sustainable 
management and operation of the Free Zones are not consistent with sound international 
best practice, the Bank can suspend the financing.  
 
Environmental audit of the Togolese Free Zone:  
 
This audit assessed the environmental and social impact of the enterprises (in operation) 
belonging to the TZF and provided recommendations for mitigating environmental and 
social impacts.  
 
Environment and Social Management Framework:  
 
This framework provides guidance to SAFOZ if it decides to develop new sites (the 
recently acquired 140 ha. or other potential new sites). This framework would apply to 
the new Free Zone / SEZ.  
 
Based on the findings and recommendations of the above studies, the following 
approach is proposed.  
 
Page  6
The component will focus on the development of a new Free Zone / SEZ site, which is 
not yet known (it could potentially be the recently acquired site 20km North of Lomé, 
however diagnostic and feasibility studies will indicate the best possible location of the 
new site). The ESMF and RPF, elaborated during project preparation, will provide 
guidance to the Togolese authorities on how to tackle certain environmental and social 
issues (including potential resettlement issues) for the new site.  
 
The PAD (and Financing Agreement) will stipulate that SAZOF (the Free Zone 
management company) will follow the RPF if ever it intends to resettle farmers or 
inhabitants in the new sites. The PAD will describe the general content of the RPF so as 
to make clear that (i) the Bank has done its due diligence on the social safeguard risks, 
(ii) the Togolese authorities are fully aware of (and have assumed) such risks by adopting 
and disclosing safeguard documents which provide, among others, mitigation measures, 
(iii) to mitigate any risk of the Bank being linked indirectly to activities outside the scope 
of this project but relating to the existing Free Zone site, the Bank will included a remedy 
in the project legal documents to the effect that if it determines that the standards and 
measures to ensure the environmentally and socially sustainable management and 
operation of the Free Zones are not consistent with sound international best practice, it 
can suspend the financing.  This is in addition to the remedies that naturally flow from 
the covenant that the Recipient has to abide by the terms of the safeguard instruments as 
concerns the contemplated new Free Zone.  
 
Once the new TFZ strategy has been approved and once a site has been identified for the 
strategically repositioned TFZ, technical assistance to undertake an Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment/Environmental Management Plan of the identified site and 
Resettlement Action Plan will be provided.  
 
Under this proposal, the Bank cannot provide any assurances that environmental and 
social safeguard issues (including in connection with the legacy issue) will be properly 
addressed by the Togolese authorities at the existing Free Zone sites if and when a non-
Bank financed project related to the Free Zone is implemented by the Togolese 
authorities further to this TA project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Various consultations with stakeholders were undertaken in the course of the elaboration 
of the safeguards documents described above.  
 
Various consultations with stakeholders were undertaken in the course of the 
elaboration of the safeguards documents described above.  
 
In particular, consultations took place with:  
 
-
Official owners of the 72 ha. plot in the port area  
 
-
Inhabitants of the 72 ha. plot in the port area  
 
-
Near-by inhabitants of the 140 ha. plot 20 km North of Lome  
 
-
Families claiming ownership of the 30 ha. plot near Kara  
Page  7
-
30
enterprises of the TFZ  
 
Once the safeguards documents (Environmental Audit, ESMF and RPF) are cleared by 
the World Bank, a disclosure notice will be published in two main Togolese newspapers. 
The disclosure notice will invite comments from the general public. These documents 
will be published at the Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/19/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/03/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/04/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/19/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/09/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/09/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
Yes 
Page  8
review and approve the EA report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin 
02/09/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
02/09/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor 
02/09/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
02/09/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paul Noumba Um 
02/09/2011 
Comments:   
