Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/26/2011 
Report No.:  AC6082
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P113415 
Original Project Name: Emergency 
Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Energy 
Project 
Country:  Togo 
Project ID:  P125049 
Project Name:  Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Energy Project - Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 12, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTUW 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (80%);Roads and highways (17%);Public administration- 
Water, sanitation and flood protection (3%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (51%);Access to urban services and housing 
(28%);Environmental policies and institutions (11%);Natural disaster management (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Additional Financing will remain the 
same as that of the original): To increase access to infrastructure and urban services in 
Lomé. The achievement of this objective would support the Government of Togo#s 
efforts to demonstrate concrete improvements in the lives of its citizens, a critical step for 
sustaining social and political stability in the country.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing project will have two components -- an expansion of the 
rehabilitation and construction works under sub-component A1 (Drainage)  and A2 
(Urban Roads) in an amount of about US$14 million and an equivalent top-up of the 
management fees of about US$1 million to ensure that the implementing entity and staff 
of the technical secretariat overseeing the implementation of the project will continue to 
Page  2
perform responsibilities delegated to them by the Government of Togo (GoT) through the 
end of the proposed extended closing date (December 31, 2015) with details as follows:  
 
Component A: Infrastructure Rehabilitation (US$14 million equivalent)  
 
A.1 
Drainage cleaning and Rehabilitation (US$12,9mequivalent): to reduce the 
number of people affected by periodic flooding in the poor neighborhoods of Lomé. The 
activities planned for this component will benefit at least additional 300,000 people. The 
activities include (i) cleaning approximately additional fifty kilometers of existing canals 
throughout the city; (ii) rehabilitation and extension of approximately additional 12 
kilometers of substandard and unsound drainage structures, resurfacing the inner walls of 
drains, and construction of new culverts along major roads, using mostly labor-intensive 
works methods; (iii) rehabilitation of shoulders and side ditches along the secondary 
drainage network that drains into Lomé's lagoons; and (iv) construction and expansion of 
additional three storm water retention ponds, including fencing for all three, linking them 
to a net work of canals (some expanded in size) to drain them into the lagoon.  
 
A.2 
Urban Roads (US$1,1equivalent): to rehabilitate about two and a half kilometers 
of secondary roads in Lomé to increase access to currently isolated areas of the city.  
Despite considerable efforts under the original IDA Grant, there still persists huge need to 
rehabilitate heavily dilapidated roads and to reinforce drainage systems in the urban 
centers, mostly as a result of the excessive floods. Key results are expected to include 
improved and lower cost public transportation in the disadvantaged neighborhoods, 
which citizens are currently isolated from businesses and job opportunities.  
 
Component B: Institutional Capacity Strengthening (about US$1m equivalent).  This 
will ensure that implementing entity and the staff of the technical secretariat overseeing 
the implementation of the project will continue to perform responsibilities delegated to 
them by the GoT through the end of the proposed extended closing date (December 31, 
2015).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project location will be in Lomé.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Additional Financing like the original project is classified as B indicating that 
environmental and social impacts will not be adverse; as they are likely to be small-scale, 
site-specific and thus manageable at an acceptable level. With this Additional Financing, 
no new safeguards policies are triggered. The types of investments (drainage 
rehabilitation, road construction) included in the Additional Financing are covered by the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) of the parent project prepared and disclosed in-country and at the 
Infoshop respectively on August 13, 2009 and August 23, 2009. The borrower will 
prepare ESIAs/EMP and RAPs as and when necessary during implementation as it is 
being done in the original project, and these documents will be disclosed prior to 
commencement of civil works.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale, site-specific 
and thus easily mitigated. There are no indirect or long term adverse impacts expected 
during project implementation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The choice of construction of civil works has been selected to minimize displacement of 
people and/or property.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The capacity of borrower to address safeguard issues is considered adequate. Safeguards 
are well mainstreamed into the original project implementation. All contracts and bidding 
documents have the environmental and social management clauses inserted. The essence 
of this is to enable contractors to follow up on environmental and social due diligence 
Page  4
during civil works. Safeguards implementation of the parent project is satisfactory and 
the Environmental and Social Specialist in AGETUR is ensuring that all sub-projects 
activities in various components are screened using the checklist contained in the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the RPF. Lomé 
Municipality staff and the IE safeguards specialist have been trained on Bank safeguards 
policies and now have better information and guidance on how to supervise delegated 
responsibility of the EMP, RAPs and ESMF implementation. The IE safeguards specialist 
follows up environmental and social issues during project implementation. To date, two 
ESIAs dealing with water supply and drainage system rehabilitation have been prepared 
by the project, consulted upon, and disclosed.  During the implementation, the Bank team 
has been providing guidance including: (i) Providing to various actors sufficient means to 
carry out the follow-up and the supervision of subprojects# EMPs and/or RAPs; (ii) 
sharing as much as possible projects safeguards instruments with project stakeholders; 
(iii) strengthening the capacity of the various stakeholder groups in environmental and 
social assessment and monitoring and reporting procedures, through training and 
sensitization programs; (iv) ensuring that proposed mitigations measures are effectively 
implemented; (v) ensuring that local communities are involved in the implementation and 
monitoring of subprojects. The Bank team is closely monitoring safeguards issues related 
to the project and will make sure that the IE complies with safeguard requirement under 
this additional financing. The existing arrangement for safeguards under the parent 
project will continue under the Additional Financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
All key stakeholders (Government, Agencies and Ministries, NGOs, Comité de 
Development de Bè, Lomé Municipales authorities, private sector, communities, 
development partners, etc.) are being and will be consulted regularly. The project will 
continue the dialogue with key stakeholders and the project will rely on the rigorous 
implementation of RPF and ESMF to ensure that the appropriate mitigation measures are 
taken into account in accordance with the Togo and the Bank's safeguards policies in 
actives consultation with key stakeholders. This participatory approach will be carried on 
throughout implementation, maintenance, supervision and evaluation of the project 
activities with the support Local Development Committees.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/12/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/13/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/23/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/12/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/13/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/23/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  6
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kwabena Amankwah-Ayeh 
04/11/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba 
04/08/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
04/09/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
04/25/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
04/25/2011 
Comments:   
