Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5855 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/10/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tonga 
Project ID: P124362 
Project Name: Tonga Aviation Infrastructure Investment Project 
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASNS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Aviation (100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (90%);Climate change (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To provide safe and secure air transport operations and environmentally sustainable and efficient 
airports.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A: Aviation Infrastructure Investments. This component will invest in the aviation 
infrastructure at the three project airports so that they are able to meet the ICAO requirements, 
while preserving and extending the service life of existing airport assets. The activities include:  
 
#
Rehabilitation of airport pavements: The project will rehabilitate the runways, taxiways and 
aprons and at all three airports. This will see the existing surfaces milled (if needed)  and 
replaced with asphalt concrete, cement concrete and/or interlocking concrete/stone pavers as 
appropriate, with proper attention to airfield drainage to prevent ponding on  shoulders, aprons 
and other critical areas.  
 
#
Provision of renewable power: Implementation of discrete photovoltaic power source for 
generation of on-site power that is carbon neutral during operation. This will not only 
significantly reduce airport operating costs, but do so usinga non-polluting, renewable, and 
importantly, reliable energy source. Potentially, excess energy could be supplied to the national 
grid, thereby reducing the diesel fuel demands and their related CO2 effects.  
Page  2
#
Energy optimization of terminals: Improvements to terminals to reduce electrical 
consumption through both passive and technological means.  
 
#
Upgrading of runway lighting: The existing lighting and cabling will be replaced with low 
power consumption LED fixtures , reducing the energy demand by 90%.  
 
#
Security improvements: Improved fencing, access control, building management system, 
FIDS and CCTV for Fua#amotu airport; X-ray equipment for hand baggage at Vava#u airport;  
 
#
Rain water harvesting and improved efficiency: Facilities will be provided to collect and store 
rain water from roof areas to significantly reduce the potable water demand and preserve natural 
water resources. The water will be used to service all sanitary demands and provide required 
collections for fire water for Crash Fire Rescue demands, and ground vehicle maintenance. 
Water consumption will be reduced by utilizing fixtures and valves within the terminal buildings 
that are high efficiency/low consumption.  
 
#
Control tower: Construction of a new control tower at TBU, along with the necessary 
communication and surveillance equipment, for example an ADS-B for Vava#u and Fua#amotu 
airports; PAPI and NDB for Fua#amoto and Ha#apai airports.  
 
#
Fire safety: Provision of a fire tender for Vava#u airport; provision of fire equipment for 
firemen (jackets, oxygen, etc.)  
 
#
Weather monitoring: Automatic Weather Observation Stations for all three airports.  
 
#
Consulting services: (i) Procurement of design and supervision consultant; and, (ii) 
Specialists for preparation of technical specifications on aviation equipment.  
 
Component B: Aviation Sector Reform: The TSCP has contributed towards major sector 
reform. The reform will continue through the project providing support to the Civil Aviation 
Department (CAD) to adopt and implement the new Civil Aviation Regulations as well as the 
agreed corrective action plan following the ICAO safety and security audits. This support will 
likely include a civil aviation advisor to CAD.  
 
Component C: Project Support and Training: (i) Support to the Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU); and, (ii) training program for staff of the MoT and CAD to address needs to carry-out 
regulatory oversight, and project support as necessary.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The investments are located at three airports on different islands in the Kingdom of Tonga: 
Tongatapu Fua#amotu International Airport (TBU), Vava#u Airport (VAV) and Ha#apai Airport 
(HPA).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has sufficient capacity on the proposed new project to implement the Bank#s 
safeguard policies, particularly from an environment perspective. This is evidenced by their 
successful implementation of these policies on the existing Tonga Transport Sector 
Consolidation Project (TSCP).  The TSCP#s Environmental Management Plan (EMP)#which 
was recently updated as part of the TSCP#s expansion and restructuring#will be used as the basis 
for the new EMP. The new EMP will have separate sections for the activities to be done at each 
airport. The EMP will include collection, transport and disposal of all debris from the works, as 
well as monitoring, reporting, and institutional arrangements for implementation. The EMP will 
be included as part of the specifications and included in the contract documents.  
Page  3
The borrower has less capacity and experience implementing social safeguards, however, this is 
not seen as an issue for the project since neither OP 4.10 nor OP 4.12 are triggered.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASNS) 
Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (EASNS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will lead to civil works to repair the existing runways, navigation lights and 
airport terminals. An EMP will be prepared for the project, with separate sections for the road 
and each individual airport or airstrip. The EMP will be included as part of the specifications and 
included in the contract documents.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no natural habitats will be 
affected.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no forests will be affected.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will have no impact on pest management.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no physical or cultural 
resources will be affected.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The people affected by the project are from a single cultural group. This group is not 
considered to be Indigenous Peoples according to OP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so no land acquisition is 
expected. All land for the airports is currently owned or controlled by the government through 
ongoing leases. There are no claims against the land upon which the airports are located. There 
are currently no people living, farming, or engaged in any activities within the perimeters of any 
of the airports. All airports are currently fenced and secure, reserved for aviation operations. The 
businesses that operate at Fua'amotu are either leases for retail, engineering, ground handling, 
fuel and rentals all related to the airport business; at Vava#u and Ha#apai there are concessions 
for ground handling and a cafe lease. None of the proposed investments will affect the ongoing 
business operations in any way.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so does not involve dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken on the existing airfields and so does not involve international 
waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project will be undertaken in Tonga where there are no disputed areas.   
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/01/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EMP will be disclosed by 3/1/2011   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
12/08/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
01/07/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
12/24/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
