Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/31/2011 
Report No.:  AC5848
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P078359 
Original Project Name: Seismic Risk 
Mitigation Project 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P122179 
Project Name:  ISMEP - ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Task Team Leader:  Jolanta Kryspin-Watson 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (20%);Other social services 
(10%);Health (20%);General education sector (40%);General information and 
communications sector (10%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (90%);Other urban development (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall goal of the project is to save lives and reduce the social, economic and 
financial impacts from future earthquakes. The specific objective of the original project is 
to improve Istanbul's preparedness for a potential earthquake through enhancing the 
institutional and technical capacity for disaster management and emergency response, 
strengthening critical public facilities for earthquake resistance, and supporting measures 
for better enforcement of building codes and land use plans.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of the following components and activities:  
 
Component A: Enhancing Emergency Preparedness  
 
The component will enhance the effectiveness and capacity of the provincial and 
municipal public safety organizations in Istanbul to prepare for, respond to and recover 
Page  2
from significant emergencies, especially those arising from earthquakes. Component 
summary:  
 
-
Improvement of emergency communications systems  
 
-
Establishment of an emergency management information system  
 
-
Upgrading of emergency response capacity  
 
-
Public awareness and training  
 
Component B:  Seismic Risk Mitigation for Public Facilities  
 
The component supports the reduction the risk of future earthquake damage to critical 
facilities in order to save lives and ensure their continued functioning in the event of an 
earthquake. Component summary:  
 
-
Retrofitting/reconstruction of priority public facilities such as hospitals, clinics, 
schools, administrative buildings, etc. (Residential buildings are not in the scope of this 
project).  
 
-
Risk assessment of  cultural heritage buildings  
 
Component C:  Enforcement of Building Code and Land Use Plans  
 
The component supports innovative measures on a pilot basis for monitoring and 
improvement of building codes and land use plans enforcement through data collection 
on land use and building inventory;  data digitization and  computer equipment to help 
district municipalities make the process of issuing building permits more efficient and 
transparent and training/awareness raising for municipal authorities and local 
communities on seismic risks and the need to take this into account in land use planning 
and construction; training of engineers in new retro-fitting regulations, etc.  
 
The component does not support preparation of land use plans and the capacity building 
it supports does  not change the "status quo" on the ground. The component will include 
the following sub-components:  
 
Component D: Project Management  
 
This component supports the Istanbul Special Provincial Administration to implement 
the project in an efficient and transparent manner, and build institutional capacity to 
sustain the seismic risk mitigation program beyond the life of the project. Component 
summary:  
 
-
Project Management Support  
 
-
Monitoring and Evaluation   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All project investments will be located within the boundaries of Istanbul province, home 
of about 15 million people and one of the most seismically vulnerable cities in the world 
due to its seismic-prone location on the North Anatolian Fault, and its high population 
and commercial/industrial densities. According to recent assessments the probability of a 
major earthquake affecting Istanbul in the next 30 years is 62% +- 12%, while the 
likelihood of such devastation in the next decade is 32% +- 12%. This is roughly 
Page  3
comparable to the risk faced by Los Angeles and San Francisco, but with a damage 
potential that is much higher because of Istanbul's greater structural vulnerabilities.  
 
The ISMEP project will support seismic retrofitting works which will be performed on 
buildings that are already in existence.  The use of innovative, minimally intrusive 
technical retrofitting solutions would be promoted.  Only on a very limited scale, a 
demolition might be necessary of the structures which do not qualify for the retrofitting, 
and construction in their place of safe buildings.  Both types of interventions have 
environmental impacts which are minor to moderate in scale, and which are very 
localized in their extent.  Impacts can be readily defined, mitigated and monitored.  
Retrofitting and new construction has been successfully carried out in the Istanbul area in 
the recent past without significant impacts.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (ECSS4) 
Ms Esra Arikan (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential physical impacts are associated with renovation of buildings for retrofitting, in 
addition to replacement of some structures, if needed. Emissions of particulate 
matter/dust to the air, sediment to sewerage systems (or nonpoint source runoff), noise 
pollution, proper disposal of demolition debris or wastes present in the buildings will 
need to be mitigated and monitored. Special precautions for retrofitting hospitals, 
schools, and other critical facilities still in partial use may be needed. In cases of 
retrofitting work on certain public buildings in Istanbul, the safeguard policy on the 
Cultural Property may be triggered, as potentially some of the publicly used facilities 
may have cultural/historical value, be in very close proximity to such properties, or may 
be located in an overall historic area. Irreversible impacts are not anticipated given strong 
local ordinances and practices regarding cultural heritage protection.  
 
Page  4
The project will not entail land acquisition or resettlement, as the retrofitting or 
reconstruction will take place on existing sites and residential buildings are not in the 
scope of the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The original Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was updated by the Borrower in 
line with the recent changes in the regulations and the updated EMP was reviewed by the 
Bank and found satisfactory. It addresses all relevant mitigation and monitoring measures 
to protect environment and cultural properties.  
 
The previous supervision missions for this project indicate that the EMP is well applied 
at the sub-project level and according to the team's assessment, the Borrower has 
sufficient capacity to continue implementing the measures as outlined in the EMP, 
including the additional financing for the project.  
 
In order to minimize the possible disturbance for the beneficiaries (facility users), the 
Borrower carefully prepares the work program and retrofits schools during holidays to 
the extent possible, or identify temporary schools and hospitals to be used during 
retrofitting works. The Borrower also informs all relevant parties beforehand on the 
works to be carried out. This includes awareness raising activities for seismic mitigation. 
Innovative actions have been taken to convey the message to the school children such as 
theatre plays and cartoons; and the information campaign for teachers, parents and health 
administrators. This approach will be continued during retrofitting and reconstruction 
activities under the additional financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Detailed consultation activities were conducted during the first phase of the project and 
since the project objectives and components will stay the same for additional financing, 
the updated EMP (minor changes have been made especially on the revision dates of the 
regulations) was disclosed both nationally and in the Infoshop. Further, the project will 
build on the existing social mobilization strategy, which is part of the project 
communications plan, designed to promote public awareness and buy-in during 
implementation; and the ongoing participatory consultation meetings with stakeholders 
would be done on regular basis.  
 
Page  5
For the buildings to be retrofitted or reconstructed, extra measures are taken; 
consultations are carried out with the related public agencies, such as provincial 
directorates for education and health. In addition, information campaigns are conducted 
for those who use services of the retrofitted facilities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/03/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/03/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/26/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  6
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jolanta Kryspin-Watson 
01/04/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Esra Arikan 
01/25/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor 
01/05/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
01/25/2011 
Comments:   
