Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/27/2011 
Report No.:  AC5964
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P096858 
Original Project Name: Fourth Export 
Finance Intermediation Loan (EFIL IV) 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P121743 
Project Name:  Fourth Export Finance Intermediation Project Add. Fin. (EFIL IV AF) 
Task Team Leader:  Steen Byskov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 24, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (50%);General finance sector (20%);Banking 
(15%);Micro- and SME finance (15%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (40%);Export development and 
competitiveness (40%);Small and medium enterprise support (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original project development objectives are to  
 
(i) 
Support exports by providing medium and long-term working capital and 
investment finance to exporting firms; and  
 
(ii) 
Improve the ability of the financial sector to provide financial resources to firms 
through development of financial intermediaries.   
 
3. Project Description 
The EFIL IV project, a financial intermediation loan (FIL) in Turkey, is implemented by 
two borrowers: TSKB and Eximbank, each supported by a loan of US$300 million 
equivalent. Additional financing is sought for $300 million to TSKB to scale up 
Component 1 providing medium term finance through banks and leasing companies to 
exporters in Turkey.  
Page  2
The additional financing will scale-up the project's impact and development 
effectiveness and continue to support the project's development objectives. It will scale-
up the achievements of the original project not only during the implementation period 
(2008-2012), but also beyond that period as the Borrower will use the reflows repaid 
from the initial sub-borrowers to finance new investments before the funds are returned 
to the World Bank. In addition, given the reduced financing available as a result of the 
current crisis, the additional financing will ensure continued access to finance for 
exporters.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Sub-projects (beneficiary exporters) will be located all over Turkey.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Esra Arikan (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been assigned Category 'FI' in accordance with World Bank safeguard 
policy OP/BP/GP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). The Environmental Assessment 
Framework (EAF) utilized under the original loan has been updated to make the review 
process more efficient and user friendly. The revised EAF will be incorporated into the 
Operation Manuals for the PFIs. All sub-loans to be financed under the EFIL IV will be 
subjected to an environmental review process by the PFIs, as described in the EAF that 
will include screening, EA documentation, public consultation, and public disclosure of 
EA documentation (e.g. EMP/Checklists) for investment subprojects.  Procedures and 
requirements detailed in the EAF for EFIL IV incorporate and are consistent with both 
the Republic of Turkey's regulatory requirements for Environmental Assessment and the 
World Bank Environmental Assessment policy (OP/BP 4.01).  
 
Page  3
There will be no large scale significant and/or irreversible impacts.  Most of the loans 
were used to buy materials (e.g. paint, aluminum bars, steel plates etc.) or equipment (e.g. 
wood laminating machine), so the impacts were the minor ones associated with the 
installation of the equipment (noise, disposal of packing materials etc.)  Sub-projects 
screened as environmental category A will not be eligible for funding. For the sub 
projects to be defined during project implementation, the Bank will verify during 
supervision that TSKB and the PFIs follow the procedures described in the EAF.  
 
The project will not support any investment requiring land acquisition or associated 
involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  All civil construction works planned will be 
executed on existing land plots which are already in the possession of the respective 
factory/production buildings and/or industrial zones, and assessment of the investments 
will confirm that the locations are not occupied or being used for economic activities by 
any person.  
 
Since investment loans could be used for conducting specific civil works and these 
works could potentially be within a historic district, the World Bank safeguard policy on 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) is applicable to these investments.  For sub-
projects in recognized historic areas and/or involving cultural property issues, the local 
authority of Ministry of Culture and Tourism is responsible for application of Turkish 
laws and regulations, including those relating to cultural heritage. The sub-borrower will 
be required to secure all necessary permits and approvals from  these local authorities. 
Subprojects that involve excavation and thus the risk of discovering cultural artifacts 
(chance finds) will include procedures and responsibilities for managing this risk in the 
sub-project EMP/Mitigation Plan/Checklist.  
 
Consideration of such concerns is provided in the works contracts that will include 
requirements that the contractor is obliged to look for chance finds and immediately stop 
work at the contested location and alert responsible authorities in case of chance finds, 
and only continue works after official approvals from the responsible authorities are 
secured. Since the national regulations on the conservation of cultural properties are 
strict, it is not anticipated that any additional requirements would arise from the World 
Bank safeguard policies.  
 
The Bank safeguard policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) is not triggered because no 
projects involving or dependent upon existing dams or dams under construction will be 
permitted. Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP  7.50) are not eligible. However, 
interpretation of this policy is not always straightforward and PFIs should consult PIU 
officials if the PFI is uncertain if this policy applies. PIU officials, in turn, may wish to 
consult with the World Bank.  
 
The EMP/Mitigation Plan/Checklists should be a part of the documentation for each 
sub-project as well as incorporated in the civil works contract when applicable.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
This will be evaluated in individual sub-loans EAs as needed. No impacts were noted in 
previously financed subprojects. Loans were made to existing enterprises to maintain or 
improve process operations.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This will be evaluated in individual sub-loans EAs as needed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower TSKB during the course of the implementation of the EFIL II, III, and IV 
projects, has developed institutional capacity to determine and monitor environmental 
risks of sub-projects. The staff in TSKB are aware of the safeguard issues as they have 
been associated with the bank in the past and have constantly being rated satisfactory in 
implementing the safeguard policies. TSKB, already has an established Environmental 
Assessment Framework document acceptable to the World Bank that defines 
environmental assessment procedures to be used in sub-project evaluation. The 
Framework document is included as a separate chapter in the Operations Manual. The 
OM defines procedures consistent with both Government of Turkey Environmental 
Assessment requirements and World Bank Environmental Assessment policies and 
procedures utilized in similar operations in Turkey.  
 
Operational Manuals will be a part of the agreements between TSKB and the PFIs. PFIs 
should be informed that implementing the Operational Manuals will be their 
responsibility and their capacity of implementing will be assessed by TSKB and 
improvement measures will be given by TSKB (with the assistance of WB if requested) 
in case necessary.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the officers of TSKB, representatives of potential sub-project 
borrowers (chambers of commerce and unions of chambers), officers of prospective PFIs, 
authorities related to the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, local communities and 
municipalities, and NGOs.  
 
The Environmental Assessment Framework was disclosed in country in the website of 
TSKB on January 26, 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/24/2011 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/26/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/26/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  6
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Steen Byskov 
01/26/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Esra Arikan 
01/26/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/27/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
01/27/2011 
Comments:   
