Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5788 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/06/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkmenistan 
Project ID: P123676 
Project Name: Turkmenbashi Port Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader: Cordula Rastogi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 28, 2011 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (100%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (50%);Pollution management and 
environmental health (30%);Trade facilitation and market access (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
62.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase capacity of the rail ferry 
terminal to handle non-oil products, and improve environmental and safety practices at the Port 
of Turkmenbashi. This will be achieved through an investment project that aims at improving 
safety and security of port operations, increasing the level of preparedness to manage oil spills, 
and enhancing the competitiveness of the port of Turkmenbashi to meet current and future 
demand. In addition, the investment will help to bring the Port's environmental and safety 
practices in line with international and regional standards. The achievement of the PDO will be 
monitored with the following results indicators:  
 
-
Average turnaround time for rail ferries increased;  
 
-
Capacity of the rail ferry terminal increased;  
 
-
Environmental and safety practices of operations improved.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project components include the following:  
 
Page  2
A: Environmental and Safety Compliance. This component aims at bringing the port safety, 
security and environmental practices in line with international and regional standards. The 
component includes the acquisition of oil spill response equipment, response vessel and waste 
water collection vessel as well as consultants' services to achieve International Ship and Port 
Security (ISPS) certification.  
 
B: Port Modernization. This component aims at improving port infrastructure, expediting the 
loading and discharging of rail wagons, and supporting improvements in port planning and 
management. The component includes the reconstruction of the ferry terminal (left ramp and 
major access), consultants' service for the design and supervision of the reconstruction, 
acquisition of shunting locomotives and consultants' services to advice on port planning and port 
management model.  
 
C: Port implementation support. This component includes project implementation support, such 
as audits, consultants, training, etc.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implemented in Turkmenistan at the Port of Turkmenbashi on the Caspian 
Sea.  The port is located 270 kilometers east of and across the Caspian Sea from Baku, 
Azerbaijan and is the largest port in Turkmenistan being also an important gateway along the 
international transport corridor Europe-Caucasus-Central Asia. Turkmenbashi port is an import 
and export center for a variety of products, including non-oil products, handling about 8.7 
million tons of cargo in 2009 (including crude oil and petroleum products). One of the main 
working areas of the port of Turkmenbashi is the rail ferry terminal which handles 70 percent of 
the country's non-oil trade. Rail ferry traffic rose sharply after the rehabilitation of the right rail 
ferry ramp by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (2005) and accounts to 
about 2.2 million tons per annum (p.a.) in 2009.  
 
The port is located on the northern shore of the Gulf of Krasnovodsk. The south area of the 
Gulf, outside the port boundaries is part of the Hazar Nature Reserve. 90 percent of this reserve 
includes water area and about 10 percent covers land. One of the main goals of the Reserve is the 
protection of migratory birds which spend the winter there.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed Project will be implemented by the State Service of Maritime and River 
Transportation of Turkmenistan (SSMRTT) being supported by a special Implementation 
Management Project Team (IMPT). Public health and environmental standards currently 
practiced in the port are not in line with World Bank safeguard policies; the IMPT has no 
previous experience with the application of the Bank's safeguard policies and procedures, 
although it acquired some experience in this regard during the implementation of EBRD project 
on renovation of the ferry terminal. Its capacity in this area will be assessed within EIA process 
and if needed relevant capacity building activities will be proposed and implemented.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (ECSS4) 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSS3) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project interventions will include civil works for reconstruction of the rail ferry terminal as 
well as acquisition of new tugboats and vessels needed to improve collection of waste water and 
solid waste from ships as well as the provision of oil spill response equipment. The project 
design does not include investment in waste treatment facility as well as will not support any 
dredging activities. Ferry terminal reconstruction will carry moderate and manageable 
environmental risks typical for this type of civil works. OP 4.01, on Environmental Assessment, 
is triggered. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) will be carried out; an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared before appraisal. The EIA study will cover, in 
particular, environmental baseline analysis including existence of any endangered species (fish) 
or protected habitats, the analysis of potential environmental direct, indirect and cumulative 
impacts, necessary mitigation measures for the construction impacts as well as measures for final 
treatment/disposal of the solid and liquid waste to be collected. The EMP will also include a 
special monitoring plan.  
 
Comprehensive upgrade of the Turkmenbashi Port is a broad task outlined in the existing 
long term plan for its development.  The plan is of a general nature, though, without explicitly 
formulated priorities, implementation arrangements and financing sources. Therefore possibility 
of placing and analyzing the expected environmental risks of the proposed project in the context 
of cumulative impacts of the Port development is very restricted.  This issue may be revisited at 
later stages of project preparation and during implementation as made possible upon refinement 
of the Port development plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
At stage of project design it is not clear if OP/BP4.04 will be triggered. The EIA will be 
examining whether or not the works will have any impact on the protected habitat, and if so, 
adequate mitigation measures will be proposed.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
No land acquisition or resettlement is anticipated because the project will take place within 
the confines of the port and there is no private property and privately operated facilities within 
the port. However, in accordance with OP 4.01, the Environmental Assessment will identify any 
significant social impacts associated with the project (including any ancillary activities outside 
the port) and set out measures needed for their management or mitigation, if needed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The Project will be implemented in an international port on the Caspian Sea, which is 
surrounded by five riparian countries. Turkmenistan is a party to the MARPOL Convention for 
the Prevention of Pollution from Ships. The  OP/BP 7.50 is triggered and an exemption to 
riparian notification will be requested based on the fact that the proposed civil works financed by 
this project will involve only rehabilitation of an existing scheme.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/20/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/01/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It is expected that the EIA will be drafted and consulted upon by the end of January 2011.  
Disclosure of the EIA is expected in mid-February 2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Cordula Rastogi 
01/03/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/05/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Henry G. R. Kerali 
01/06/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
