Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/18/2011 
Report No.:  AC6063
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P112578 
Original Project Name: Private Sector 
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency 
Project 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P124898 
Project Name:  Private Sector Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Shinya Nishimura 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 11, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 19, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (90%);District heating and energy efficiency services (10%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (50%);Climate change (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
150.00
150.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Repeater [X] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original objective of the project is 'to help increase privately owned and operated 
energy production from indigenous renewable sources within the market-based 
framework of the Turkish Electricity Market Law, and to enhance energy efficiency and 
as a result help reducing greenhouse gas emissions'. The objective will remain the same. 
The purpose of additional financing is to scale up the activities under the ongoing project, 
thereby enhancing the impact already being achieved.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional financing will consist of two IBRD credit lines, one each to the 
two development banks in Turkey, Türkiye Sinai Kalkinma Bankasi (TSKB) and to 
Türkiye Kalkinma Bankasi (TKB). The FIs will allocate minimum of 25% of IBRD loan 
towards energy efficiency, and maximum of 50% towards hydros.  
 
Page  2
Renewable Energy - All renewable energy sources are eligible for financing including 
hydro, wind, geothermal, biomass, and solar energy, including for heating and cooling 
(such as geothermal).  
 
Energy efficiency - Energy efficiency investments will be eligible for financing under 
the proposed project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Specific sub-project locations will be determined during project implementation, as sub-
project proposals are screened and evaluated.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (ECSS4) 
Ms Esra Arikan (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed additional financing will not lead to a change in the environmental 
category of the project, nor trigger any new safeguard policies.  The projects to be 
financed are of the same type as the ones currently being financed (RE and EE), and the 
sub-projects may trigger World Bank safeguard polices on Environmental Assessment 
(OP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Dam Safety (OP 4.37). Since the 
project is an FI operation, individual subprojects are not known at the appraisal stage. 
Consequently, the Environment Policy Framework (EMF) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) utilized under the ongoing Project are revised by the Borrowers based 
upon both lessons learned so far. The draft final versions of these documents were 
disclosed in the country and sent to the Infoshop.  
 
Both EMF and RPF documents are included in the Operational Manual, which will 
govern the manner in which the Borrowers will be required to implement the Project.  
Page  3
The EMF defines the environmental assessment (EA) review procedures under Turkish 
laws and regulations and covers the gaps which have to be fulfilled to satisfy the World 
Bank requirements regarding environmental screening, documentation, public 
consultation, etc.  
 
Sub-projects will not be eligible for financing under this project if they are located in 
Natural Habitats or Critical Natural Habitats (as defined in World Bank OP 4.04) or in 
any areas protected under the Borrowers legislation for the purposes of conservation.  
 
Due to growing trend towards small scale hydropower stations in Turkey, the concern 
over potential negative impacts to downstream ecosystems also has gained importance.  
In particular, attention has been drawn to the risk of cumulative impacts of multiple 
installations within the same river basin.  The revised environmental policy framework 
introduced an explicit requirement for carrying out cumulative impact assessments in 
addition to individual sub-project EIAs under certain circumstances.   The scope of 
cumulative impact assessments will be introduced to FIs through training(s). Initial 
criteria for identifying when this is required have been included in the EMF, with the 
understanding that these are likely to be refined based on a technical workshop (May 
2011) with local and international experts.  All relevant ministries, agencies and 
stakeholders will be invited to participate in a discussion on the subject of appropriate 
criteria and regulatory requirements.  
 
The Dam Safety Policy Framework document used under the ongoing Project will be 
continue to be used for and is included in the operations manual of the additional 
financing. There have been subprojects where the dam safety safeguard policy has been 
triggered. In all instances, the project sponsor followed the requirements of the policy 
satisfactorily, under the oversight of the FI. A panel of experts was set up, which 
reviewed construction progress periodically. The panel will continue to monitor the dam 
for safety considerations after its completion.  
 
The policy on International Waters was not triggered under the ongoing Project because 
it was agreed that hydro power projects would be financed only in a specified list of 
domestic river basins.  This was reflected in the legal agreements for the ongoing project 
in the form of a list of the river basins where hydro subprojects could be located. The 
same approach and the same list will continue to be used under the proposed additional 
financing.  
 
For any land acquisition involving taking of private land or economic displacement, the 
FIs will prepare Land Acquisition Plans (LAP) in line with the OP 4.12 Involuntary 
Resettlement safeguard policy and Turkish legislation to mitigate any temporary and 
permanent impacts and submit same for World Bank#s prior approval.  In cases where 
land acquisition has been completed prior to the sponsor approaching an FI with a 
proposal for project financing, the LAP will be prepared and submitted to the World 
Bank for review at that time, and the financing for the sub-project will be approved only 
if it is demonstrated that the land acquisition was carried out in a manner compliant with 
Page  4
OP 4.12.   The Operational Manual specifies the process for this.   Based on the 
experience of the ongoing project, the FIs would also improve project reporting, 
documentation and monitoring by elaborating more information in their LAPs.  
 
All of the issues mentioned above were addressed in the updated Environmental Policy 
and Resettlement Policy Framework documents.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is likely to have significant positive environmental benefits through reduced 
GHG emissions, which will have benefits both nationally and globally. Some types of 
hydro projects may contribute to cumulative environmental impacts on the river basin, 
which will be addressed through appropriate measures based on cumulative impact 
assessments.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives available for project site, technology and operations will be assessed in the 
individual environmental assessment reports of the sub-projects.  
 
As in the ongoing project, subproject activities will avoid where possible private land 
acquisition, which may have adverse impacts on people and their livelihood sources. In 
situations where this cannot be avoided, the borrower will prepare a Land Acquisition 
Plan (LAP) to address the needs of affected persons affected by loss of economic 
activities, land acquisition and/or resettlement. The LAP will be sent to the Bank for 
review and clearance before it is disclosed publicly in country and on the Bank's infoshop 
prior to commencement of civil works.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment and Social teams established by TKB and TSKB for the first Renewable 
Energy Project have been maintained and strengthened throughout the implementation of 
ongoing Project.  These teams are responsible for implementation and monitoring of the 
environment and resettlement policy frameworks as well as dam safety aspects.  These 
teams have acquired significant experience in the design and implementation of 
environmental and social safeguards, and they regularly participate in the Bank's 
safeguards training workshops and other similar capacity building efforts.  Both FIs are 
committed to strengthening their teams as and when necessary. In addition, they have 
internal systems for assessing the safeguard risks of the sub-project applications. These 
systems will be updated in line with the revisions/additions to the environmental and 
resettlement policy frameworks.  
 
Both FIs will have the obligation to assist prospective developers to prepare 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)/Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and 
Land Acquisition Plan (LAP) (if needed) for their individual facilities in accordance with 
Turkish laws and regulations and the safeguards policies of the World Bank Group, 
Page  5
following the guidelines provided in the EMF and RPF. Typically, the private companies 
and their contractors will be the implementers for most of the mitigation and many of the 
monitoring measures for their investments or subprojects.  The arrangements they 
propose and their capacities to carry them out will be assessed when their individual 
EIA/EMPs and RAPs are reviewed, by FIs, the Bank, and the relevant regulatory 
agencies.  The OM spells out the respective institutional arrangements and 
responsibilities as well as identifies measures for improving the management of the 
potential impacts of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the local populations where individual subprojects are to be 
located, NGOs, Ministry of Environment and Forests and their provincial offices. For 
individual subprojects, the EMF and RPF documents describe requirements and 
procedures for public consultation to be conducted during the EA process as part of any 
EA document preparation as well as EA regulation allows subproject sponsors to carry 
out further consultations if deemed necessary. Individual subproject EA documents will 
be regularly disclosed in the FI websites, in local MoEF offices and in municipal 
buildings with public access and English language versions will be sent to the World 
Bank by the FIs for disclosure in the Infoshop.  Prior to land expropriation, the subproject 
developer and Energy Market Regulatory Authority (EMRA) carry out upstream public 
consultations with potentially affected people.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/04/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/10/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/04/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/10/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
Yes 
Page  7
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shinya Nishimura 
02/17/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Esra Arikan 
02/16/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor 
02/16/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/17/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
02/18/2011 
Comments:   
