                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/09/2011                                  Report No.: AC5807
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P092837                   Original Project Name: UGANDA
                                               TRANSPORT SECTOR
                                               DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
Country: Uganda                                Project ID: P121097
Project Name: Uganda Transport Sector Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Labite Victorio Ocaya
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 18, 2011 Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2011
Managing Unit: AFTTR                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (89%);Public administration- Transportation (11%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (45%);Other urban development
(37%);Infrastructure services for private sector development (14%);Export development
and competitiveness (4%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             75.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project’s development objective is to improve the connectivity and efficiency of the
transport sector through: (i) improved condition of national road network, (ii) improved
capacity for road safety management; and (iii) improved transport sector and national
road management. The initial Project Development Objective remains relevant and there
are no changes to it under the Additional Financing (AF).

3. Project Description
The TSDP and the proposed AF are intended to support a five and half year time slice
(July 2010 to January 2016) of Uganda’s Road Sector Development Program. It consists
of five components: (a) Upgrading of 160 km of gravel roads to paved standard (Gulu-
Atiak; Vurra-Arua-Oraba and Kamwenge-Fort Portal roads). (b) Improve road safety
through the creation of a Road Safety Authority and the establishment of a crash data
base. (c) Preparation of Kampala Urban Transport Project inclusive of preparation of
bidding documents for a Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) infrastructure, procurement of bus
operators and fare collector services and legislation for establishment of a Metropolitan
Area Transport Authority (MATA; (d) Strengthen Ministry of Works and Transport
(MoWT) through the provision of TA, the financing of studies, the provision of training
and equipment, and the financing of project related operating costs. (e) Strengthen
Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) through the provision of TA, the financing of
studies, the provision of training and equipment, and the financing of project related
operating costs.

 The proposed additional Credit would help finance: (i) the paving works and the
associated supervision services of the Kamwenge-Fort Portal road (length 66 kilometers)
and (ii) technical assistance for strengthening the internal audit functions of the Uganda
National Roads Authority for technical audits of road projects. The activities to be funded
out of the additional financing will require an extension to the credit closing date by
about 19 months from June 30, 2014 to a revised date of January 31, 2016.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The Kamwenge-Fort Portal Road (length 66 kilometers) being financed under the
additional financing forms part of the national road Nyakahita-Kazo-Ibanda-Kamwenge-
Fort Portal road (length 209 kilometers). This road connects western Uganda to the
Northern Corridor and the Trans African Highway and has a traffic volume of 574
vehicles per day (1569, inclusive of motor cycles). Composition of the traffic is mainly
light vehicles, with medium to heavy vehicles forming 15 percent of the traffic.. It passes
through a rural area of high agricultural potential for production of food, cash crops and
farm animals, except for the 13.3 km section that crosses Kibale Forest National Park, a
tropical high forest that is a habitat to a habituated population of chimpanzee and several
other primate species.

 The road will be upgraded from gravel to a paved (bituminous) standard with a 6.0 m
wide carriageway and sealed 1.5 m wide shoulders except for the 13.3 km long section
that passes through the Kibale Forest National Park where the total width including
carriageway, shoulder and drainage infrastructure will be limited to remain within the
existing (narrower) footprint of the existing road. Traffic signs and speed control
measures (speed humps) will be installed as well. Physical works will include local
sourcing of construction material (gravel, rock, murram), earth works, reinstatement of
abandoned murram borrow pits (that will no longer be needed to maintain a paved road),
establishment of workers camps and machinery maintenance yards, clearing and
reinstating vegetation, establishment and reinstatement of diversions, installation and
upgrade of culverts and roadside drainage ditches, etc. Except limited earth works and
improvements to road drainage, the above activities will be excluded from the Kibale
Forest National Park section of the road. The widening and re-alignment of the roads will
also result into land taking.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN)
  Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The key safeguards issues stem from potential impacts associated with physical works
and sourcing of construction materials necessary for upgrading the target road from
murram surface to paved (bituminous) surface, operation of temporary workers camps,
land taking, and road safety issues associated with increased travel speed and traffic
volume.

 The physical works include earth works, widening of the roads according to the national
standard, improvements to road drainage infrastructure, operation of road construction
machinery, establishment of temporary workers camps, diversions and traffic disruptions
during road construction, opening and rehabilitation of borrow pits and quarries, removal
and reinstatement of vegetation. For the 13.3 km section of the road passing through the
Kibale Forest National Park, the key issue is associated with avoidance of potential
adverse impacts of road upgrading on the forest and its population of chimpanzees and
other species. Social safeguards issues are associated with land taking in semi urban and
agricultural dependent areas as a result of widening and re-alignment of the roads. Other
social interferences stem from the establishment of temporary road workers camps. Based
on the EIA and RAP and the mitigation measures prescribed therein, the potential adverse
impacts are not anticipated to be large scale or irreversible.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Project area is forecasted to increase traffic 15% annually. Potential indirect and long
term impacts are those associated with rural development in the project area # partly
induced by improvement of the road, and road safety issues which are chronic in Uganda
(on average, 10 people die and 40 people are injured daily on Uganda#s roads).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
For the entire section of the project road, regravelling the existing road with murram was
considered but rejected due to the need for frequent and costly maintenance.

 For the Kibale Forest National Park (KFNP) section of the road, additional alternatives
were evaluated. These included:

 (a) Upgrade to Class II Bitument Standard (including upgrade of surface, width and
speed parameters). This alternative was rejected as such an upgrade would entail
widening of the road and selective removal of roadside trees or vegetation considered an
important part of a known chimpanzee habitat.

  (b) No upgrade of the KFNP section except regravelling with murram. This
alternative was rejected due to need for frequent (every 15 months) regravelling, and
frequency of buses and other vehicles getting stuck within the park during the wet season,
with corresponding damage to vegetation during efforts to unstuck vehicles, exposure of
wildlife to travelers and littering in the park during the unstuck efforts.

  (c) Upgrade using concrete pavers and labor-intensive construction methods. This
alternative was considered and rejected due to high noise from traffic over concrete
pavers, risks to wildlife from a large labor force in the park during road construction, and
risks of damage to pavers from overloaded trucks.

 (d) Upgrade the road surface to bitumen while confining the upgrade works to the
footprint of the existing murram road, limit travel speed to 40 km/hr recommended by
Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA), through installation of speed humps, and prohibit
activities with potential adverse impacts, including workers camps, borrow pits,
vegetation clearance, material disposal, traffic diversions, and heavy vehicle turning in
the park. This alternative was selected as it combines advantages of a bitumen road
surface with avoidance of potential impacts associated with road widening or travel speed
increase.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
(a)     The Borrower prepared and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop, the
Environmental Assessments and Resettlement Action Plans for the proposed 66 km road
upgrade, updating and refining the due diligence documentation prepared for the entire
209 km road between Nyakahita and Fort Portal. In addition to drawing on the broad
consultation with stakeholders, the Borrower carried out a targeted consultation with
conservation NGOs, UWA, Makerere University Biological Field Station in Kibale
Forest, and the local community development foundation with respect to the upgrade of
the road through the Kibale Forest National Park. To assess potential impacts on physical
cultural resources, the Borrower carried out an archaeological survey along the road
corridor.
 (b) The implementing agency --Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) -- has
permanent environmental and social staff experienced with implementing World Bank
projects. UNRA will retain consultants for the implementation of the RAPs while
maintaining its responsibility to monitor the progress and report to IDA quarterly. In
addition, UNRA committed to work closely with UWA and conservation stakeholders
(e.g. the Makerere University Field Station) to oversee the road upgrade through the
national park and monitor its impacts.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in this project are: Uganda National Roads Agency (UNRA),
Ministry of Works and Transport (MoWT), Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA), the local
governments and communities benefiting from the target road, and conservation
community. Consultations with stakeholders were carried out through face to face
meetings in the project area during the preparation of the relevant safeguard policy
instruments, i.e. EIAs and RAPs, and will continue throughout their implementation. In
addition, targeted consultation with conservation stakeholders were carried out during the
EIA update regarding the Kibale Forest National Park section of the road. Safeguards
instruments were disclosed following standard procedures in Uganda (in the capital city,
in the project area, and through public media).



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    02/07/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                02/15/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 02/09/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    02/01/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                02/15/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 02/09/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Labite Victorio Ocaya                     05/03/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Martin Fodor                              05/03/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo                      05/03/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     05/05/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Supee Teravaninthorn                      05/05/2011
  Comments:
