Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/11/2011 
Report No.:  AC5830
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ukraine 
Project ID:  P096586 
Project Name:  UA - ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
Task Team Leader:  Gary Stuggins 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 20, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (70%);Other environment and natural resources management 
(20%);Other financial and private sector development (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to contribute to energy efficiency by industrial and 
commercial companies, municipalities and municipally-owned enterprises and energy 
service companies by facilitating financial intermediaries to finance energy efficiency 
investments   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Bank Loan to UkrEximBank will be a Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL) 
with a [Variable Spread (VSL)] denominated in Euros with [level] repayment of the 
principal.  The IBRD funds will be utilized by UkrEximBank to directly finance eligible 
sub-projects and provide subsidiary loans to other "participating banks" (PBs) for energy 
efficiency sub-projects, with a guarantee by the GoU.  The FIL approach was chosen to 
support a sustainable approach to financing energy efficiency projects which are typically 
very profitable and therefore lend themselves to commercial finance practices   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As the proposed loan is through a financial intermediary UkrEximBank and participating 
financial intermediaries (PBs), the project sites will be at various locations throughout 
Ukraine.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov (ECSS2) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Given the focus of this project and scope of the sub-projects, it is expected that the 
majority of sub-projects would fall into Category B or C. Category A subprojects are not 
excluded from possible financing as they might have large Energy Efficiency gains. 
Appropriate measures to mitigate environmental impacts, monitor sub-projects are put in 
place to ensure full compliance with Bank and Ukrainian Environmental Reqirements by 
the borrowers. All sub-projects to be financed under the EEP will be subject to an 
environmental review process utilizing the procedures described in the Environmental 
Assessment Framework (EAF). This EAF is intended to provide those responsible for 
assessing the viability of sub-projects simple step by step guidelines/procedures to ensure 
that the sub-projects receive the required attention from an environmental and social 
point of view. UEB and PBs will be required to follow these procedures as part of the 
overall appraisal of sub-borrowers/sub-projects. UEB will provide final screening of all 
sub-project including environmental safeguards before clearing them and submitting for 
World Bank No Objection. These procedures are consistent with both the environmental 
policies and regulations of the Government of Ukraine and the Bank (OP/BP 4.01 
Environmental Assessment, Social Assessment Procedure).  
 
Sub-project investments supported by the project involve modifications or system 
improvements within existing facilities. Sub-projects which could necessitate land 
acquisition are not anticipated. In the unlikely event that a sub-project that requires land 
acquisition is proposed for financing, it must be documented that land acquisition was 
Page  3
made on a willing seller - willing buyer basis and that the land purchased did not require 
the displacement of encroachers or informal land users. Sub-project investments which 
necessitate land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement will not be financed under 
this project. Similarly, sub-projects for which technical success is linked to other 
interventions or investments which do require involuntary resettlement will not be 
supported by the project.  
 
An example of a possible Category A project is an existing Cement Plant that is 
designed to change from a wet to a dry process, cutting the energy use in about half.  
 
The World Bank will keep full responsibility for prior review of all Category A sub-
project EIAs and Executive Summaries of EIAs for any category A sub-projects will be 
provided to the World Bank Board.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Implementation of Energy Efficiency Projects by FIs will have positive environmental 
impacts, through reduced energy consumption and air pollution.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
UkrEximBank has adequate capacity (including an Environmental Engineer and two staff 
who attended in 2008 WB Safeguards training workshop in Georgia and one in Moldova) 
and are performing well in this capacity at EDP 2 Project. They have been satisfactorily 
following the environmental guidelines embedded in EDP 2 project and will be working 
with environmental guidelines in form of Environmental Assessment Framework 
document were embedded in the Project's Operational Manual. Therefore UkrEximBank 
has qualified technical staff for assuring compliance with Ukrainian environmental 
assessment safeguards. However, they and PBs have all indicated that they wish 
additional training to develop their skills to implement any additional requirements of the 
EAF which are needed to satisfy World Bank environmental policies. These additional 
responsibilities include: screening in accordance with World Bank criteria; providing 
Sub-borrowers with guidance in EA/environmental management plan (EMP), 
Environmental Info Sheet preparation, and supervision and reporting activities. The 
World Bank project team will conduct safeguards training to UkrEximBank and the PBs 
technical staff in these aspects during the project launch mission. The project team 
environmental specialist will provide the dedicated safeguards staff of the UkrEximBank 
and PBs a series of training sessions on implementation of the EAF during project 
preparation, loan effectiveness, and for their first few sub-project applications. The 
project team environmental specialist will organize one day to two day workshops 
(depending on number of participants) which would be a very efficient and cost-effective 
way of training, providing hands-on experience and building capacity. The potential 
environmental impacts to be associated with the anticipated sub-projects are either minor 
or negligible. Therefore, these arrangements are considered acceptable.   
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are UkrEximBank, the Borrower, the participating private 
commercial banks, and industrial companies who are going to be the sub-borrowers for 
the EEP loans. There are expected to about 20-30 sub-loans in various sectors of the 
economy. These are not known ex-ante. The environmental safeguards will be done 
through an Environment Assessment Framework included as part of the EEP Operations 
Manual and will be monitored by the private banks as per the sub-loans applications 
package and by the Borrower as part of project implementation and sub-loan approval 
process. The environmental screening process will identify the environmental category of 
the planned sub-projects and recommend the environmental mitigation procedures as and 
if required.  
 
A
public consultation meeting was held on September 28, 2010 and notifications of the 
meeting were posted in the reputable Governmental newspaper #Uriadovyi Courier# (The 
Governmental Courier) on September 1, 2010, inviting the interested stakeholders to 
participate. The English language version of the EAF and the Minutes of the public 
consultation meeting were disclosed at the Infoshop on October 28, 2010. The short 
overview of EAF is presented in Annex 10 of PAD and full document is included as an 
annex to OM.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/26/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/28/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/28/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gary Stuggins 
01/05/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov 
12/14/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
01/05/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/05/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
01/07/2011 
Comments:   
