Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/17/2011 
Report No.:  AC5960
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P095203 
Original Project Name: Second Export 
Develoment Project 
Country:  Ukraine 
Project ID:  P109649 
Project Name:  EXPORT DEVELOPMENT 2 ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Task Team Leader:  Marius Vismantas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 20, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  Banking (100%) 
Theme:  Export development and competitiveness (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project is Additional Financing (AF) to the existing Second Export 
Development Project (EDP2) and thus will continue with the following original EDP2 
development objectives:  
 
(i) 
Serve as a catalyst to support export and real sector growth in Ukraine during the 
EDP2 implementation period (2006-2011) and beyond (including the proposed period of 
AF implementation of 2011-2013) by providing medium and long-term working capital 
and investment finance to Ukrainian private exporting enterprises; and,  
 
(ii) 
Further improve the ability of the Ukrainian banking sector to provide financial 
resources to the enterprise sector, through further development of intermediation, by 
expanding its depth and breadth through more and better lending products.   
 
3. Project Description 
It is proposed that the current EDP2 closing date of December 31, 2011 is extended by at 
least two years to allow for utilization of resources allocated under AF.  Accordingly, the 
Page  2
AF credit line will be divided into two sub-components: (i) Direct Lending by UEB, and 
(ii) Wholesale Lending to PBs. The AF will scale up the current EDP2 credit line 
administered by the Joint Stock Company #The State Export-Import bank of Ukraine# 
(Ukeximbank or UEB). The AF will allow UEB and the existing and new participating 
banks (PBs) to provide long-awaited financing to a larger number of borrowers - 
Ukrainian exporting enterprises, therefore supporting Ukraine#s economic renewal, 
encouraging exports growth, and increasing the project#s reach and impact. The longer-
term resources of EDP2 AF will also help banks better mix funding maturities and 
improve liquidity that were among the major constraints for banks during the crisis, thus 
increasing financial intermediation and access to finance for new borrowers.  
 
The AF will not require any changes in the project development objective. It will scale 
up the effect of the original project not only during the implementation period, but also 
beyond that period as UEB and the participating private commercial banks (PBs) will use 
the reflows repaid from the initial sub-borrowers to finance new investments before the 
funds are returned to the World Bank.  
 
The export-oriented enterprises such as Nibulon, Ukrplastic, Rapid, Vozko, Vesta 
Dnipro and many similar enterprises which were the sub-borrowers under EDP1, EDP 2 
and became the most known and leading exporters in Ukraine with majority private 
ownership will be the final beneficiaries of the credit line. The credit line will finance 
medium term working capital (e.g. raw materials and other inventory for industrial 
production, manufacturing, agricultural processing, etc) and investment loans (e.g., 
machinery, equipment, and civil works) with no sector restrictions except for the 
production of goods agreed on the WB#s negative list.  The credit line resources will be 
on-lent to enterprises by UEB directly, as well as through eligible commercial banks, on a 
30/70 split basis, meaning that USD 45 million will be on-lent by the UEB to sub-
borrowers directly, while another USD 105 million will be provided by UEB on a 
wholesale basis to participating banks, for further on-lending to eligible sub-borrowers.  
 
There will be no changes in the AF to the eligibility criteria for sub-borrowers, or in the 
implementation arrangements.  Some minor adjustments are made to the eligibility for 
UEB and the PBs, specifically the Foreign Currency (FX) limits and liquidity ratios 
requirements will be brought in compliance with the prudential requirements of the 
National Bank of Ukraine.  
 
The proposed restructuring will not affect the environmental category of the Project and 
will not trigger new safeguard policies.  
 
The Loan amount proposed for this AF is USD 150 million, which is based on the 
pipeline of prospective sub-projects and absorption capacity of UEB and other PBs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As the proposed loan is through a financial intermediary Ukreximbank and participating 
financial intermediaries (PBs), the project sites will be at various locations throughout 
Page  3
Ukraine. General characteristics of the sites observed during the EDP2 project 
implementation are common to industrial areas of existing project facilities (e.g., large 
industrial company sites) situated usually far from residential sites or within the limit of 
sanitary protection zones (SPZ) allocated by sanitary/environmental authorities. The 
CJSC #Centravis Production Ukraine# company, for example, is producing pipes of 
different diameters and the production area is located within the locality of Nikopol city, 
which is situated in the Dnipropetrovsk region (oblast) of central Ukraine. The Sanitary 
Protection Zone (SPZ) for steel tube production facilities at Nikopol is set at 500 meters 
and there are no houses located within the SPZ. Themain production areas in the case of 
agriculture enterprises are located outside villages, at distances far  enough from any 
protected, historical and public recreation areas areas. (e.g., . the residential area in the 
case of Batkivshina sub-borrower is at the distance of 5 kms;while the nearest municipal 
infrastructure facilities (hospital, school etc.) are located about 30 kms away agricultural 
lands in the case of Sribne settlement.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov (ECSS2) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential environmental impacts to be associated with the anticipated sub-projects 
are either minor or negligible. Environmental issues for sub-borrowers, if any, will be 
addressed through the sub-loan environmental eligibility criteria process on a case by 
case basis as it is outlined in the project Operations Manual specifically in the section on 
Environmental screening for EDP2 project. Deviations from the screening proposed and 
implemented under the EDP 2 are not envisioned. Possible temporary impacts of sub-
projects at industrial sites financed under the original project that were observed during 
supervision missions for industrial sites are related to: emissions from stationary sources 
such as boilers, waste generated from industrial processes, water discharged from 
industrial processes and possible sanitary issues, which are all mitigated and monitored in 
line with the site-specific EMP developed for each subproject. Agricultural subprojects 
Page  4
have minor negative impacts usually associated with water use and water discharged and 
waste management. Application/purchase of pesticides/herbicides is prohibited for 
financing under the project and carefully monitored in line with the Bank (outlined in 
Operations Manual) /International (WHO) procedures and Ukrainian legislation.  
 
OP/BP4.12 is not triggered by the EDP2 as in the majority of subprojects the sub-
borrowers use funds for operational capital needs to purchase raw materials or increase 
production capacities of existing lines for which additional land/areas acquisition is not 
required. Also, there were no cases of resettlement of people since the project sites are in 
majority of instances located in industrial zones.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect impact were noted during EDP2 project supervision missions or during the 
review of Environmental Safeguards documents submitted to the Bank.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project alternatives could include different type of subprojects, such as those that are on 
the negative list but not allowed to be financed (e.g., subprojects that include possible 
land acquisition aspects which trigger OP/BP 4.12, or sites where indigenous people 
reside which is triggered by OP/BP4.10).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Ukreximbank has adequate capacity (including an Environmental Engineer and two staff 
who attended WB Safeguards training workshops held in Georgia in Moldova in 2008) 
and is performing well in this capacity during the EDP 2 Project. This staff has been 
satisfactorily following the environmental guidelines embedded in EDP 2 project and will 
be working with environmental guidelines presented as part of the Environmental 
Screening embedded in the Project's Operational Manual. Therefore, Ukreximbank has 
qualified technical staff for assuring compliance with Ukrainian environmental 
assessment safeguards. However, Ukreximbank and the participating private commercial 
banks (PBs) have indicated their wish for additional safeguards training to implement 
additional requirements of the EAF which are needed to implement accordingly the 
World Bank environmental policies. These additional responsibilities include: subproject 
screening in accordance with the World Bank criteria; providing Sub-borrowers with 
guidance in the EA/environmental management plan (EMP) implementation, 
Environmental Info Sheet preparation, and supervision and reporting activities. The 
World Bank project team will conduct safeguards training to Ukreximbank and the PBs 
technical staff in these aspects during the AF project launch mission. Also, the project 
team environmental specialist will provide a series of training sessions to the dedicated 
safeguards staff of the Ukreximbank and PBs.  
 
The environmental safeguards will be applied through an Environment Assessment 
Framework (EAF) included as part of the EDP2 Operations Manual and will be 
Page  5
monitored by the Participating Banks as per the sub-loans applications package and by 
the Borrower (as part of project implementation and sub-loan approval process). The 
environmental screening process will identify the environmental category of the planned 
sub-projects and recommend the environmental mitigation procedures as and if required. 
The EAF was disclosed in 2006 on the Ukreximbank website as well as in Infoshop and 
since that time Safeguard documents are officially posted on Ukreximbank website. The 
contact information of Ukreximbank experts is provided on this website and any advice 
during subproject safeguard implemnettaion could be requested if needed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stake holders are Ukreximbank, the Borrower, Ministry of Finance, the 
participating private commercial banks (PBs), and the private exporters # potential sub-
borrowers for the EDP2 loans.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/27/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/27/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/12/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Marius Vismantas 
12/27/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov 
12/21/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
12/27/2010 
Comments:  Cleared on behalf of Agi Kiss 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
12/28/2010 
Comments:  Cleared by email on December 28, 2010 
