Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5832 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/22/2010 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uruguay 
Project ID: P110965 
Project Name:  Sustainable Industrial Development 
Task Team Leader: Anjali Acharya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 27, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 22, 2011 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (40%);Micro- and SME finance (30%);Central 
government administration (30%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (40%);Small and medium 
enterprise support (35%);Environmental policies and institutions (20%);Export 
development and competitiveness (5%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The primary development objective of this project is to support efforts by the 
Government of Uruguay to increase environmental performance and compliance with 
environmental regulations of small and medium enterprises in key polluting sectors.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
2. 
The project, with a total estimated cost of US$25 million, would be financed by a Sector 
Investment Loan (US$20 million) combined with counterpart financing from the Government of 
Uruguay (US$5 million). Through the proposed project, the Bank will be supporting the efforts 
of the government to implement a broad-based, multi-year program aimed at providing effective 
drivers to control, manage, and prevent industrial pollution through the adoption of cleaner 
production processes and technologies. The program will be targeting polluting SMEs with 
inadequate access to credit and will focus on key sectors in Uruguay. While the dairy and meat 
processing sectors have been pre-identified, other polluting sectors will be identified during 
project preparation. Spatially, the proposed project will also target pollution hotspots with high 
Page  2
SME concentration, such as the Uruguay and Santa Lucia River Basins, and the outskirts of 
Montevideo. The following areas have been identified with GoU to be included under the 
proposed project:  
 
3. 
Pilot program for industrial reconversion and cleaner production in SMEs.  
 
This component will assist a selected group of SMEs in key polluting industrial sectors to 
improve their environmental performance and comply with environmental regulations through 
the adoption of cleaner production technologies and systems to increase the efficiency of the 
plants and processes; minimize the use of resources; control, reduce and/or eliminate toxic inputs 
and emissions to legal limits or below them.  This pilot program would test financing 
mechanisms and demonstrate how cleaner production investments can improve environmental 
compliance, while generating lessons for scaling up this approach in the future. The 
methodology and criteria for selection would be further developed during project preparation, 
but DINAMA has indicated that the financing mechanisms would be structured through a 
demand-driven competitive process, whereby SMEs demonstrate their commitment to attaining 
environmental improvements and compliance through industrial reconversion.  
 
4. 
Water resource management in industrial processes.  
 
This component would seek to: (a) carry out an active water quality monitoring campaign and 
enforcement in key river basins with heavy industrial activities, for which key agencies would 
receive technical support and equipment; (b) promote a rational use of water resources in 
industrial processes; and (c) develop a mechanism of tax incentives to those industries that 
demonstrate a rational use of water resources (recycling, reuse, etc.).  
 
5. 
Alternative mechanisms to command and control.  
 
The project would help formulate mechanisms such as the development of a flag system for 
environmental performance of enterprises, or the promotion of a green brand awarded to 
products certified as having been produced through environmentally sound processes. This 
would help to add public pressure to SMEs that are not compliant with environmental standards 
and could improve the competitiveness of Uruguayan manufactured products in international 
markets.  
 
6. Technical 
assistance. 
 
 
This proposed component would provide technical assistance and capacity building to SMEs 
and related industry associations to: (a) identify cleaner production measures that would help 
improve their environmental compliance, by sector; (b) elaborate technical guidelines and 
prepare subproject proposals; and (c) assist in subproject implementation. These TA activities 
would help build knowledge and capacity within government and among SME owners and staff 
about best available technologies to improve environmental compliance by sector. Additionally, 
the TA would help improve SME access to commercial credit by building credit histories, 
developing formal audited financial statement, etc.; as well as raising awareness among 
commercial banks to provide such credit for SME investments in cleaner production.  
 
7. 
Project management and communications.  
 
This component will support a unit with the technical and administrative capacity needed to 
supervise subprojects and activities at a decentralized level within the Ministerio de Vivienda, 
Page  3
Ordenamiento Territorial y Medio Ambiente (MVOTMA). The Project Implementing Unit (PIU) 
for the project will also benefit from the technical and operational experience gathered in the 
implementation of the CF-Assist Project (also within MVOTMA). This component foresees the 
establishment of a communications unit to promote project activities to SMEs, to disseminate 
lessons learned from project activities, to carry out outreach programs and to help build public 
support for environmental programs within industry associations. The PIU would have the 
responsibility for coordinating project activities among SMEs, the Centro de Producción más 
Limpia Uruguay (CPmL-UY), specific relevant sectors (i.e. agriculture), and with other key 
stakeholders (NGOs, academic institutions, etc.).  
 
8. 
In order to complement the design and methodology of the proposed project, a range of 
environmental, technical, and economic studies, surveys, consultation workshops and pilot 
projects will be undertaken during project preparation. These activities would be financed 
through a recipient-executed Spanish Trust Fund for Latin America and Caribbean (SFLAC) 
grant. These activities include, among others, carrying out baseline industrial studies to identify 
priority sectors for adoption of cleaner production technologies and practices; and diagnostic 
studies that will garner insights into appropriate financing mechanisms for the industrial sector 
(esp. SMEs) in Uruguay.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nation-wide, as potential sub-projects are expected from small and medium enterprises from all 
parts of the country, including industrial hotspots.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project will be executed by DINAMA, through a project implementation unit. 
Staffing will include environmental and social specialists. DINAMA manages the environmental 
assessment system at the national level, relying on technical tools and procedures to determine 
and manage safeguards-related risks. A full capacity assessment will be completed before QER 
in order to determine the institutional strengthening that might be needed.  
 
The MVOTMA, through DINAMA, has made a significant effort at the national level to 
undertake environmental impact assessments. However, the bigger problem is the lack of 
material resources to monitor projects, while co-ordination among the public sectors for their 
control remains a challenge. In addition, DINAMA has not worked under World Bank safeguard 
policies standards so far.  
 
In Uruguay, the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was legally approved through Law 
No. 16.466 in January 1994, which assigns the MVOTMA in the role of national competent 
authority. In September 1994, the law was regulated through the Decree No. 435/994 which 
expanded its scope and set the procedures for its application in practice; with DINAMA (as the 
executing unit within MVOTMA) responsible for the application of the EIA regulations.  
 
The Law also describes a list of works or activities included in the EIA framework, expanded 
and treated more rigorously in the Regulative Decree, and which establishes the procedure for 
the listed works or activities to get prior environmental authorization from MVOTMA. The 
Decree also defines the categorization of works/ activities to be used by MVOTMA. Category A 
Page  4
is for projects with low or no impacts; Category B for those with moderate environmental 
impacts or which partially affect the environment; and Category C for those that have significant 
environmental impacts. Category A does not require an Environmental Impact Study (but does 
not mean that its authorization is not conditioned on mitigation measures). For the other 
categories an EIS must in undertaken either partial (for category B) or comprehensive (for 
category C), including the identification of potential impacts and related mitigation measures.  
 
Advisors or Private Advisory Consulting Firms may be contracted to undertake the EIS and 
present it to MVOTMA for clearance. MVOTMA determines under which preventive and/or 
mitigation measures are authorized. The EIA Law also establishes requirements for public 
participation (for projects classified B or C), including the period for public comment on the 
summary environmental report for the project. In the case of projects with large social impacts, 
MVOTMA can request the inclusion of opinions from existing social actors in the project area.  
 
The EIA System in Uruguay functions at the #project scale#. This means that the assessment is 
done for the proposed project scope, and does not examine project alternatives or the cumulative 
impacts of various other projects in the project area. Strategic Environmental Assessments 
(SEAs) has not been adequately used in Uruguay.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO) 
Mr Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The application of this policy will be managed under the Project through an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF). Specific sub-projects will undergo environmental 
screening following the ESMF guidelines to determine eligibility for financing. Eligible 
subprojects will include only those that can be confirmed to have an environmental 
categorization of Category B (or C); and that do not involve complex issues with regard to other 
environmental safeguards policies including significant impacts on cultural property or natural 
habitats and impacts on critical natural habitats. The sub-projects are thus expected to have 
limited environmental impacts associated with the design and location of the works and the 
management of construction works. These will be managed through an environmental 
assessment process. Cumulative impacts should be highly positive if the systems are built and 
operated with the envisaged high quality supervision and environmental management. 
Cumulative impacts of sub-projects to be selected during implementation will be assessed as part 
of the corresponding EIA, under the ESMF guidelines, and any specific provisions to manage 
these would be included in the relevant Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and 
Environmental Technical Specifications (ETS) for contractors.  
 
Proposed Instrument. The ESMF will be used and applied by DINAMA and all 
participating SMEs charged with the execution of the investment sub-projects. It will provide an 
analysis of the Project setting and baseline conditions and a set of technical guidelines describing 
procedures and institutional responsibilities for assessing and managing the potential 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
environmental and social risks and impacts that could be faced throughout the sub-project cycle. 
This framework will support three essential goals: (a) increasing social and environmental 
sustainability of sub-projects financed under loan; (b) complying with national environmental 
legislation, and (c) complying with Bank's Environmental and Social Safeguards Policies. The 
ESMF will include relevant recommendations and standards from the World Bank Pollution 
Abatement and Prevention Handbook and from the IFC-WBG Environmental, Health and Safety 
Guidelines (2007).  
 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Process. Once specific SMEs investment 
proposals are determined and undergo the initial screening to confirm eligibility and scope out 
the key issues, eligible subprojects will be required to follow the procedures to be outlined in the 
ESMF to ensure compliance with safeguards policies applicable to the subproject. The ESMF 
will include a detailed environmental assessment methodology for the assessment of sub-projects 
including: (a) procedures for environmental and social screening of activities; (b) procedures for 
preparation of EAs and EMPs including draft TORs and guidelines for mitigation measures; (c) 
procedures and guidelines on public consultation and disclosure procedures; (d) procedures for 
clearance of EAs; and (e) procedures for supervision of EMP implementation.  
 
The EMP will include ETS for contractors prepared during Project preparation to avoid and 
reduce impacts on surrounding environments, properties and address social impacts. All sub-
projects will receive the no-objection from the Bank prior to initiation of bidding processes and 
ETS to contractors.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The Project will undergo a general screening during preparation and before QER in order to 
ensure that potential sub-projects will not involve significant conversion or degradation of 
natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
This Project will not involve forest areas. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The Projects will undergo a general screening during preparation and before QER in order to 
ensure that potential sub-projects will not involve the use of pesticides   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The Project will undergo a general screening during preparation and before QER in order to 
ensure that the typology of potential sub-projects will not involve physical cultural resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The project will involve private companies that own their land and assets. Any project 
proposal that either adversely affect Indigenous Peoples or includes them as beneficiaries will 
not be supported. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy is triggered as a precautionary measure. No resettlement associated with the 
activities to be funded is foreseen. However, since the physical interventions relating to cleaner 
production investments for SMEs which would be financed by this project have not yet been 
determined, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared as a precaution.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
This Project will not involve dams. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
This policy will be triggered. Uruguay is located in between the Rio de La Plata and the 
Uruguay river, two international waterways. In addition, the Project would finance water quality 
monitoring campaigns and enforcement in key river basins with heavy industrial activities. 
However, this Project falls under the exceptions to notification requirement provided in 
paragraph 7(a)  of OP 7.50. The team will work with SAT and LEGEN to process a request of 
exception. The request will be based on OP 7.50 as provided for in paragraph 7(a), specifically: 
(i) the proposed Project will not adversely change the quality or the quantity of water flows to 
the Rio de La Plata and río Uruguay and thus not adversely affect possible water use for other 
riparians; and (ii) will not be adversely affected by the possible water use by the other riparians.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
This Project will not include disputed areas. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/04/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It is expected that the Environmental Management Framework for this project will be 
launched and completed before project appraisal (May 2011).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anjali Acharya 
12/20/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
12/21/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karin Erika Kemper 
12/21/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
