Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/07/2011 
Report No.:  AC5751
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P113349 
Project Name:  Health System Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Susanna Hayrapetyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 9, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: April 7, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (98%);Compulsory health finance (2%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (33%);Other communicable diseases 
(17%);HIV/AIDS (17%);Nutrition and food security (17%);Child health (16%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
93.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.00
8.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall Project Development Objective (PDO) is to: (1) improve access to quality 
health care at the primary and first referral level, and (2) strengthen the Government's 
public health response to the rise in NCDs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project design envisages the following four components:  
 
Component 1: Improving Health Service Delivery (estimated total cost US$82.17 
million equivalent). This component will focus on improving service planning at RMUs, 
refurbishing them with modern biomedical equipment, and improving skills and 
competencies of clinical staff in disease case management and treatment while focusing 
on most frequently occurring pediatric and non-communicable disease conditions.  This 
component will also advance PHC reforms by expanding general practice PHC model to 
urban areas, strengthening the referral system and improving skills and competencies of 
medical personnel in early diagnosis, screening and treatment of priority NCDs.  
Page  2
Sub-component 1.1: Hospital Services Improvement  
 
This sub-component will finance:  (i) the provision of diagnostic, waste management 
equipment and supplies to the 100 central rayon hospitals; (ii) provision of medical 
furniture; (iii) foreign and local technical assistance on hospital service planning and 
revision of norms and standards for hospital construction; (iv) development of health 
service referral guidelines and mechanisms; (v) development of systematized medical 
equipment maintenance for these hospitals; (vi) study tour for health administrators to 
countries, which have successfully implemented hospital optimization/modernization 
programs and (vii) operational support to the Oblast Hospital Oversight Committees.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Primary Health Care Development  
 
This sub-component aims at providing further support to general practice based PHC 
established and supported under the Health I and II projects. The sub-component will 
support (i) the completion of GP re-training for rural health facilities; (ii) the extension 
and institutionalization of urban primary care general practice model in three oblasts: 
Fergana, Syrdarya, Samarkand, and in Tashkent and (iii) the continuing professional 
development of PHC doctors and nurses through short courses.  
 
Sub-component 1.3: Clinical Quality Enhancement  
 
The key aim of the sub-component is to strengthen the quality of secondary health care 
through improvement of the clinical skills and competence of health personnel.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Health Financing and Management Reforms (estimated 
total cost: US$4.45 million equivalent). This component aims at: (i) strengthening per 
capita based PHC financing and management reforms that were rolled out nationwide 
under Health II; (ii) strengthening leadership role of the Ministry of Health in health 
financing policy formulation and oversight; (iii) implementing hospital payment system 
reforms at rayon level; and (iv) develop a Health Financing Information System to 
support the implementation of the hospital financing pilot.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening for NCD Prevention & Control (estimated 
total cost US$2.98 million equivalent). The overall aim of this component is to strengthen 
the capacity of Uzbekistan#s public health institutions in effective prevention and control 
of non communicable diseases.  
 
Sub-component 3.1: Health Promotion and NCDs Prevention  
 
This sub-component would focus on increasing awareness of and changing behaviors 
associated with increased risk for hypertension, diabetes and other chronic diseases 
among the population.  
 
Sub-component 3.2: Strengthening Health Surveillance Systems  
 
This sub-component would support the development of epidemiological surveillance 
(including behavioral risk factors) for NCDs, which would be piloted initially in the two 
oblasts with later expansion to routine national level monitoring.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (estimated total cost US$3.40 million equivalent). 
This component will support the management of the financing, administrative, and 
Page  3
overall fiduciary requirements, including providing expertise in project coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation, procurement and financial management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in six Oblasts. Environmental OP 4.01 is triggered as 
the Project would indirectly support the rehabilitation of health facilities financed by the 
Government budget (100 hospitals) with potential improvements in health care waste 
management. In accordance with WB regulations on OP 4.01, the project facilities 
belonging to Category B that requires preparation of EMP for each individual facility, as 
far as rehabilitating works will be implemented within the existing hospital territory and 
there no land acquisition for construction is anticipated.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no large scale construction activities associated with this project all activities 
will be within the existing facilities and most of the activities will be of rehabilitation 
works on existing hospital buildings. There may be few small new construction on 
existing foot print which are not significant nor have irreversible environmental impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no potential indirect or long term impacts on these activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No project alternatives are considered as the project activities will be in existing 
locations.   
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared a Framework Environmental Management Plan (FEMP) to 
screen sub-projects during implementation.  During implementation sub-project specific 
EMPs will be prepared by environment-engineer of Central Project Implementation 
Bureau (CPIB) in accordance with the WB policy for Safeguards and Local Environment 
Law. For minor rehabilitation works the borrower will use Checklist EMP.  
 
The environmental-engineer will be responsible for:  
 
#
development of EMP for each individual sub-projects;  
 
#
tracking of EMP involvement to the bidding documentation for construction works;  
 
#
providing the further monitoring on EMP implementation during construction works;  
 
#
preparing six-monthly report on project implementation;  
 
#
assisting in adaptation of medical wastes management system,  
 
For installing the incinerators, the managers of hospitals will be responsible for 
preparing EA as well as its approval in accordance with Environmental Legislation of the 
RUz, by involving appropriate project organizations.  
 
After construction works and medical equipments being completed and installed, the 
hospital administration will be responsible for equipment operation and wastes treatment. 
External monitoring on medical wastes treatment will be conducted on established 
schedule by representatives of District Sanitary and Epidemiological Station (SES), 
District MOH and District Committees for Nature Protection.  
 
The Project would provide clear environmental management guidelines and training, as 
deemed necessary, for contractors hired for rehabilitation and outfitting of health care 
facilities.  
 
All the activities are in existing facilities therefore, Resettlement Policy OP4.12 is not 
triggered.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are hospital employees, and local population.  Prior to consultation 
FEMP was disclosed at the official website of the ministry of health and the public 
consultations were advertised in the national newspaper.  The participants (around 58) 
were representatives of various medical institutions of Tashkent city and regions of the 
Republic, State Sanitary and Epidemiological services, State Nature Protection 
Committee and citizens of Tashkent.  
 
During project design and implementation, a consultation plan will be developed to 
include local communities and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in the 
development of the project. The site-specific EMPs will be shared with NGOs and local 
communities. Environmental Engineer of CBPI will be responsible and reporting for 
Page  5
conducting these consultations. Consultation activities will also include community and 
NGO participation in facility design, scheduling construction hours, traffic management, 
effects on local businesses, and establishing a system for the public to register complaints 
related to project activities. The plan should include an approach to public liaison so that 
NGOs and communities are engaged with the facilities throughout their operating life.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/30/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Page  6
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Susanna Hayrapetyan 
11/30/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Johnson Appavoo 
12/01/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abdo S. Yazbeck 
01/07/2011 
Comments:   
