Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/10/2010 
Report No.:  58455
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P111760 
Project Name:  Syrdarya Water Supply Project 
Task Team Leader:  Pier Francesco Mantovani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 10, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
88.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.00
12.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project development objective (PDO) is to improve the availability, quality, and 
sustainability of public water supply service in selected districts of the Syrdarya region.  
 
The objective is to be achieved through rehabilitation, replacement, and limited 
expansion of water supply infrastructure and through institutional capacity building of the 
Syrdarya Regional Suvokova (SRVK) utility. Capacity building will in particular aim at 
improved operations and maintenance and at systematic billing and collection of user 
charges, to cover annual cash operating expenses (including repairs and maintenance) and 
a
marginal share of annual debt service as agreed with GOU.  
 
Progress towards the PDO during project implementation will be measured through the 
following performance indicators: (i) percentage of people with access to improved water 
supply service (core indicator); (ii) percentage of water samples meeting potable quality 
standards; (iii) increased water consumption of the served population (iv) number of 
piped households with water meters; (v) improved financial working ratio of SRVK; (vi) 
number of water utilities supported by the project (core indicator); and vii) improved 
energy efficiency of the water supply systems (reduced specific energy consumption per 
liter).   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Government launched the preparation of the Project with a PHRD-funded feasibility 
study managed by Uzkommunkhizmat.  The following feasibility study sections were 
completed and submitted to the Bank, as drafts in January 2010, and as final drafts in 
April 2010: i) Technical, and Economic Feasibility; ii) Financial and Commercial 
Feasibility; iii) Social Assessment; and iv) Environmental Impact Assessment.  
 
The Project will comprise the following components:  
 
Project Component A: Improvement of Water Supply Infrastructure (total estimated cost 
US$96.49 million of which IDA is US$83.79 million) - This component will finance 
rehabilitation and limited expansion of water supply systems, including production, 
conveyance and distribution works, in five districts in the Syrdarya region, namely: 
Akaltyn, Bayaut, Mirzaobad, Sardoba and Khavast, including the provision of: (1) related 
design and supervision services; (2) operations and maintenance equipment; (3) spare 
parts; (4) information systems; (5) a pilot for supervisory control and data acquisition 
system (SCADA), and (6) water quality laboratories, through the carrying out of works 
and the provision of goods and consultants# services.  
 
The following sub-components will be financed:  
 
Sub-Component A1: Physical Investments. Physical investments will be divided into 
two sub-regional areas; Area 1- Sardoba/Akaltyn and Area 2 # Bayaut/Khavast (refer to 
annex 4 for details). Selection of communities/villages in the respective investment areas 
will be done in close participation with the community through their respective Mahalla 
committees.  
 
Area 1: Sardoba and Akaltyn sub-region. The extent of rehabilitation and extension of 
water supply production, transmission and distribution systems in this area will be as 
follows: i) Rehabilitation of all settlements in Sardoba district; ii) Rehabilitation of all 
settlements in Akaltyn district, except for Shodlik town; iii) Rehabilitation of three towns 
in Mirzaobad district; iv) Rehabilitation of settlements in the north-western part of 
Khavast district (Mekhnatobad zone).  
 
Area 2: Bayaut/ Khavast sub-region. Rehabilitation and extension works in this area will 
be as follows: i) Partial rehabilitation of settlements in Bayaut district; ii) Full 
rehabilitation of Khavast district except Mekhnatobad zone; and iii) rehabilitation of the 
town of Birlashgan in the Mirzaobad district.  
 
Sub-Component A2: Operations and Maintenance Assistance. The Project will finance 
the procurement of equipment and spare parts for improved operations and maintenance 
of the newly rehabilitated water supply system (refer to Figure 4-7 in Annex 4), central 
and site laboratory to carry out complex water quality analysis and  installation of a pilot 
SCADA system to assist with monitoring and controlling the operating conditions of the 
water network.  
 
Sub-Component A3: Implementation Consultants. The Project will finance procurement 
of Implementation Consultants that will assist the Syrdarya Regional vodokanal and the 
PCU in the following areas of project implementation - Detailed design, preparation of 
bidding documents, assistance during award of contracts and construction supervision.  
 
Component B: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (total estimated cost 
US$1.76 million of which IDA is US$1.76 million) - The Syrdarya Regional Vodokanal 
(SRVK) and its district level vodokanals  feature broad capacity weaknesses in terms of 
Page  3
qualified management and operational staff, information systems and methods needed to 
operate and maintain large water supply systems.  SRVK in particular lacks adequate 
capacity to manage customers, install and read meters, issue bills and collect them, and 
detect, maintain and repair system failures.  
 
The Project will in particular finance the following sub-components (refer to Annex 4 
for details):  
 
Sub-Component B1: Improvement of Utility Management and Operational Practices:A 
consulting firm will be retained to provide consulting service for the design, 
implementation or support of the institutional strengthening activities. In addition, the 
establishment of modern customer service capacity at SVRK, will benefit from the 
expertise and systems acquired in recent years by Tashkent Vodokanal (TVK).  A 
Technical Cooperation agreement for capacity building,  technical support and software 
provision will be put in place with Mussafo Obi Hayot LLC (subsidiary of Tashkent 
Vodokanal) to promote learning and the exchange of knowledge and applied experience 
in the water sector in Uzbekistan.  
 
Sub-Component B2: Institutional Assessment and Local PSP Study. The Project will 
finance an institutional assessment of the formal and informal arrangements and 
capacities in place to deliver water supply services. The study will examine the 
organization and capacity of the SRVK and district vodokanals # Akaltyn, Bayaut, 
Khavast, Mirzaobad and Sardoba, and investigate the informal roles and capacities of 
local mahallas and shirkats.  The study will make recommendations for improved 
organization and increased capacity in the vodokanals while assessing opportunities for 
outsourcing of selected vodokanal tasks to local private entrepreneurs.  
 
Sub-component B.3 Training Activities  for Utility Staff and Management (local and 
international) Training will be provided to staff in the rayon Vodokanals, Mahallas and 
Shirkats so that they are equipped with the information needed to communicate to project 
beneficiaries. Consumer orientation training will improve staff responsiveness to user 
concerns and complaints and will build on the Bank funded technical assistance aimed at 
improving Customer Relationship Management (CRM) in Bukhara vodokanals. More 
advanced or specialized training will be offered to Vodokanal management and technical 
staff through formal training study tours at foreign equivalent size utilities, technology 
vendors, suppliers, and training institutes.  
 
Sub-component B.4: Utility Management Equipment and Software:  This will include 
computer hardware and accessories for vodokanal management, operation & 
maintenance, billing & accounting, laboratory; relevant vodokanal software such as GIS, 
CAD and hydraulic modeling warehouse management and material procurement software 
packages; latest high accuracy satellite images of all project areas; equipment for 
operation and maintenance; domestic water meter test bench, repair and assembling 
equipment workshop tools, machinery and accessories;  basic management information 
system (MIS), or database for the collection of operational, financial management and 
results indicators data during project implementation.  
 
Sub- Component B5: Communication Strategy and Public Awareness Campaigns- given 
that improved water supply will increase consumption of water in the region, public 
awareness campaigns will be carried out and aimed to improve public hygiene practices, 
water conservation, and educate the public about the Project#s expected health and 
Page  4
environmental benefits and the need for regular tariff payments to support O&M 
operations.  
 
Sub-Component B.6: Consumer Satisfaction Surveys. Customer satisfaction surveys 
will be designed and conducted annually, to monitor water supply situation and Project 
impacts among various stakeholder categories, duly sampled for the socio-economic 
level, location, and status of water supply.  
 
Component C: Feasibility Studies for Future Sewerage Investments (total estimated cost 
US$0. 75 million of which IDA is US$0.75 million). Under the management of the 
central government, this component will finance consultant studies to identify sewerage 
investments needs in the Syrdarya Region. It is envisaged that the feasibility study will 
help financiers to consider financing the wastewater infrastructure sector in the Syrdarya 
region. The component will be executed by the Uzkommunkhizmat with support from the 
PCU.  
 
Component D: Project Management (total estimated cost US$1.7 million of which IDA 
is financing US$1.7 million)  
 
Subcomponent D1: US$ 1.0 million. This component will finance the Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU), and its branches in Syrdarya, along with their operating costs, 
technical assistance and capacity building needs. The component will also finance 
monitoring and evaluating (M&E) of project activities: technical, environmental and 
social monitoring (for example, periodic beneficiary assessments to determine consumer 
satisfaction, connection rates, and the effectiveness of public awareness campaigns). 
Implementation consulting and technical assistance costs for design and supervision of 
project investments and for vodokanal capacity building are included in components A 
and B, respectively.  
 
Subcomponent D2: US$0.7 million.  Annual financial audits of district vodokanals 
and/or newly established inter-district vodokanal.   
 
The total expected IDA financing for the proposed Project is expected to be US$88 
million, complemented by GOU#s co-financing of US$12 million, before tax.  GOU#s 
will further contribute by waiving or paying applicable taxes (VAT estimated at 18% or 
US$ 18 million). The equivalent cost of US$268 per capita of the beneficiary populations 
is relatively high and is explained by the dire state of the existing infrastructure and by 
the need for long-distance conveyance of water for those towns where nearby 
groundwater sources are of such poor quality that they cannot be treated economically to 
meet drinking water standards.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will target rehabilitation of water supply infrastructure works in the Syrdarya 
Province located in the center of Uzbekistan on the left bank of Syrdarya River. The 
project area covers five rayons: Akaltyn, Bayaut, Khavast, Mirzaobad, and Sardoba. 
These rayons are located in the southern and central part of the Syrdarya Province, 
stretching from the west to east borders of the province. The total population is 340,000 
in an area of about 4,000 km2. The beneficiaries reside in about 50 towns. The main 
problem of these selected rayons is the scarcity of water resources, access to sources of 
drinking water supply, inadequate condition of the water supply system as well as high 
Page  5
level of ground water (located at about 0.5 # 4 m), which leads to widely spread water 
logging and land salinization in the project area. The source of the water supply in this 
region of Uzbekistan is mainly provided by fresh underground waters that occur naturally 
at 100-500 m depth. The water is provided mainly for domestic and agricultural use 
through main transmission pipe lines from deep intake facilities including of standalone 
wells most of which need urgent rehabilitation and new pumps given their current poor 
ability to function. Most towns in the project area are supplied with water through 
pipelines via gravity given the high elevated location of the existing water intake 
facilities (e.g. Turttom/Sirgali). The groundwater source in the project area is categorized 
as "national significance" and is not hydraulically connected with any international 
waterways.  
 
Safeguard policies are triggered by proposed activities financed under Component A - 
Improvement of the Water Supply Network. Typical activities for this component include 
rehabilitation works of the existing water supply infrastructure, limited expansion of the 
water supply network and possibly works for drilling new deep wells if the rehabilitation 
of some of the existing wells (e.g., in Khavast and Bayaut rayons) will not ensure proper 
functionality based on their pre-inspection. If constructed, the new wells will be located 
next to the existing ones (while the old ones will be properly sealed) and will follow the 
national construction standards and mitigation measures.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mary P. Judd (EASER) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed rehabilitation water supply infrastructure investments will trigger the 
following Bank policies: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; OP/BP 4.12 on 
Involuntary Resettlement; and OP 17.50 on Disclosure Policy. The proposed project is 
categorized as #B,# based on the fact that the project involves mainly rehabilitation of 
Page  6
existing water supply distribution systems (transmission main,  water distribution 
pipelines, water intakes wells and related pumps, pumping stations with integrated 
chlorinators, water towers, replacement of valves, water meters installation) and  new 
installation of 26 km transmission main of 700 mm diameter from Turttom water intake 
to Khavast and Bayaut rayon. Selected new construction of distribution systems that can 
be supplied more economically and sustainably from local groundwater wells is also 
planned under the project.  
 
The rehabilitation related impacts are likely to be localized and efficiently prevented by 
applying international construction practice and planning. Such potential impacts may be 
related to: (i) dust, noise, vibration, temporary access restriction and temporary closure of 
traffic during works, (ii) improper disposal of construction related waste; (iii) temporary 
pollution of soil, groundwater and surface waters as a result of leaching of chemicals 
used sometimes as pipe coating or lining, and by accidental spillage of oil and other 
products used as lubricants and  fuel during works; (iv) lowering of the water table level 
may potentially occur in the close surrounding areas when the excavation of ditches and 
trenches goes deeper than the former; this effect, combined with the decompression of the 
soil, may lead to increased terrain instability with potential risks to nearby infrastructures 
and buildings; (v) impacts and risks associated with leaks and spills of chlorine and other 
chemicals or safety hazards including worker safety specially related to dismantle of 
asbestos pipes; and (vi) chance finds of physical cultural resources. However, these 
impacts will need to be properly managed during the construction phase by the contractor 
and closely supervised by Syrdarya PCU (SPCU), respective vodokanals, and designated 
supervisor engineer.  
 
Construction of the new or replacement water supply pipes may require some 
displacement of commercial or agricultural activities, although the social impact, if any, 
is expected to be minor. The Project's intention is not to displace people but will find 
alternative locations should land be required. Because the exact locations will only be 
known during implementation, the Borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy 
Framework that will describe the process to be followed in the event any enterprises need 
to relocate to allow land to be available for the construction and operation of the water 
supply network, as needed.  
 
No major impacts on Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) are expected during the project 
implementation, yet attention will be paid to the possibility of built PCR being affected 
by dust and vibration during works.  
 
Projects on International Waterway. The project will rely on groundwater to supply the 
population with safe and sufficient water. The OP/BP 7.50 is not triggered because the 
groundwater to be accessed is not connected hydrologically with the Syr Darya river or 
any other international waterway. The EA evaluation concluded that the additional water 
amount extracted as a follow-up to the new project investments will remain in the limits 
of the operational reserves and utilization of fresh saline underground waters deposits 
(thousand cubic meters/day) approved by the national legislation. Consequently, the team 
Page  7
assessment based on consultation with LEGEN is that the project interventions do not 
trigger the OP/BP 7.50.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). A screening during project preparation 
established that the proposed project is not expected to involve land acquisition as the 
focus of the project will be rehabilitation and/or replacement of the existing water supply 
infrastructure. Should land be needed for these investments, the project plans to us state-
owned land which is located on existing rights of way designated for municipal 
infrastructure, and not occupied by residents (legal or illegal) or enterprises.  
 
Although the need for and locations of new pipelines have not been established, a 
reconnaissance of the potential sites where new construction may occur suggests that the 
project may necessitate the (temporary) relocation of households, private and other 
enterprises, or that it may lead to a loss of access to assets or a loss of income sources for 
certain people living in the project area. The screening confirmed that there are a lot of 
illegally taken plots and unauthorized buildings/structures, including additions to houses, 
cattle-pens, warehouses, garages, toilets, sheds, vegetable gardens, etc., as well as 
electrical, gas and phone networks in the project area. Some of these structures are 
located near Suvokova facilities and networks, near non-functioning or functioning 
artesian wells, water towers, over WSNs and SNs, near gas and electrical networks, as 
well as too close to residential buildings.  
 
To avert any negative social or economic impacts on persons losing access to land, 
assets and income as a result of the project a Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) was 
prepared by the Borrower. The purpose of the RPF is to clarify the policies and principles 
and organizational arrangements for the delivery of compensation and other entitlements 
in the event that land acquisition and/or displacement occurs; the process by which these 
will be determined and delivered; and arrangements for possible grievance redress 
mechanisms as well as independent monitoring of the implementation of a specific 
resettlement plan (RP) or abbreviated resettlement plan (if impacts are minor or fewer 
than 200 people are displaced) that may become necessary as a result of the Project. For 
any project component requiring land acquisition, specific RPs consistent with the 
principles in this RPF will be submitted to the Bank for approval when detailed 
investment planning information and the scope of the civil works becomes available, and 
the extent of the land acquisition needed for the investment is known.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Water and soil pollution could remain temporarily affected during operational phase of 
the project (once works are finalized) due to accidental water bursts (at pumping stations 
or along the rehabilitated water supply networks) potential natural disasters and extreme 
climate events (e.g. floods, earthquakes) or improper household wastewater management 
generated due to the new domestic water use in the project area. Also, there is the 
possibility of some risks to health and safety of operation personnel due to inappropriate 
handling or accidental release of chlorine at those water distribution systems that require 
use of chlorination equipment for disinfection purposes. Overall and in the long-term, the 
Page  8
project is expected to have a positive impact on the environment and on the 
beneficiaries#quality of life. With an improved access to basic services infrastructure 
provided by the project, beneficiaries will improve their health condition while at the 
same time reducing their expenditures to get basic services that are located farther away 
prior to the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The least cost analysis performed during project preparation as part of the FS considers a 
total of six project alternative supply options (e.g., two for each of the sub-areas 1, 2 and 
3
covering the 5 rayons financed by the project investments). The options for Area 1 
include works regarding water supply by gravity from the southern Turttom/Sirgali 
wellfield or water supply by gravity from the southern Turttom/Sirgali wellfield to the 
southern part of Area 1 but with three independent local groundwater supplies for three 
towns in northern Akaltyn; the options for Area 2 consist of works regarding pumping 
water from the northern Beshbulok wellfield or pumping water for the northern part of 
Area 2 from the northern Beshbulok wellfield and provision of water supply by gravity 
for sections of the southern part from the southern Turttom/Sirgali well-field; the options 
for Area 3 includes works related to pumping water from the northern Beshbulok 
wellfield through existing supply lines or pumping water from a central, existing but 
deteriorated, Balikchi well-field that would have to be rehabilitated. The least cost 
solution is to rely on the Turttom/Sigali wellfield for gravity supplies to supply Areas 1 
and 3 while relying on the Beshbulok wellfield to supply Area 2 by pumping. The choice 
of gravity supplies for Areas 1 and 3 would have the additional (unquantified) benefits of 
facilitating the operations and maintenance of the system.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Syrdarya Regional Production Organization "Suvakova" with the headquarters in 
Guliston is responsible for water supply and waste water services in the Syrdarya 
Province and reports to the State Agency "Uzkommunkhizmat." An EIA with EMP 
satisfactory to the Bank requirements and related national laws was prepared by 
Uzkommunkhizmat to help them implement the necessary measures to minimize 
potential negative environmental impacts and implement the project in an 
environmentally sound and sustainable manner. In order to ensure adequate 
implementation of the necessary measures and monitoring aspects, the specific provisions 
in the EMP and good construction practices will be incorporated in the contractors# 
bidding documents.  
 
The Borrower's institutional capacity for addressing safeguard policies is built on the 
ongoing experience implementing the Bukhara and Samarkand Water Supply Project.  
The overall capacity to oversee safeguard management aspects needs be strengthened 
through regular on-site supervision of the central and local Project Coordination Units 
during the implementation of the proposed project. This should include routine 
monitoring of the environmental and social aspects noted in the project EMP and in the 
technical specifications listed in the civil works contracts.  Capacity of the local and 
Page  9
regional project entities will be built during project implementation and through regular 
Bank supervision missions.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the population in the project areas, Uzkommunkhizmat, 
Syrdarya Vodokanal and respective Hokimiyats, local relevant institutions involved in 
monitoring of environmental and social aspects, as well as consultants/supervisor 
engineers hired by Borrower to properly implement the project. The draft EA with EMP 
acceptable to Bank standards was subject to one public consultation and disclosure by 
Uzkommunkhizmat and Suvokova (SPIU) to stakeholders involved and benefiting from 
the proposed project investments. Public discussions on the draft report took place in 
each of the 5 selected rayons during November-December 2009. The draft report 
including minutes of theses public meetings as well as the Bank review was finalized, re-
disclosed in country in local language and disclosed in English in Infoshop in February 
2010. Similarly, the project Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) was prepared by the 
Borrower and disclosed in country in February 2010. The RPF calls for development of 
specific RPs during project implementation that will be submitted to the Bank for 
approval when detailed investment planning information and the scope of the civil works 
becomes available.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/26/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/04/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/04/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/17/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/04/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/09/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  10
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pier Francesco Mantovani 
09/16/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
09/16/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary P. Judd 
09/16/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
09/17/2010 
Comments:  ISDS updated on 9/18/2010 to reflect change in financing scope. 
