Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/21/2011 
Report No.:  AC6145
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P118197 
Project Name:  Alat and Karakul Water Supply Project 
Task Team Leader:  Pier Francesco Mantovani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
19.90
19.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve the coverage, quality, 
and efficiency of public water supply services in the two districts (rayons) of Alat and 
Karakul in the Bukhara region.  The objective would be achieved through rehabilitation 
and/or replacement of the existing water supply infrastructure that has now reached the 
end of its useful life as well as through the expansion of network coverage to new urban 
and rural service areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will comprise the following components:  
 
1. 
Component A: Physical investments (total estimated cost US$38.70 million of 
which IDA US$18.80 million): This component will finance the detailed design, 
construction, and works supervision of rehabilitation and expansion works on existing 
water production, conveyance, and distribution systems, including metered user 
connections, in the two rayons of Alat and Karakul. This also includes the procurement of 
operations and maintenance equipment. The following sub-components will be financed:  
 
Page  2
(a) 
Sub-Component A1: Implementation Consultants (estimated cost US$3.05 
million, of which IDA is US$3.05 million). The Project will finance procurement of 
international Implementation Consulting firm that will assist the Bukhara Regional 
vodokanal and the PCU in the following areas of project implementation: (a) review, 
assessment and optimization of the feasibility study; (b) preparation of detailed design, 
preparation of bidding documents, assistance during award of contracts and construction 
supervision, including monitoring and evaluation; (c) technical assistance utility 
operations and management; and (d) feasibility study of the rural water supply systems, 
including the definition of community participatory approaches.  
 
(b) 
Sub-Component A2: Water production and bulk transmission system (total 
estimated cost US$27.01 million of which IDA is US$11.93 million) - This component 
will finance the rehabilitation and expansion of water production and transmission 
systems including the rehabilitation of the water intake, the rehabilitation and expansion 
of the pre-treatment and treatment facilities, the rehabilitation of the 24 km transmission 
system from Dvoinik intake to the town of Alat, the rehabilitation of 13 km transmission 
system from the town of Alat to the town of Karakul, and the rehabilitation and 
expansion of the transmission pumping stations and related water tanks. The increase in 
water production and transmission capacity from 14.000 m3 per day currently to about 
40,000 m3 per day will allow service coverage expansion both in the urban and rural 
areas of the districts of Alat and Karakul.  
 
(c)Sub-Component A3:  Water distribution systems (total estimated cost US$6.44 
million of which IDA is US2.85 million).  This component will finance the rehabilitation 
and extension of water distribution systems, including treated water tanks, treated water 
pumping stations, disinfection systems, distribution networks, as well as the metering of 
about 7,200 existing household connections and the implementation of about 1,600 new 
meter household connection in the towns of Alat and Karakul.  
 
(d)Sub-Component A4:  Operations and Maintenance Equipment and Facilities (total 
estimated cost US$0.90 million of which IDA is US$0.40 million).  The Project will 
finance the procurement of operational machinery, vehicles and equipment, and related 
spare parts for improved operations and maintenance of the newly rehabilitated water 
supply system.  
 
(e)Sub-Component A5: Rural Water Systems Design Consultants (estimated cost 
US$1.30 million, of which IDA is US$0.0.57 million). The Project will finance 
procurement of design Consultants that will assist the Bukhara Regional vodokanal and 
the PCU in the detailed design of the Alat and Karakul rural water systems including the 
definition of community participatory approaches.  
 
2. Component B: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (estimated cost is 
US$0.40 million, of which IDA financing is US$0.40 million).  This component will 
finance:  (a) an assessment of the Alat and Karakul vodokanals and development of a 
business plan for improvements in their management and operation; (b) an assessment of 
BVK operations and management including its role in coordination of the water and 
Page  3
sanitation sector in the Bukhara region; (c) training to the staff of the Bukhara, Alat and 
Karakul Vodokanals in utility management, billing, collection, internal auditing, 
accounting and record keeping, and customer relations; (d) equipment and software 
necessary to improve the management and operations of the vodokanals;  and (e) training 
program for vodokanal staff and management.  
 
3. Component C: Feasibility Studies for Future Sewerage Investments in Alat and 
Karakul towns (estimated cost US$0.30 million of which IDA is US$0.30 million). This 
component will finance consultant studies to identify sewerage investments needs in the 
towns of Alat and Karakul. It is envisaged that the feasibility study will help financiers to 
consider financing the wastewater infrastructure sector in these towns.  
 
4. Component D: Project Management (total estimated cost US$0.50 million of which 
IDA is US$0.50 million). This component will finance (i) incremental staffing, 
equipment and software at the BPCU and (ii) monitoring and evaluating (M&E) of 
project activities including customer surveys, (iii) annual financial audits of the project 
accounts and the district vodokanals and technical audits of the Project investments.  The 
Bukhara Vodokanal audit is financed from the Bukhara and Samarkand Sewerage 
Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover urban areas of the Alat and Karakul towns in Bukhara region of 
Uzbekistan which is adjacent to the border of Turkmenistan.  The town of Karakul 
(22,000 people) is about 60 km south-west from Bukhara city, and connects to the town 
of Alat (12,000 people) 15 km further through the highway M-37. The Alat town is 
located about 20 km away from the Uzbek-Turkmen border.  
 
The source of water for the cities of Alat and Karakul is the water of the Amu Darya 
River, which is an international waterway. The main water supply intake facility (called 
Dvoinik) that requires partial rehabilitation is located on the Amu-Bukhara canal - an 
irrigation channel that derives water from the Amu-Darya River approximately 15km 
upstream - at the border line with Turkmenistan. The Dvoinik site includes several 
infrastructure facilities such as the intake itself, sedimentation ponds, and a pumping 
station. The exact location of the water supply intake facility Dvoinik is in an area 
between Uzbek and Turkmen borders, but on the territory of Uzbekistan (as confirmed by 
the Government based on official maps).  
 
The quality of the intake water is high in turbidity and salinity; although the project area 
might have been impacted by extensive agricultural practices, traced concentration of 
pesticides have not been detected at the Dvoinik location based on analysis carried out by 
the Bukhara regional center of State sanitary epidemiological control.  
 
Two main reservoirs - Tudakul and Talimarjam - are both located off-stream and are 
quite far from the project's intake (e.g., 280 km). A dam is located on the Amu-Bukhara 
channel near the town of Farab about 10 km upstream of the intake in Turkmen territory. 
Page  4
However, this dam acts mainly as a water distribution facility and does not serve the 
function of water storage.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSS4) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is categorized as #B# in line with the OP/BP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment based on the fact that the project involves mainly 
rehabilitation and expansion of existing water supply infrastructure (e.g., distribution 
systems, transmission networks, treated water pumping stations, Dvoinik water intake, 
pre-treatment and treatment facilities) for potable water production and transmission in 
Alat and Karakul towns.  
 
The rehabilitation related impacts are localized and will be efficiently mitigated by 
applying international construction practice and planning. Such potential impacts may be 
related to: (i) dust, noise, vibration, temporary access restriction and temporary closure of 
traffic during works, (ii) improper disposal of construction related waste; (iii) temporary 
pollution of soil, groundwater and surface waters as a result of leaching of chemicals 
used sometimes as pipe coating or lining, and by accidental spillage of oil and other 
products used as lubricants and  fuel during works; (iv) impacts and risks associated with 
leaks and spills of chlorine and other chemicals or safety hazards including worker safety 
specially related to dismantling of asbestos pipes; and (v) chance finds of physical 
cultural resources. These impacts will need to be properly managed during the 
rehabilitation phase by the contractor and closely supervised by Bukhara PCU, and 
designated supervisor engineer.  
 
Projects on International Waterways. The project will rehabilitate and expand capacity 
of the existing Dvoinik water intake which is located on an irrigation canal that draws 
Page  5
water from the Amu Darya River, an international waterway. The rehabilitation works 
will increase the amount of water abstracted from 14.000 m3 per day currently to 40.880 
m3 per day, which will allow service coverage expansion both in the urban and rural 
areas of the districts of Alat and Karakul. Formal treaties are in place between Uzbekistan 
and Turkmenistan for the shared management and use of Amudarya waters. Statements 
from responsible government agencies were received confirming that the additional 
volumes to be extracted due to the project are within the share of Amudarya waters 
allowed for Uzbekistan. Nevertheless, in line with OP/BP 7.50, the Government of 
Uzbekistan has notified riparian countries (Turkmenistan) about the scope of the project 
and relevant investments. Comments on project information are requested and shared 
with the Bank within 30 days from the date of letter submission to riparians (e.g., April 4, 
2011).  
 
No major impacts on Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) are expected during the project 
implementation, yet attention will be paid to the possibility of built PCR or chance finds 
being affected by dust and vibration during works.  
 
The project will also finance the detailed design and works supervision of rehabilitation 
and expansion works on existing water production in rural areas as well as feasibility 
studies (FS) for future sewerage investments in Alat and Karakul. The TORs for these 
studies will ensure that environmental and social safeguard issues are addressed, such 
that the resulting design/FS would be acceptable for World Bank investment.  
 
The water supply system that supplies the Alat and Karakul districts relies on the water 
intake on the Amu-Bukhara channel. A structure is located on this channel near the town 
of Farab, 10 km upstream of the intake (in Turkmen territory). The borrower provided 
information on the nature of this facility and clarified that the Farab facility is in fact a 
hydrocenter with the role of water distribution but with no storage function. Based on the 
clarification provided by the borrower, the Safety of Dams policy is not triggered.  
 
Land Acquisition. The Project triggers the World Bank#s Operational Policy 4.12 
(Involuntary Resettlement) because the Project is expected to involve some land 
acquisition.  During project preparation, the screening by the consultants carrying out the 
social assessment, the Bukhara Vodokanal, and the World Bank team established that the 
proposed Project is likely to involve permanent or temporary land acquisition for the 
rehabilitation of existing pipelines or construction of new pipelines in areas not currently 
served.  If land is needed for these investments, it is envisaged that the Project would 
involve state-owned land located on existing rights of way designated for municipal 
infrastructure, and not occupied by residents (legal or illegal) or enterprises. Along some 
rights of way, however, it may be necessary to cut trees or remove other structures that 
may be close to the rights of way.  However, none of the civil works are expected to 
involve displacement of any residents or enterprises.  For the large infrastructure such as 
the water treatment plant and the Dovinik intake, land acquisition will not be required 
because these facilities occupy their own fenced-in sites used only for these facilities.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Water and soil pollution could remain temporarily affected during operational phase of 
the project (once works are finalized) due to accidental water bursts (at pumping stations 
or along the rehabilitated water supply networks) potential natural disasters and extreme 
climate events (e.g. floods, earthquakes) or improper household wastewater management 
generated due to the new domestic water use in the project area. Overall and in the long-
term, the project is expected to have a positive impact on the environment and on the 
beneficiaries# quality of life.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Feasibility Study did not analyze clearly any other project alternatives.  If the current 
proposed technical solution will not be implemented, water will continue to be wasted 
and infiltration into ground water will continue to affect the environment. Options 
considered relate to technical design such as the location of parts of the infrastructure 
(e.g., the filtration plant). The option of wells or boreholes in the rural areas was briefly 
considered in the feasibility study but was found not feasible due to the deterioration of 
quality of such water due to high salinity and excessive related agricultural use.  In the 
elaboration of the feasibility study for rural areas that will be prepared during project 
implementation, this option will be reconsidered depending on the local conditions.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The central Project Coordination unit located in Tashkent (PCU) and Oblast level 
Bukhara vodokanal, through the branch Bukhara Project Coordination Unit (BPCU) # are 
the two main entities with responsibilities to implement this proposed project.  The PCU 
and the BPCU manage two Bank financed projects in the water supply and sanitation 
sector in the Bukhara and Samarkand districts (one project closed in June 2009). The 
projects are EA category #B# thus these entities are exposed to Bank safeguard 
procedures on OP/BP 4.01 including preparation, disclosure and implementation of 
EMPs. Bank#s safeguards supervision reviews based on missions, site visits and 
evaluation of progress monitoring reports found that the Borrower has good capacity to 
implement mitigation measures and monitoring actions that are agreed in the EMP.  
These measures and their monitoring will be incorporated in the terms of references of 
design and supervision consultants and in the responsibilities of contractors in the bidding 
documents.  
 
A
draft EIA with EMP satisfactory to the Bank requirements and related national laws 
was prepared by BPCU to help them implement the necessary measures to minimize 
potential negative environmental impacts and implement the project in an 
environmentally sound and sustainable manner. The EMP with updated environmental 
baseline information (e.g., water quality) will be revised in line with the detail designs# 
findings once they are prepared during project implementation.  
 
Page  7
Although the Bukhara Vodokanal produced a RPF satisfactory to the Bank, both the 
Bukhara Vodokanal and local PCU have not had direct experience preparing or 
implementing a RAP.  Thus the Project Launch will include clear guidance to these 
entities on how to carry out its OP 4.12 responsibilities during project implementation.  In 
addition, the Bank#s supervision missions will include a social development and 
safeguard specialist to provide continued guidance to the local PCU in implementing the 
RPF, and in preparing and implementing any subsequent RAPs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders include the Government of Uzbekistan/ Uzkommunkhizmat, 
Bukhara vodokanal, the Alat and Karakul vodokanals, local institutions involved in 
monitoring of environmental and social aspects, and Alat and Karakul population located 
in the project area.  
 
In preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), the client, in January 2011, 
carried out discussions with a range of stakeholders about the project and potential 
impacts.  In February 2011, the borrower disclosed the draft RPF on the national website 
and carried out public consultations in the project area.  On February 25, 2011, the Bank 
cleared the final RPF, and both the English and Russian versions of the RPF were sent to 
the Bank#s InfoShop.  The Bank team informed the client that as soon as the specific 
locations of land to be acquired are known, the borrower will need to prepare a specific 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) consistent with the principles of the RPF, obtain the 
Bank#s clearance of the RAP before it may be implemented, and then deliver the agreed 
compensation to all affected parties before any of the planned civil works may 
commence.  
 
The draft EIA with EMP has been publicly disclosed in local language on February 2, 
2011 and discussed during meetings held in Alat and Karakul on February 5, 2011. The 
draft EIA report including minutes of the public meetings and the Bank review comments 
was disclosed in Infoshop on March 14, 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/02/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/14/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/21/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/05/2011 
 
Page  8
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/25/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  9
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pier Francesco Mantovani 
03/18/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
03/17/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein 
03/17/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
03/18/2011 
Comments:   
