Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/17/2011 
Report No.:  AC5926
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P119939 
Project Name:  Talimarjan Transmission Project 
Task Team Leader:  Doina Visa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 11, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2011 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%);Regulation and 
competition policy (20%);Managing for development results (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
110.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
44.00
44.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To improve the reliability of the electricity supply to residential and business consumers 
in South Western Uzbekistan.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have two components: (a) investments in power transmission network 
and (b) institutional strengthening for  UE.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening power transmission network (estimated cost US$ 130 
million).  The investments will include construction of: (a) about 220 km. single-circuit 
500 kV transmission line from Talimarjan TPP to Sogdiana substation; (b) 500/220 kV 
open switch-yard at Talimarjan TPP; (c) a bay extension at Sogdiana substation; and (d) a 
short connection with nearby Karakul-Guzar line with the new open switchyard. The 
investments will help to increase the electricity supply to customers in the beneficiary 
region, reduce the technical losses in the transmission network, increase the reliability of 
electricity supply and enable to effectively supply the additional electricity generated at 
the two new units at gas-fired Talimarjan TPP, which are expected to be commissioned in 
Page  2
2014-2015. The Karakul- Guzar line interconnection will help in improved reliability of 
the power supply in South-Western part of the country, which will be further enhanced 
with commissioning of the new capacity.  
 
Component 2: Institutional strengthening by providing technical assistance (TA) to 
build Uzbekenergo capacity (estimated cost US$ 10 million). This component will 
support: (a) project implementation support consultant to assist UE during the project 
implementation; (b) capacity building to strengthen fiduciary capacity of UE; (c) 
Strengthen technical capacity of UE; (d) technical assistance to UE in the renewable 
energy development program; (e) mitigation of avian risk during the project 
implementation and operation; (f) project and UE audits in accordance with 
internationally accepted auditing standards; and any other areas agreed between the Bank 
and  UE.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The 500 kV transmission line will start from Talimarjan TPP and pass through the 
territory of Samarkand (87 km) and Kashkadarya (131 km) regions (oblasts).  
 
From the border of Samarkand region, the route goes through hilly piedmont terrain, 
undeveloped lands, and the hilly valley of the river Kum-Darya. It traverses some 
irrigated fields, lands used for dryland cereal crops and cotton, and through unused lands 
as well as non-cropped land used for livestock pasture.  In summary, over the total length 
of the route of the high voltage line, land use is primarily irrigated agriculture (cotton, 
cereals), livestock pasture, and undeveloped.  There are no protected or declared 
conservation areas or nature reserves within the project site or surrounding areas that 
might potentially be affected by project activities.  The existing vegetation cover of the 
transmission line construction area contains no sites with rare plant species.  
 
The Adyr lands in Kashkadarya oblast are ecologically significant for birds, both 
resident nesting species and migratory species, and the region is one of the key bird flight 
routes in Central Asia. The project will not affect flora and fauna in Kashkadarya 
Province, since it will occur along existing roads and facilities. Also, the route will not 
pass through areas with medicinal and indigenous plants; rather, it will run along the edge 
of fields to minimize potential damage to crops. Installation of the transmission towers 
for the 500 kV lines at high elevations and in uplands along both sides of water bodies 
will have no negative impacts on biocoenosis and ichthyofauna.  
 
The Outdoor Switchyard (OSY) will be constructed adjacent to the Talimarjan TPP on 
land that was transferred from the local administration to the Talimarjan TPP.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASCS) 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSS4) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).  In general, the project presents well-defined and 
well-understood environmental issues of narrow scope.  Most of the expected 
environmental issues are minor, of limited duration, influence a relatively small area, and 
occur primarily during the construction phase.  
 
During construction of both the open switch-yard and the transmission line, the only 
issues are those primarily associated with the movement of workers, machines, and 
materials (e.g. dust, noise and disposal of construction wastes, crossing of surface waters, 
and worker health and safety).  During operation, the chief issues are avian mortality, 
public health and safety from the electromagnetic fields generated at the substation and 
along the transmission line right-of-way, and noise produced by corona discharge.  
 
The project was tentatively assigned Category A during concept review because of the 
uncertainty regarding the avian mortality risk issue identified in the Uzbek EIA document 
(discussed below).  
 
Subsequently, an avian risk assessment (ARA) prepared by an international avian risk 
expert concluded that this risk was minimal and the project was formally assigned 
Category B.  Nonetheless, EA procedures followed the requirements of a Category A 
project because the avian risk level (outcome of the ARA) was not known during the 
early project preparation stages.  
 
Uzbekistan Environmental Assessment Regulations required an Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) for the project.  UE prepared the EIA which was approved on March 
12, 2010 by the State Committee for Nature Protection.  However, the government 
approved EIA did not contain sufficient information to satisfy World Bank EIA 
requirements for a Category A project. Thus, UE engaged an independent consultant to 
prepare an EIA Supplement. The government approved EIA taken together with the EIA 
Supplement constituted all the information required for a World Bank Category A EA 
Page  4
document.  The EIA Supplement included the following aspects (not included in the 
Uzbek approved EIA): (i) an Executive Summary; (ii) description of the Uzbek policy, 
legal and administrative framework; (iii) a due diligence review of the environmental  
performance of the existing Talimarjan TPP (connected project); (iii) analysis of 
alternative transmission line routes; and (iv) environmental management plan (EMP). 
The ARA mitigating recommendations were incorporated into the EMP Section of the 
EIA Supplement prepared by the independent consultant.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).  UE will need to acquire approximately 12.03 ha of 
land on a permanent basis and 159.42 ha on a temporary basis from 114 leasehold farms 
in Kashkadarya and Samarkand oblasts. The large majority of farms grow cotton and 
wheat: a small percentage has orchards and small crops. In Kashkadarya, land will be 
acquired from 90 leasehold farms; in Samarkand oblast, land will be taken from 24 
leasehold farms.  The impacts will not be significant because land acquisition will not 
exceed more than 4 percent of the total holdings for any one farm, most of the land will 
be acquired on a temporary basis, and acquisition will not require displacement of homes 
or enterprises.  
 
Participation of project-affected parties was provided at the earliest stages of project 
preparation.  During the initial assessment of social impacts conducted in September 
2009 and February 2010, as well as two rounds of public consultations conducted in July 
2010, farmers# opinions were discussed regarding the need to use part of their land 
holdings on a temporary or permanent basis.  During these discussions, farmers expressed 
their preferences regarding:  (a) the acceptability of the decision to acquire land from 
farmers and what consequences this would have for the private farms; (b) preferred 
alternatives for compensation; and (c) mechanisms for paying compensation to farmers.  
Their views were subsequently taken into account in the preparation of the Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP).  
 
In compliance with OP 4.12, all measures were taken in establishing the route of the 
transmission lines to avoid impacts on residential areas and/or immovable built assets.   
Consequently, there will be no displacement of households or businesses due to project-
related construction activities.  The one exception involved the need to relocate one 
farming enterprise prior to the start of project preparation.   The farmer agreed to vacate a 
plot of land he rented adjacent to the Talimarjan power station which will be used for the 
construction of the new power substation, in exchange for another equivalent plot of land 
that he could farm.  The farmer also received cash compensation to cover income losses 
associated with this transfer.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Three routes were considered for the transmission lines.  Alternative 1 (218 km) was the 
route chosen because it has the lowest social and environment impact.Alternative 2 (196 
km), would have been a straighter route, but more than 30% of the line would have 
passed through mountains, which, although shorter, would raise costs.  Alternative 3 (227 
km) would run along the existing 500kV transmission line of Karakul-Guzar-SS 
Sogdiana, but more than 70% of the route would pass through mountains.  
 
The assessment of these routes demonstrated that for environmental reasons, 
alternatives 1 and 2 would have minimal impact. Neither route crosses environmentally 
protected areas or archeological and historical sites; nor would they require displacement 
of residents or farm enterprises.  However, Alternative 1 is more feasible from the 
technical and economic point of view because it will require fewer towers.  Also, 
construction and maintenance during operation will mainly use existing roads, which 
means only a few minor temporary roads would need to be built.  Further, it is the most 
preferable in terms of mortality risk to migratory birds because it is situated at the 
lower/flatter lands (avoiding mountains). Alternative 2 would include many sections built 
in the mountains, which would require construction of a large number of heavy support 
towers.  As mentioned above, this would increase project costs.  In addition, routing in 
mountainous areas is technically more complicated because special drilling techniques 
and construction of many roads would be needed. The mountainous terrain would create 
maintenance difficulties during line operation.  
 
Alternative 3 has significant environmental, economic, and technical disadvantages; e.g. 
it would pass through some parts of the Kitab Natural Park, which is on the International 
List of Conservation Areas. Further, the part of the route in densely populated areas 
would require a great deal of resettlement.  Also, this mountainous route would increase 
maintenance costs during operations. As in the case of Alternative 2, construction of 
many support towers would increase project costs.  
 
Thus, Alternative 1 was considered the more effective route and is the most acceptable 
from both environmental and social perspectives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project was tentatively assigned Category A during concept review because of the 
uncertainty regarding the avian mortality risk issue identified in the Uzbek EIA 
document.  
 
Subsequently, an avian risk assessment (ARA) prepared by an international avian risk 
expert concluded that this risk was minimal and the project was formally assigned 
Category B.  Nonetheless, EA procedures followed the requirements of a Category A 
project because the avian risk level (outcome of the ARA) was not known during the 
early project preparation stages.  
 
Page  6
Uzbekistan Environmental Assessment Regulations required an Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) for the project.  UE prepared the EIA which was approved on March 
12, 2010 by the State Committee for Nature Protection.  However, the government 
approved EIA did not contain sufficient information to satisfy World Bank EIA 
requirements for a Category A project. Thus, UE engaged an independent consultant to 
prepare an EIA Supplement.  
 
The government approved EIA taken together with the EIA Supplement constituted all 
the information required for a World Bank Category A EA document. The EIA 
Supplement included the following aspects (not included in the Uzbek approved EIA): (i) 
an Executive Summary; (ii) description of the Uzbek policy, legal and administrative 
framework; (iii) a due diligence review of the environmental  performance of the existing 
Talimarjan TPP (connected project); (iii) analysis of alternative transmission line routes; 
and (iv) environmental management plan (EMP). The ARA mitigating recommendations 
were incorporated into the EMP Section of the EIA Supplement prepared by the 
independent consultant. UE has agreed to implement the EMP.  UE also prepared a RAP.  
 
Because the land to be acquired was known prior to project appraisal, UE was required 
to prepare a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) under OP 4.12.  In meeting the Bank#s 
policy requirement, UE prepared a RAP in consultation with the affected farmers that 
identifies the affected farms and describes the measures that will be taken to compensate 
the affected farmers for their losses, the principles that were incorporated in formulating 
the RAP, the institutional arrangements for implementing the plan, grievance and redress 
measures, and arrangements for monitoring RAP implementation.  
 
A
dedicated project management unit (PMU) with adequate technical skills has been 
established to manage the Talimarjan Transmission project.  In addition, the World Bank 
team will work closely with the Asian Development Bank (who are also to provide the 
PMU training on their safeguard policies) to develop a comprehensive program of 
safeguards training to reflect the requirements of both organizations.  World Bank 
safeguards training would be provided by the Task Team safeguard specialists in 
coordination with the Tashkent staff and ECA Safeguard specialists as appropriate.  As 
currently envisioned, training is to be provided before and during project implementation 
on an "as needed" basis.  
 
UE capacity to undertake both preconstruction and post-construction avian risk 
monitoring will need to be strengthened. This is most important for post construction 
mortality monitoring where instruction and training should be provided in developing 
standardized approaches for avian collision and electrocution monitoring of transmission 
lines and towers. Specific details for this capacity building will be developed by the 
international avian risk assessment expert in consultation with UE and World Bank 
environmental specialists in the initial phase of project implementation.  UE has agreed to 
implement any additional avian risk mitigating actions should avian mortality monitoring 
results indicated such actions are required.  
 
Page  7
The PMU will include a specialist on land acquisition internal monitoring who will 
develop detailed plans and indicators for monitoring the implementation of the RAP to 
ensure that all affected farms have been compensated as planned, and that all affected 
parties are fully informed about grievance procedures.  The specialist will submit 
quarterly information about work progress for inclusion into the PIU#s management 
information system and project monitoring reports.  During Project Launch and 
subsequent implementation support missions, the Bank task team will include a social 
development specialist to provide guidance to the PMU related to RAP implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
UE held two public consultations with locally affected groups to discuss the TORs for the 
EIA Supplement and the draft EIA Supplement. A first round of public consultations to 
discuss the TORs of the EIA Supplement was conducted by the independent consultant 
on July 1, 2010 in Kashkadrya Province and on July 2, 2010 in Samarkand Province.  A 
second round of public consultations to discuss the EIA Supplement was conducted by 
the independent consultant on July 27, 2010 in Samarkand Province and July 28, 2010 in 
Kashkadarya Province.  The final EIA Supplement, in English and Russian languages 
was disclosed in Uzbekistan (UE website) on November 5, 2010 and the Bank's InfoShop 
on November 11, 2010 and the ARA is planned to be disclosed in Russian and English on 
the UE website on December 17, 2010.  In addition, the EIA executive summary in 
English and Russian languages was disclosed on the UE website on October 1, 2010 and 
in the Bank Info shop on November 23, 2010.  The EIA executive summary has also been 
disclosed in the Uzbek language on UE#s website on November 5, 2010.  
 
With regard to land acquisition, participation of project-affected parties was provided at 
the earliest stages of project preparation, and their opinions are reflected in the RAP.  
Two consultations were conducted with project affected parties in both Kaskadarya and 
Samarkand Oblasts on July 28, 2010 and July 27, 2010, respectively.  The draft RAP in 
Russian and English languages was made available on September 19, 2010 on UE#s 
website, and in English language on September 27, 2010 at the World Bank InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/05/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/11/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/27/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/19/2010 
 
Page  8
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/27/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  9
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Doina Visa 
12/14/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
12/14/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein 
12/15/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
01/17/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
01/17/2011 
Comments:   
