Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/23/2010 
Report No.:  AC5859
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P075399 
Original Project Name: Public Financial 
Management Reform Project 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P120613 
Project Name:  Additional Financing to the Public Financial Management Reform Project 
Task Team Leader:  Quyen Hoang Vu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: February 3, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASPV 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (75%);Sub-national government 
administration (25%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (50%);Debt 
management and fiscal sustainability (50%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
14.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Additional Financing to the Public Management Reform Project 
(PFMRP) is to continue to strengthen the Recipient capacity to plan, execute and report 
on its budget and to improve the transparency and accountability of the budgetary 
systems and processes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project -- to which the additional funding  -- consists of the following 
original components, namely: (1) Strengthening treasury and budget management; (2) 
Strengthening state budget and investment planning; (3) Strengthening management of 
public debt and monitoring of SOE fiscal risks; and (4) Project management support.  
 
It provides an integrated package of assistance to strengthen budget planning, execution, 
reporting and accountability of the country public financial management system. The 
Page  2
project includes major investments to upgrade the core system of public financial 
management, and Technical Assistance (TA) to support institutional reform, policy 
formulation, and capacity building.  As part of PFMRP, an integrated Treasury and 
Budget Management Information System (TABMIS) is being implemented in central, 
provincial and district treasury offices and financial agencies. Upon completion, 
TABMIS will enable accurate, timely and consolidated budget reporting and cash 
accounting.  A platform is also being introduced for a number of essential PFM reforms 
such as revamping and integrating account code structure, and introducing elements of 
accrual accounting and modern cash management.  The project is providing support for 
modern budget planning approaches in core government agencies and provinces.  It is 
also providing support to strengthen public debt management in core government 
agencies, including integrated processes for recording of domestic and external debt and 
monitoring of fiscal risks.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Additional Financing to the PFMRP will be in Hanoi and selected provinces, but 
eventually will be implemented in all provinces and central government ministries.  
 
No safeguards policies are triggered under this proposed additional financing project as 
there are no activities that require safeguards mitigation measures.  The parent project 
also did not trigger any safeguards policies and was categorized as C and this Additional 
Financing credit continues to be the same.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not required.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not required.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  4
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Quyen Hoang Vu 
12/15/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
12/23/2010 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Linda Van Gelder 
12/17/2010 
Comments:   
