Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/17/2011 
Report No.:  AC5583
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P111548 
Project Name:  VIETNAM: Haiphong Urban Transport Project 
Task Team Leader:  Reindert Westra 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 7, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
175.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
101.07
101.07 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve urban accessibility and strengthen 
capacity for urban transport management and planning.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A - Strategic Urban Road (estimated cost of US$262.99 million; with IDA 
financing US$163.89 million). The component will finance improvement of access for 
cross-town traffic within Haiphong and longer-distance freight to and from Haiphong's 
port system, including: (a) construction of the Bac Son - Nam Hai East-West Link; (b) 
replacement of the deck structure of Niem 1 Bridge and surface treatment of Trung Chinh 
Road; (c) compensation, resettlement, rehabilitation and livelihood restoration of Project 
Affected Persons, including construction of resettlement sites with basic infrastructure, 
such as roads, electricity, water, and sewage systems; and (d) provision of support for 
detailed design, procurement and construction supervision of works under this 
component.  
 
Component B - Public Transport Improvement: (estimated cost of US$8.04 million; 
with IDA-financing of US$6.24 million). The component will finance transformation of 
Page  2
public transportation services, including: (a)(i) development of an institutional 
framework, regulatory model, and operational procedures for the establishment of a 
public transport management authority; (ii) provision of support to a strategic approach to 
service delivery, including carrying out of route optimization reviews and 
implementation of fare setting measures; and (iii) implementation of public awareness 
campaigns and consultations, including a media management strategy; (b) transformation 
of line 2 bus services along the Tam Bac - Kien An Corridor, including acquisition of 
new vehicles and global positioning system-based fleet management and other intelligent 
transport applications; and (c) (i) carrying out of infrastructure and facilities upgrades 
along the Tam Bac - Kien An Corridor, including installation of bus shelters and signs, 
development of road markings, implementation of traffic engineering measures such as 
improved pedestrian sidewalks and convenient paved pedestrian ways into side streets, 
and construction of a bus depot in the An Lao area; and (ii) provision of support for 
detailed design and construction supervision of works under this component.  
 
Component C - Capacity-building: (estimated cost of US$5.04 million; with IDA-
financing of US$4.88 million). This component will finance: (a) (i) Development and 
implementation of the first phase of the rollout of an integrated geographic information 
system-based application supporting transport infrastructure planning, including 
acquisition and installation of equipment, establishment of institutional arrangements, 
provision of technical and data management support to the Department of Transport, and 
development of protocols for both public access and internal use and training; and (ii) 
development of a strategic plan for the expansion of system functionality to other urban 
management and planning agencies. (b) Human resource development of the Recipient's 
relevant Haiphong province entities through the preparation and implementation of 
training programs; and (c) Provision of support to the Regional Transport Works Project 
Management Unit for Project implementation, including for Project management and 
monitoring and evaluation, external monitoring of implementation of environmental and 
social safeguards and capacity building in relation to the implementation of such 
safeguards, carrying out of an independent land price survey, and carrying out of 
independent annual financial audits of the Project, and office and equipment upgrading 
and acquisition of vehicles.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed Hai Phong Urban Transport Development Project will be implemented in 
an urban area in the south/southeast of the City center and the rural, peri-urban area west 
of Hai Phong City.  The majority of the investment is for the construction and 
improvement of the Bac Son - Nam Hai East-West Link (a 19.9 kilometre long arterial 
road link) from National Highway 10 to the Haiphong Dinh Vu port, which will require 
land acquisition and resettlement. Therefore, the project will also finance (through 
counterpart funds) construction of basic infrastructure for 12 resettlement sites. The 
western section of the alignment runs through a peri-urban agricultural area, which the 
city Master Plan envisages being urbanized over the next 10 years, with main land 
features being low laying rice fields alternating with residential areas (villages) and some 
industrial buildings. The eastern section crosses several urban districts (Hai An, Le Chan 
Page  3
and to smaller extent Ngo Quyen and Kien An), which are largely residential (villages or 
urban houses) and some industrial buildings.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (SASDE) 
Mr Pramod Agrawal (SASDA) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS) 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Strategic Urban Road component will involve the construction of 19.9 km new urban 
road, along a new alignment corridor, in and around both heavily populated urban areas 
as well as agriculturally used land (including aquaculture). The construction of this 
highway will also involve the relocation (from 7 to 10 m toward water front) of 1.5 
kilometer of a river flood protection dyke to accommodate the right-of-way required for 
the road specifications.  
 
During project identification, there was a question on whether the alignment will 
traverse a portion of unprotected "wetland" located in Vinh Niem ward.  Investigations 
on refined road alignment in Vinh Niem road confirm that the project will not affect any 
sites being protected by local communities, or at provincial or national levels.  In this 
area, the alignment will cut through mainly aquaculture ponds with some trees and shrubs 
as well as a small area of unused grassland.  The area along this road section has been 
planned as a "green spot" for the city, with future investments on a wastewater treatment 
plant, a regulatory reservoir and green park.  
 
The proposed project will not cause relocation of any known archaeological sites, 
pagodas, temples, churches etc. However, the operations at some pagodas or temples 
would be disturbed by noise, dust and traffic from construction and operation phase. 
Page  4
Consultation has been conducted to the owners of these structures and mitigation 
measures have been proposed.  
 
The project triggers the World Bank policy on Physical Cultural Resources OP4.11. The 
EMP includes the measures to protect all pagodas from construction related impacts 
(noise, dust, access). However, additional measures, if necessary, will be identified and 
consulted with pagoda authorities during detailed engineering design. A dedicated budget 
for these additional measures has been included in the EMP.  The project will also require 
relocation of some graves including those located within the right of way of the road at 
Bac Son, Le Loi, Dang Cuong and Dong Hoa communes and the other five located 
within Dang Cuong resettlement site. Compensation will be paid to households such that 
they can arrange for relocation to take place in such a way that suits local cultural 
customs. Chance-find procedure has also been developed and included in the EMP.  
 
The project will affect a total of 3,037 households or 12,605 persons living in 13 
communes/wards of five urban/rural districts. Of these, 909 households would need to be 
relocated. Land acquisition for 12 resettlement sites will affect an additional 871 
households, with 4,223 persons.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential impacts on hydrology and drainage, connectivity of communities located along 
the road, traffic safety, disruptions onto the operations or accessibility to existing public 
services, etc. are the primary concerns during both construction and operation phases of 
the proposed road under Component A. Safety during pre-construction and construction 
at the project area relating to unexploded ordinance (UXO) left behind from the war need 
to be addressed prior to construction commencement. Relocations of graves and indirect 
impacts on cultural resources and relocations also have been considered.  
 
Other impacts identified in the EIA include: (i) noise levels possibly exceeding the 
relevant standards at sensitive sites along the alignment.  Since the western section of the 
road will traverse populated urban areas, heavy machinery and transport vehicle 
operation during the construction phase would cause noise problems; (ii) dust and toxic 
air pollutants from hot asphalt mixing plants during the construction work were identified 
as a major air pollution problem; and (iii) slurry wastewater produced from construction 
sites and domestic wastewater from construction camps during the construction phase 
might cause adverse impacts on water bodies and aquatic life.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The main alternative considered during project identification was construction of a 
section of the Outer Ring Road. The feasibility of this road in the short term was affected 
by the decision to build the Hanoi-Haiphong Expressway on a similar parallel alignment. 
A
key east west arterial in the Master Plan was therefore selected for the project. The 
eastern section of the Master Plan alignment for this arterial would have resulted in 
significant property demolition and resettlement. A four km section of the alignment to 
Page  5
the east of Rao Bridge was therefore moved to the current alignment along the Lach Tray 
River where very limited resettlement is required. At one major interchange options were 
considered to minimise resettlement of persons already resettled from another project. 
The selected route was agreed at project identification.  
 
The EA was conducted early enough and in coordination with the feasibility study phase 
such that alternatives in the alignment and changes in the design were recommended in 
the EA are taken into account to avoid some of the most serious impacts and to lessen 
some of those that could not be avoided. The EA also looked at induced and other 
medium to longer term impacts, such as spontaneous and opportunistic developments 
alongside the new highway and what that would mean for planning officials in the City of 
Haiphong.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Management Unit for Regional Transportation Works (PMURTW) has 
prepared a comprehensive Environmental Assessment (EA). The EA package includes an 
overall EA report for Components A and B, and a separate EA report for the resettlement 
sites to be constructed as part of the project.  Hydrological modeling for the relocation of 
a
section of the existing dyke has been carried out as part of the EA and its findings are 
included as an annex to the main report.  Potential socio-environmental impacts will be 
identified and assessed; a mitigation program will be developed accordingly to address 
these potential impacts.  
 
A
stand-alone Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been developed, and the 
proposed measures are to be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts.  The 
EMP defines mitigation measures and costs, training plan, environmental monitoring 
plan, and environmental management organizations. A chance find procedure for 
physical cultural resources has been developed and included in the EMP.  
 
PMURTW is responsible for the implementation of EMP. Environmental monitoring 
will be carried out by a qualified independent monitoring consultant to be selected 
through a competitive procurement process. For the proper implementation of EMP, a 
specialized social and environmental unit will be set up under the PMURTW with at least 
one professional staff designated to supervise the overall implementation of EMP.  In 
addition, key staffs engaged in environmental management in contractors, construction 
supervision consultant, road operation company and government organizations will 
receive intensive training.  During the construction and first two years of operation 
phases, noise, surface water and ambient air monitoring will be carried out at selected 
sensitive sites.  
 
PMURTW has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in accordance with 
the requirements of OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and the newly issued 
Vietnamese Decree 69 on additional provisions on land acquisition, compensation, 
assistance and resettlement. The RPF will be approved by Prime Minister and all 
Resettlement Plans (RPs) applied for the project will follow the approved RPF to ensure 
Page  6
all project affected people will improve or, at least, have restored their pre-project level 
livelihood. The City#s commitment to livelihood restoration is confirmed through the 
RPF and RPs.  
 
According to the preliminary survey results, the project will affect a total of 3,037 
households or 12,605 persons living in 13 communes/wards of five urban/rural districts. 
Of these, 909 households would need to be relocated. PMURTW has prepared a draft 
Resettlement Plan (RP) for the urban arterial road, which has been discussed with the HP 
Peoples Committee. The key provisions of the RP are also discussed with the project 
affected households and the RP is disclosed at the ward/commune level.  
 
PMURTW, in coordination with the ward and commune authorities, has identified 12 
potential resettlement sites covering an area of about 37.5 ha., and has conducted 
feasibility studies for these sites.  Land acquisition for these resettlement sites will affect 
an additional 871 households (4,223 persons), seven of which would also be 
accommodated at these locations, while the rest would loss agricultural land. A 
standalone RP for these affected persons at these sites has also been prepared.  
Resettlement costs, including the cost of development of the resettlement sites, are 
estimated at US$60.8 million.  
 
Hai Phong People's Committee, supported by the Project Steering Committee, will 
assume overall responsibility for the resettlement program. The HPPC will give the final 
approval for land acquisition, allocation and compensation rate updating.  All 
resettlement site works, compensation and land acquisition costs will be wholly financed 
by HPPC.  
 
The PMURTW is responsible for overall management and reporting of the resettlement 
program. Working with the HP City PC and district authorities to implement resettlement 
plans, the PMURTW will monitor the progress of social development in terms of 
compensation and relocation of households to resettlement sites and for delivery of 
rehabilitation assistance to income-affected households. It is responsible for updating the 
design of the resettlement program, supervising its implementation, maintaining a RAP 
database for internal monitoring, recruiting and supervising the independent monitoring 
consultant, and reporting regularly to the World Bank on resettlement progress, including 
finalizing the resettlement design, preparing the compensation and relocation package, 
delivering compensation payments and assisting in the relocation process. A national 
resettlement consultant will be recruited to assist the PMURTW in RAP implementation 
and monitoring. The PMURTW will also contract an experienced external resettlement 
monitoring agency for third party monitoring of resettlement implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EA process included meaningful and participatory consultations with potentially 
affected persons and communities, where these impacts and their proposed management 
were discussed. For instance, these discussions led to the re-design of pedestrian 
crossings and their locations at some of the intersections, due to safety concerns raised 
Page  7
and improvements in road drainage system to enhance the protection of roadside 
aquaculture activities, both issues arising out of the consultation process with affected 
communities.  
 
Extensive consultation with the communities that will be affected by the proposed 
project was carried out during the RAP preparation. Information on the project#s 
objectives and likely impacts, and salient features of the compensation and resettlement 
policy was disseminated. The participatory approach helped reaching consensus on the 
resettlement policy and entitlements for various adverse impacts. A similar participatory 
approach will be pursued further during project implementation to ensure implementation 
of the project's RPF.  Further consultations with relevant stakeholders are proposed 
during resettlement plan implementation, especially in planning and designing 
rehabilitation assistance strategies for income-affected households. To promote fairness 
and transparency in project resettlement compensation and site clearance processes, all 
social safeguard documents, including compensation options, will be made available on-
line in addition to traditional public disclosure measures like community meetings, leaflet 
distribution and documents disclosure at public places.  
 
To ensure that compensation for all types of affected assets are paid at fair market value, 
PMURTW will hire a professional appraiser at the initial stages of the resettlement 
implementation to conduct Replacement Cost Surveys (RCS) for different types of assets 
as the basis for the City to decide appropriate compensation prices that reflect market 
prices. The proposed RCS is to be carried out in parallel with the Detailed Measurement 
Survey (DMS) of affected assets and updating of the Resettlement Plan.  
 
Vietnamese version of the final draft EIAs and EMPs, RPF and RAPs were disclosed at 
the project ward/communes People's Committees Offices for public access on November 
19, 2010. The English and Vietnamese versions of the EIA, EMPs, RPF and RAPs were 
made available at the Bank#s Information centers in Washington and Hanoi on 
November 23, 2010.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/19/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/16/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/24/2011  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/19/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/19/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/23/2010 
 
Page  8
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  9
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Reindert Westra 
01/18/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu 
01/18/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham 
01/18/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
02/17/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jennifer J. Sara 
02/06/2011 
Comments:   
