Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/04/2011 
Report No.:  58947
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P119090 
Project Name:  Hospital Waste Management Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Toomas Palu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 16, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (40%);Sewerage (30%);Public administration- Health (20%);Solid waste 
management (10%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (50%);Environmental policies and institutions 
(25%);Pollution management and environmental health (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to reduce environmental degradation and potential 
risks for human health through the improved management of health care waste in 
Vietnam hospitals.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises three components: (i) Policy and Institutional Environment 
Strengthening; (ii) Hospital Waste Management Improvement Facility; and (iii) Project 
Implementation Support and Coordination.  
 
Component 1.  Policy and Institutional Environment Strengthening. The aim of this 
component is to create conducive policy environment for effective management of health 
care waste generated by the health care system, and to strengthen the institutional 
capacities to regulate, implement, monitor and enforce proper health care waste 
management practices. This component will comprise three sub-components.  
 
Page  2
Sub-Component 1.A - Streamlining policy and regulatory framework for health care 
waste management. The main objective of this sub-component is to improve policies and 
regulatory instruments for health care waste management. It will build on the work 
carried out before and during the preparation process. It will produce the following 
outputs: (i) new or revised regulatory instruments and guidelines for health care waste 
management applicable to various types of health care institutions and enforceable for all 
types of health care facilities; and, (ii) a platform for an inter-sectoral policy dialogue in 
relation to health care waste management, public information and knowledge 
dissemination products.  The sub-component will also undertake a feasibility study for 
applying Public Private Partnership approaches for health care waste management.  These 
outputs will be produced mainly through foreign and local technical assistance. Sub-
component will also provide necessary office equipment for the Vietnam Health 
Environment Agency (VIHEMA).  
 
Sub-Component 1.B - Strengthening capacities for health care waste management. The 
main objective of this sub-component is to equip institutions responsible for regulating 
and monitoring the health care waste management with adequate skills and knowledge to 
perform their function prescribed by the relevant laws and regulations.  The key 
institutions supported will be VIHEMA, four regional public health institutes, provincial 
preventive health centers.  The main outputs will be a trained cadre of professionals who 
can regulate, monitor, and enforce health care waste management at various levels of 
health care service.  This will include the cadre of trainers who can provide training and 
support to health care institutions. The integrated training process will also address 
norms, standards, and organization and execution of the monitoring and surveillance 
function.  Altogether, six different training modules will be prepared and taught.  Internal 
training at individual facility level is covered under Component 2.  
 
Sub-Component 1.C - Establishing monitoring and surveillance system for health care 
waste management. This subcomponent will produce the following outputs: (i) Improved 
technological capacities and infrastructure of central and provincial level facilities to 
monitor health care waste management practices and impact on environment; (ii) An 
integrated online database on health care waste management practices and compliance 
status of all health care institutions. This will also include online resources and guidelines 
for health care institutions.  The component will also generate evidence for social and 
economic impact of health care waste management to inform the decision makers and 
These outputs will be produced through technical assistance (consulting services), 
training, acquisition of testing and laboratory equipment, provision of vehicles, upgrading 
of offices space and equipment, and incremental operating costs.  
 
Component 2.  Hospital Waste Management Improvement Facility.  This component 
will have two subcomponents: (2.A) for Central Hospital; and, (2.B) for Provincial 
Hospitals. The component will provide grants to eligible central and provincial hospitals.  
The priority focus will be on larger hospitals (larger waste generators) in more densely 
populated areas.  The grants to health care facilities will be guided by  provincial health 
care waste management masterplans and hospital  health care waste management plans 
that are mutually consistent.   The plans are prepared according to the agreed format as 
Page  3
per Operational Manual.  The grants will finance hospital sub-projects to upgrade 
infrastructure for waste water and/or solid waste management; strengthening institutional 
capacity for waste management within the hospitals, including dedicated management 
structures and staff, internal waste management guidelines/regulations for minimization, 
segregation, collection and storage of hazardous waste and occupational safety 
strengthening; training of staff; supplies and consumables; and, allocation for grant 
management. The Operational Manual includes list of eligible technologies and 
guidelines for selection of appropriate technology for different circumstances. For solid 
hazardous waste, the project will prioritize non-burning technologies to avoid additional 
emissions of toxic chemicals including POPs.  
 
The provincial hospital sub-component will be implemented in a rolling schedule.  
Every six months one region will be targeted for project support and accompanied by 
concerted information and communication activities and capacity strengthening support 
for preparing provincial and hospital waste management plans.  Standardized costing 
methodology will guide the costing of the grants. Implementation of an individual grant 
is expected to take about 12-15 months. It is expected that each round will produce 20-30 
hospital grant applications in 10-15 adjacent provinces.  Five provinces in Mekong region 
will be the benefitting from the project facility with 16 hospitals receiving grants.  
 
The central hospital sub-component will follow the same implementation cycle with 
smaller number of hospitals involved.  Given expected higher complexity and variation 
of central hospital, the Bank and the MOH will jointly appraise the first five grant 
proposals with subsequent central hospital grants applications reviewed on sample basis 
and ex-post for possible integration of lessons learned into operational manual and 
processes.  Five central hospitals have been identified for the first round of grants.  
 
Strong synergies are expected between the Components 1 and 2.  Policies, standards, 
generic waste management guidelines, training curriculum and training the trainers from 
Component 1 will provide needed inputs for the Component 2.  
 
In total, at least 150 hospitals are expected to benefit from the project. The results of 
project support will be measured across three dimensions: (i) hospital effluent meeting 
the Vietnam environmental standards; (ii) hospital solid waste management, including 
emissions where relevant, meeting Vietnam environmental standards; (iii) hospitals 
implementing adequate internal procedures for waste management. The results will be 
verified by an independent verification agent. Hospital waste management performance 
will also be monitored through Government's regular systems, including internal 
monitoring by the Ministry of Health; and, enforcement agencies of MONRE and 
Ministry of Public Security.  
 
Component 3.  Project Implementation Support and Coordination. This component will 
support the establishment and operation of the Central Project Management Unit 
(CPMU) under the Ministry of Health and coordination between MOH and concerned 
ministries and agencies in implementing the project. It will provide the institutional 
capacity necessary to plan, coordinate, and manage the implementation at the central 
level, and provide technical and management support to the local level.  Under the 
Page  4
oversight of the Steering Committee and supported by the Technical Advisory Group 
(TAG), the CPMU will manage the reviews and approvals of grants twice a year, 
disburse the funds to beneficiaries, monitor the progress of grant implementation, 
organize independent technical audit/verifications of health care waste management in 
facilities, and anticipate and resolve implementation problems timely. The component 
will finance: (i) consulting services for technical issues, project management and 
supervision, procurement, disbursement, financial management, project audit, including 
procurement audit, independent technical verification of health care waste management 
in facilities, project monitoring and evaluation, including base-line, mid-term, and end of 
project survey, project reporting, and implementation support at central and local levels; 
(ii) training of project management staff and training workshops for preparation of grant 
applications; (iii) provision of office equipment; and (iv) incremental operating cost.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Selected central hospitals, provincial and inter-district hospitals in Vietnam.Thirteen 
provinces in the Mekong Delta region are selected to be eligible for grants in the first 
round and five were confirmed during appraisal mission. Five central hospitals are being 
considered for the first round of grants as well. During project implementation, the 
project focus will move biannually from region to region, eventually covering most of the 
country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASDI) 
Mr Tuan Anh Le (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment OP. 4.01 is triggered. The environmental safeguard issues 
related to this project are associated with infection control and waste management. 
Vietnam generates about 350 tons/day of healthcare waste including 40 tons/day of 
Page  5
hazardous waste and about 150,000 m3 of wastewater daily. However only 65% of 
hospitals segregate and collect healthcare waste according to the national regulations and 
6% of hospitals wastewater discharge meets the national standards. In addition to 
increasing the pollution load on the environment and increasing the potential risks to 
public health, there has been significant media coverage related to poorly run incinerators 
and untreated infectious waste products being recycled and re-used.  
 
The project design by nature addresses the issue of poor health care waste management 
and its key performance indicator will measure the increased number of health care 
facilities meeting environmental and liquid and solid waste management standards, as 
required by the Government of Vietnam. The management process put in place for 
funding individual hospitals captures the mitigation measures required to address the 
adverse environmental impacts of healthcare waste.  
 
OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) is not triggered as there are no ethnic minorities peoples 
present within the impact zones of the project.  
 
OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered as all project activities take place 
within existing hospital sites.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project investments will not generate new waste; the focus is improved 
environmental management of waste already being generated. The potential long-term 
risk could be associated with poor operations and maintenance of waste treatment and 
disposal technology being funded under the project. However these are being mitigated 
through the provision of capacity building and training of relevant operators and ensuring 
that maintenance contracts are maintained and financed by the Government. The project 
also provides capacity building support to ensure proper and safe occupational safety and 
segregation measures are followed by healthcare staff in facilities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
While the Government has taken prompt steps to promulgate legislations and procure 
some waste treatment technology, enforcement has been inadequate and there is 
insufficient supervision of waste management practices, largely due to limited human 
resources, unclear mandates, fragmented and overlapping roles of various government 
agencies, and limited interagency coordination. Inadequate skills and lack of equipment 
and capital are additional constraints to effective implementation and enforcement. The 
project will address these issues through establishment of an inter-sectoral institutional 
framework, capacity building and environment management measures which are 
Page  6
integrated into the Operational Manual.  Relevant parts of the Operational Manual 
addressing safeguard issues have been disclosed as a Safeguards Document.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are Ministry of Health, Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources, Ministry of Public Security, four key public health research institutes, 
provincial health administrations and preventive health centers, hospitals at the central 
and provincial level. Consultations were held with relevant stakeholders, Environmental 
Inspector, Environmental Policy, and Urban Environmental Company (URENCO).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/18/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/18/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/18/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Toomas Palu 
12/20/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruma Tavorath 
12/20/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Tuan Anh Le 
12/20/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juan Pablo Uribe 
12/22/2010 
Comments:   
