Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/18/2011 
Report No.:  AC6088
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P119077 
Project Name:  URBAN WATER SUPPLY AND WASTEWATER 
Task Team Leader:  Sudipto Sarkar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
36.20
36.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to sustainable water 
services and environmental sanitation in selected urban areas in Project Provinces. The 
success in meeting the objective would be measured through the following indicators: 
number of new piped household water connections; number of people in urban areas that 
have improved sanitation due to the project; increase in satisfaction level of beneficiaries, 
established through two surveys conducted in the first and last years of project 
implementation, and financial sustainability of water companies measured through 
working ratio.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises the following two components:  
 
Component 1: Investments and Project Implementation (Total cost $232.4 million)  
 
This component will support project preparation and supervision and investments in the 
participating provinces for water and sanitation investment.  Works, goods, and 
consulting services that are intended for project preparation and implementation, 
investments, and technical assistance will be supported under this component.  
Page  2
The water investments will include: an expansion of the water network including 
transmission and distribution; increase in house connections; and construction of water 
treatment plants (WTP).  
 
The sanitation investments will include: expansion of sewerage connections, 
construction of drains, increase of house connections to the sewerage system, and 
construction of wastewater treatment plants.  
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$3.8 million)  
 
The Technical Assistance will be implemented by the MOC (Institutional Strengthening 
and Project Monitoring) and MPI (Improving the Efficiency of Investments and 
Operations).  The details are presented below.  
 
Sub-component 2A: Institutional Strengthening and Project Monitoring. This sub-
component will be implemented by the Ministry of Construction (MOC). Consultancy 
services would be supported through this component to develop the sector, help the 
provinces implement the project and to monitor project progress.  Through this 
component, MOC will manage the designated accounts for the provinces and also hire an 
independent consultant to monitor compliance on social and environment safeguards.  
 
Sub-component 2B: Improving the Efficiency of Investments and Operations. This 
component will be implemented by the MPI. Consultancy services would be supported 
through this component to develop regulations for wastewater tariffs, and promote the 
role of the private sector in the water and wastewater business.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The investments under the project would be carried out in 10 provinces with 14 sub-
projects.  There are four provinces where both water and sanitation sub-projects are 
expected to be carried out (projected total 8 sub-projects in Ninh Binh, Tam Ky, Da Lat, 
and Dong Xoai); there are three other provinces where only water sub-projects are 
expected to be carried out (projected 3 sub-projects in Uong Bi, My Phuoc, and Phu 
Quoc); further, there are three other provinces where only sanitation projects are expected 
to be carried out (projected 3 sub-projects in Bim Son, Dong Ha, and Thai Hoa).  
 
It is expected that about 884,000 people (current population) will benefit from the 
improved water services to be provided through the project.  Further, it is expected that 
801,000 (current population) will have access to better sanitation and wastewater 
collection and treatment services. The water and sanitation service improvements will 
benefit the entire city given the public good nature and the environmental externalities 
associated with the investments.  As the population in these cities is growing, in the 
coming years additional people will benefit from the investments.  The project sites are in 
the urban areas of the towns, most of which have a population of around 100,000 people 
(excepting Bim Son that has a population of 58,688).   
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ximing Zhang (EASCS) 
Mr Van Trung Nguyen (EASVS) 
Mr Huy Toan Ngo (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are three safeguard issues that will be addressed in the project: environment, social, 
and dam safety.  
 
At the concept stage, the project was categorized as an environmental category 'A' 
project since there was a large drainage investment of around US$100 million proposed 
in Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC). This drainage investment would be a continuation of 
another ongoing Bank project which was categorized as an environmental category A; to 
be consistent the Urban Water Supply and Wastewater Project was also classified as an 
environmental category A project at the concept stage. However, during preparation and 
before the appraisal the large drainage investment in HCMC was dropped and it was 
replaced with a number of smaller sub-projects on water and sanitation. Thus the project 
has been recategorized as an environmental category 'B' project as environmental impacts 
are limited and site specific.  
 
The environmental impacts would be during the construction of the water and sewerage 
networks, water and wastewater treatment plants, and house connections.  During 
construction, the environmental impacts would be due to airborne dust, noise, traffic 
disruption, and disposal of construction materials.  During the operation of the project, 
the wastewater treatment plants will generate sludge and there could be foul odor near the 
plant.  
 
Based on screenings/field surveys conducted in each project area to determine the 
presence of PCRs, it has been determined that the project will not affect any physical 
Page  4
cultural resources (PCR) and OP 4.11 is not triggered.  A chance find procedure will be 
included in all bidding documents.  
 
On social safeguards, the project will require permanent land acquisition for the 
construction of (a) reservoirs to provide water sources for drinking water systems and (b) 
the water supply plants, (c) wastewater treatment plants, and (d) pumping stations. For 
water supply and sanitation investments, both permanent and temporary land acquisition 
will take place where the impacts will be mainly on the households who have small 
businesses along the roads or streets within these towns. The task team, including the 
social safeguards specialist, visited all 14 subprojects in 10 provinces. Various 
consultation meetings with different stakeholders of the project were conducted and 
affected communities and beneficiaries visited. As per the field visits, it has been 
confirmed that all 14 specified subprojects are planned to be constructed within urban 
areas of cities or towns. All the residents of these cities and towns are Kinh, which is the 
ethnic majority in Vietnam, and there are no indigenous people known to be living in the 
project areas. It has been noted that these urban areas have not encroached upon local IP 
communities during the urbanization process. Information on indigenous people has been 
provided as part of the RPs, indicating that no IPs would be affected by the project. Thus, 
OP 4.10 is not triggered.  
 
The Bank's dam safety policy will be triggered as some of the water projects will draw 
water from reservoirs that are created through existing dams.  
 
Bank team: (a) The environmental safeguard specialist on the project was Mr. Toan Huy 
Ngo (consultant).  Ms. Phuong Thi Thanh Tran as an additional environmental specialist 
provided guidance, as needed; (b) The social safeguard specialist on the project was Mr. 
Quang Ngoc Bui and Mr. Van Trung Nguyen (consultant).  Ms. Pilar Larreamendy as an 
additional social safeguard specialist provided guidance, as needed; and (c) The dam 
safety specialist on the project was Mr. Ximing Zhang.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No adverse indirect or long term impacts are expected due to the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
On environment, as part of the EA, Environmental Management Plans (EMP) have been 
prepared which will be followed under the project. The EMPs will include Environmental 
Codes of Practice (ECOPs) which would be agreed upon between the Bank and the 
Government at negotiations.  The ECOPs will be updated prior to the issuance of the 
bidding documents and include remedial measures to address environmental non-
compliance. The project will have a positive environmental impact due to the provision 
Page  5
of clean water and wastewater treatment.  The impacts during construction and operation 
of the water and wastewater treatment plants are manageable.  During construction, 
contractors will water construction sites during dry and windy seasons, develop plans to 
mitigate noisy construction activities and avoid/ban night time construction, maintain 
equipment in good operating condition, and develop temporary traffic plans to detour 
traffic around construction sites.  During the operation of the treatment plants, the sub-
project owners will ensure that the sludge that is generated from the water and 
wastewater treatment plants are disposed in an environmentally safe manner.  
 
On social safeguards, Resettlement Plans (RP) have been prepared in consultation with 
the stakeholders. In preparing the RPs, besides consultation with the affected households, 
consultations with  provinces and the central government have also taken place. The total 
number of project affected households (permanent) is expected to be 556 of which 9 
would be relocated and 3 households where businesses would be impacted.  About 
870,583 m2 of land will be permanently acquired for the sub-projects. The total amount 
of temporary land acquisition resulting from the project is estimated to be 768,571 m2, 
with 11,036 temporarily affected households.  
 
The detailed breakdown for each sub-project is available in the Operational Manual. 
These plans have been publicly disclosed as per Bank procedures.  In addition, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework has also been developed that outlines the principles, and 
processes to follow to address issues of land acquisition and  involuntary  resettlement 
not known at the time of appraisal, that may be necessary during project implementation.  
 
On dam safety, there are six dams which will be monitored during the project.  For these 
projects, the provinces have agreed to prepare: an Operational and Maintenance Manual, 
Emergency Preparedness Plan, and an Annual Dam Report which will include an 
Implementation Plan and a Dam Safety Report.  
 
The institutional set-up to address safeguard issues is adequate.  The measures taken 
under the project are: (a) the Financing Agreement of the project between the 
Government of Vietnam (GOV) and the Bank includes provisions through which the 
GOV will ensure that Bank's policies on safeguards are followed; (b) each Provincial 
Project Management Unit (PPMU) that will implement the sub-projects has been 
involved in the preparation of the RP or EA and is aware of the actions to be taken to be 
in compliance with Bank safeguard procedures.  Under the subsidiary agreement between 
the central government and local authorities, provisions will be in place to ensure that 
Bank's safeguard policies are followed; (c) contractors that will implement the project 
will have to ensure that recommendations of the EMP are followed; (d) provinces have 
identified the project affected households and the costs for land acquisition and 
resettlement are known, with adequate funding allocated;  (e) construction management  
consultants will be responsible for monitoring the safeguard measures under the project; 
(f) training will be provided to the PPMUs on Bank safeguard policies and funds under 
the project could be used for consultants, if needed by the PPMUs on safeguard matters; 
and (g) the central government will hire independent safeguard consultants that will 
monitor the compliance with Bank policies. Environmental independent monitoring 
Page  6
reports will be shared with the provincial or district environmental authorities which 
provided approval to all 14 EIA reports and will oversee the implementation of the 
environmental commitments.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project stakeholders are the participating households, local authorities and the water 
companies and sanitation companies. Public consultations included surveys using public 
opinion questionnaires and public meetings with key stakeholders such as beneficiaries 
and affected households as well as local NGO representatives in project areas. In 
addition, there have been several rounds of consultations with government agencies, local 
governments and other stakeholders of the project to discuss project locations, scope, 
environmental and socio-economic concerns and environmental management and 
mitigation plans. The final draft EAs, RPs and RPF have been disclosed locally since 
December 20, 2010 and in InfoShop as of January 6, 2011.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/25/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/20/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/20/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/25/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/17/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  7
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sudipto Sarkar 
03/30/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran 
Mr Ximing Zhang 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
03/15/2011 
03/29/2011 
03/30/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
04/15/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cuong Duc Dang 
04/14/2011 
Comments:   
