Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2011 
Report No.:  AC6021
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P116846 
Project Name:  Clean Production & Energy Efficiency 
Task Team Leader:  Alberto Ugalde Ang Co 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 28, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (67%);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
2.37 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.78 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
0.00
1.78 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to strengthen the Government of Vietnam's capacity 
for the effective delivery of the Vietnam national energy efficiency program in key 
industrial sectors, thereby improving energy efficiency and reducing associated 
greenhouse gas emissions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components, which are described below.  
 
COMPONENT 1: ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLANS FOR KEY 
INDUSTRIAL SECTORS  
 
The combined industrial fuel and electricity use, which accounts for almost half of the 
total commercial energy use in Vietnam, is one of the top priority areas to achieve the 
challenging energy efficiency targets of the Vietnam National Energy Efficiency Program 
Phase II (VNEEP-II). This component will support technical assistance comprising 
Page  2
consultancy services and training for assessment of energy-intensive and high-growth 
industry sectors to develop energy efficiency action plans, chart the course for setting 
long-term goals, and outline specific strategies for achieving industrial energy efficiency 
and VNEEP II targets. The essential steps and activities to be financed under this 
component for developing energy efficiency action plan will include assessment of the 
sectoral energy efficiency potential, demonstration of voluntary agreement, customized 
assistance to individual enterprises (participating in voluntary agreement program), and 
development of supporting programs and policies. The energy efficiency action plan for 
key industrial sectors can provide a platform for coordinating energy efficiency programs 
and initiatives from both public and private sectors, with the government providing 
leadership to ensure long-term attention to energy sustainability. The pilot voluntary 
agreements can become the building block for a future national program promoting 
commitment by key industry sectors and top designated enterprises to improve energy 
efficiency.  
 
COMPONENT 2: DEVELOPMENT OF ENERGY SERVICE PROVIDERS  
 
The effective delivery of the VNEEP-II requires concerted efforts of all key market 
players such as government, enterprises, energy service providers, and financial 
institutions. This component will focus on expanded capacity building of energy service 
providers and key market players as one mechanism to deliver increased energy savings 
in the energy efficiency market. The key activities for this component will comprise 
development and delivery of advanced training programs pertaining to energy 
performance contracting (EPC) models; and customized expert support for key market 
players, especially for energy service providers to continue building their core 
competency in identifying and packaging feasible energy-efficiency opportunities 
targeting especially the industry sectors. The capacity building for energy service 
providers and key market players can further boost the development of the energy service 
industry and promote that the concept of providing package of turnkey energy services, 
most especially to industrial enterprises, can be viable under Vietnamese conditions.  
 
COMPONENT 3: CAPACITY BUILDING FOR PROGRAM MANAGEMENT, AND 
MONITORING AND EVALUATION  
 
The nationwide implementation of the VNEEP-II as well as the recent Law on Energy 
Efficiency and Conservation (EE&C) necessitates massive capacity building for program 
management and supervision at all levels of government administration. This component 
will center on the capacity building of the implementing agency's Energy Efficiency and 
Conservation Office (EECO). The support to EECO will involve provision of expert 
assistance and training activities in carrying out various energy efficiency projects, 
programs, and policies (including management of the proposed GEF project). Key staff 
sufficiently aware and trained can ensure that there are strong workforce and adequate 
governance to implement energy efficiency programs and sustainable practices.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project Management Office will be located in Hanoi. The demonstration projects 
will be located in key cities and provinces in Vietnam.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
The project is classified as Category C project as it is expected to have minimal or no 
adverse environmental impacts.  The project will support industrial sectors and 
enterprises through technical assistance comprising consultancy services and training on 
energy efficiency action plans, and capacity building of energy service providers. The 
project is only a technical assistance, which does not include any feasibility studies for 
downstream physical investments. Energy efficiency investments resulting out of the 
training programs and demonstration projects will not be financed by the project. The 
project is not planning to assist enterprises with projects that increase the capacity to 
produce coal or directly increase production or use of coal.  
 
Considering the project nature and its potentially negligible environmental impacts, no 
EA instrument is required for this project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project would contribute to improvements in energy efficiency and the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emission by strengthening the Government of Vietnam's capacity for the 
effective delivery of the Vietnam national energy efficiency program in key industrial 
sectors.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT), through its EECO, will be the executing 
agency responsible for implementation of the project. The EECO was established under 
the MOIT (Ministerial Decision No. 919/2006/QD-BCN). The duties and responsibilities 
of EECO include: (a) formulation of EE&C policies, measures, and action plans; (b) 
supervision, promotion, and dissemination of EE&C activities; and (b) cooperation with 
international organizations. For the proposed project, the MOIT has established a Project 
Management Unit (PMU) within the EECO to undertake the day-to-day and overall 
coordination, supervision, and management of the project. The PMU will be fully 
responsible for implementing project sub-components following terms and conditions of 
the legal agreements, including procurement, financial management, monitoring and 
evaluation, and project reporting. The MOIT is familiar with Bank safeguard procedures 
through its experience with implementing past projects financed by the Bank.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  5
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alberto Ugalde Ang Co 
03/03/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
05/04/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jennifer J. Sara 
05/04/2011 
Comments:  cleared 
