Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/24/2011 
Report No.:  AC5794
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P106235 
Project Name:  Da Nang-Quang Ngai Expressway Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Paul Vallely 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 10, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (25%);Regulation and competition policy (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
503.60 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
109.90 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
116.60 
 
JAPAN: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
673.60
790.20 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objectives are to construct an expressway that will enhance 
efficiency and safety for road users travelling between Da Nang and Quang Ngai and 
build institutional capacity for expressway development in Vietnam's Ministry of 
Transport.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises two components:  
 
Component 1:  Da Nang - Quang Ngai Expressway  
 
(a) 
Construction of a four-lane expressway from National Highway 1A, to the south 
of Da Nang province, to Quang Ngai province, including construction of a main 
carriageway, bridges, viaducts, and culverts, a tunnel, connection and service roads, and 
intersections, and related maintenance and rehabilitation of the local road network, in two 
Page  2
parts: (i) from Da Nang province to Tam Ky city in Quang Nam province; and (ii) from 
Tam Ky city to Quang Ngai province.  
 
(b) 
Construction of a two-lane highway, including bridges, from the southern end of 
such expressway to National Highway 1A, in Quang Ngai province.  
 
(c) 
Compensation, resettlement, and rehabilitation, including livelihood restoration, 
of Project Affected Persons.  
 
(d) 
Establishment of an integrated traffic management and toll collection facilities 
system, and design, installation, and commissioning of an intelligent transport system for 
the operation, management, and maintenance of such expressway.  
 
Component 2:  Project Implementation Support and Institutional Strengthening  
 
(a) 
Provision of technical assistance to the Vietnam Expressway Corporation (VEC) 
in relation to (i) Project implementation, including: (A) construction supervision; (B) 
integrated review and monitoring; (C) financial auditing; and (D) implementation of the 
Governance, Transparency, and Anti-Corruption Plan; and (ii) capacity building for 
financial management.  
 
(b) 
Capacity building of: (i) and provision of policy support to the Ministry of 
Transport in relation to: (A) expressway planning and network management, including 
establishment and operationalization of an expressway planning and network 
management entity; and (B) operationalization of said Ministry's public-private 
partnerships cell; and (ii) the Inspectorate Department in relation to its mandate of 
governance and anti-corruption.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed, 131 km four-lane, Da Nang - Quang Ngai Expressway (DQE) will 
constitute the main north-south expressway in the central region of Vietnam, beginning in 
Da Nang City and passing through the two provinces of Quang Nam and Quang Ngai. 
Topography of areas along the alignment of the Da Nang - Quang Ngai expressway is 
characterized by low hilly terrain and coastal flood plains. Ground elevation ranges from 
1
to 50 msl (meters above sea level). The Expressway will be located west of the 
National Highway 1A and the North-South Railway and will avoid densely populated 
areas.  
 
The project area is defined as the areas to be directly impacted by the highway 
construction as well as by the ancillary areas such as access roads and borrow pits. It 
includes areas that could be indirectly affected in some way, such as adjacent 
communities that could be isolated or adjacent areas that could be impacted by 
hydrological changes.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (SASDE) 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS) 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal (EASVS) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS) 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS) 
Mr Tuan Anh Le (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The expressway was designed following the mitigation hierarchy principles of avoidance, 
minimization, mitigation, and compensation. The key safeguard issues are described in 
the following texts:  
 
Minimal Ecological Impacts. The vast majority of the project area consists of farmland, 
paddy fields, plantations, and inhabited areas. Small patches of secondary vegetation 
occur along the alignment (primarily along watercourses) but no pristine natural habitats. 
The EIA found that no endangered species or protected or valuable habitats, terrestrial or 
freshwater, will be affected. The nearest areas of biodiversity importance is the Phu Ninh 
reservoir area which is several km distant from the project area. Standard mitigation 
measures (described below under construction impacts) will minimize the minor potential 
impacts on natural vegetation.  
 
Impacts on Agricultural and Forest Land. This project will result in land acquisition of 
about 959 ha of which about 434 hectares is cultivated land. The land acquisition will 
have consequences for individual households (covered under resettlement) but is not 
significant in terms of agricultural land use patterns. There are over 167,100 ha of 
cultivated lands in the districts crossed by the expressway. Construction of the 
expressway certainly has the potential to influence hydrological flow patterns and 
irrigation in the project area, including in paddy fields; such potential impacts will 
Page  4
however be easily mitigated through standard measures such as adequate drainage, 
culverts, and choice of alignment.  
 
The EIA indicates there will be losses of trees from agricultural areas and plantations. 
These losses are not significant in economic or ecological terms. The project itself 
includes vegetation restoration to be carried out on some 423 ha so this will also mitigate 
the loss of trees and vegetation during construction.  
 
Important Impacts during Construction. Noise and dust impacts during construction of 
the road, bridges, and tunnel will be important and result from construction activities in 
general and particularly from the operation of heavy machinery.  Large quantities of 
borrow fill material will be obtained from local quarries, sand pits, and hills along the 
construction corridor. If unprotected and poorly managed, the borrow areas could be 
subject to erosion, cause siltation, generate dust, and become a permanent scar on the 
land.  Given the high rainfall during the peak construction season months, erosion rates 
could be high.  
 
The proposed roadway requires 132 bridges, 26 viaducts on sections subjected to annual 
flooding, 23 flyovers crossing local roads and at-grade intersections, 107 box culverts, 
and 492 pipe culverts. These installations will require diversions for the larger projects, 
construction equipment in the riverbeds, and the transport and use of construction 
materials in and over the water surface. In addition, up to 1,500 people are expected to 
work full time on the project for the four-year period and will produce significant 
volumes of sewage per day. Impacts on surface water quality and underground water 
could result from dredge and piling hole waste material, hazardous substances in the 
sediments, accidental spills, serious erosion, and other contaminants that could enter the 
watercourse accidentally.  
 
Standard codes of practice and mitigation measures in the Environment Management 
Plan can substantially mitigate most of the construction impacts and none will be 
irreversible or significant. Because of proximity to urban areas, worker camps are not 
likely to be constructed. Nevertheless the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) 
includes measures to reduce camp impacts, if they were to be built.  
 
Significant Resettlement Impacts. An analysis of census and inventory data collected 
during Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) preparation indicated that more than 632 
households (HH) are likely to be affected by the project and may need to be physically 
relocated. Additionally, about 4,200 HH, mostly located in Quang Nam and Quang Ngai 
provinces, would be affected by a loss of productive land to the extent that their 
remaining land was no longer economically viable. In addition over 60 HHs would have 
their business affected. A preliminary assessment indicated that about 959 ha of land will 
be acquired for the project development. Of this, about 434 ha is agriculture land, 73 ha is 
residential land, 184 ha is cultivated forest/wood land and 269 ha are used for other 
purposes. In the project area virgin forest has long since been cleared.  
 
Page  5
A
major linear development such as this Expressway project always has the potential for 
dividing and isolating communities. This was addressed carefully in the choice of 
alignment which was modified, with input from the consultations, to minimize such 
impacts. As a result, no community will be divided by the Expressway; individual losses 
of access or connectivity will be addressed through the RAPs.  
 
Impacts on Cultural Resources. The construction of the expressway will result in direct 
impacts on a group of four Champa archaeological ruins in Duy Xuyen District. 
Therefore, the Bank's Operational Policy 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is 
triggered. Of these four sites, the alignment directly passes through three, namely Trien 
Tranh, Go Gach and Go Loi, and will pass within 500 m of the fourth site, Chua Vua. 
During preparation, qualified specialists from the Archeological Institute carried out a 
preliminary study of these sites. They recommended an action plan which includes 
further overall study of the area, test excavation and salvage of artifacts at the affected 
sites has been included in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The costs for all 
these activities are included in the cost table of the EMP.  
 
Construction works also requires relocation of 135 graves.  Affected households will be 
paid for arranging the relocation in such a way that suits local culture and customs.  It is 
also possible that during construction, additional archaeological /cultural sites may be 
discovered.To protect such unknown archaeological/cultural sites that may be exposed 
during construction phase, the EMP also includes a Chance Find Procedure which is in 
accordance with the Vietnamese Law on Cultural Heritage and the Bank's requirements 
as specified in OP 4.11.  
 
No Impacts on Ethnic Minorities. The Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP/BP 4.10) is not 
triggered by the project. This is based on: i) the fact that no indigenous peoples, as 
defined by the Bank's OP 4.10, were identified during the preparation of the three RAPs, 
EIA, and consultations with affected people during social assessment, ii) task team's 
review of secondary data related to ethnic minority (EM) peoples available at commune 
level, based on data from the National Committee for Ethnic Minorities Affairs, and (iii) 
confirmation from each of the three project provinces that no EMs will be affected by the 
project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The entire area served by the Expressway is undergoing rapid growth and national, 
regional and provincial development plans all envisage major changes in the area in the 
next decades, as part of an ongoing process of industrialization and urbanization. 
Certainly the Expressway will be part of that process as it will facilitate movement of 
people and goods throughout the area - indeed this is implicit in the project PDO. At the 
same time, the Expressway cannot be considered to be the major or sole trigger of future 
developments in an area that is already well served by multiple transportation options and 
is already in a rapid development transition.   
 
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EIA process looked at two major alternatives: the status quo and the selected 
Expressway construction option. The status quo was not acceptable because of the need 
for greatly improved transportation options in the region. Expansion of the existing 
national highway was discarded because of major resettlement impacts. Alignment 
options were limited because of the lay of the land of which the project area with 
mountains to the west and developed areas along the coast.  
 
In determining the proposed expressway alignment the following macro-scale criteria 
were applied: i) avoiding mountains and hilly areas as much as possible; ii) avoiding a 
major reservoir located between Da Nang and Quang Ngai; iii) minimizing impacts on 
paddy fields and agricultural lands; iv) avoiding and minimizing impacts on the main 
north-south railway route running parallel to the proposed expressway, v) avoiding and 
minimizing impacts on local towns and industrial zones along the alignment; vi) avoiding 
the existing NH1A highway; vii) enhancing and optimizing connections with existing 
road network and NH1A; viii) avoiding and minimizing impacts on critical protected 
areas, critical forests, flora and fauna species of conservation importance. Based on these 
macro-scale criteria there was only one major viable and cost/effective corridor available 
to design the expressway between Da Nang city and Quang Ngai.  
 
At the micro scale, the horizontal alignment was carefully updated through several 
meetings with the Peoples Committees. Small scale amendments were made to the 
alignment to take into account many factors so as to reduce land acquisition (especially 
farmland), to protect ecological environments, to avoid sensitive locations, to minimize 
the relocation of electric pylons (both 500KV and 35KV) and to take into account 
opinions expressed by both local governments and people affected by the project. 
Specific changes in the alignment at three sections (from km 106 to km 115, km 115 to 
km 127, and km 127 to km 132) were made to reduce impacts on land acquisition, 
especially to reduce the number of households that have to be relocated. Further 
comparison and analysis in terms of environmental protection indicated that the 
recommended route scheme was the optimal scheme, and was recommended as the final 
alignment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment. According to the World Bank's Operational Policy 4.01 Environmental 
Assessment, the proposed project is Category A for environmental assessment purposes, 
due to the scale and significance of potential environmental and social impacts and the 
sensitivity of the project areas. A full Environmental Assessment (EA) was carried out 
following the Vietnamese environmental assessment laws/regulations as well as the 
World Bank safeguards policies. The EIA and EMP reports cover the entire DQE 
roadway, service areas, tolls, and all construction related infrastructure such as access 
roads, workers' camps, borrow pits, and disposal sites (including work financed by 
JICA).  
 
Page  7
Mitigation measures have been designed for all the adverse impacts. These will be 
avoided, mitigated, minimized or otherwise compensated. Furthermore, an environmental 
management system involving environmental management and supervision 
organizations, environmental monitoring, institutional strengthening, and personnel 
training will be established to ensure the environmental performance of the Project. In 
addition, to help with successful implementation of these measures, an EMP has been 
developed. The EMP establishes a set of mitigation and monitoring measures to help 
minimize or reduce to acceptable levels the adverse environmental and social impacts 
that can occur during the construction and implementation of the DQEP Expressway. The 
EMP addresses all issues identified in the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and: 
(i) proposes measures to mitigate environmental impacts during construction and 
operation; and (ii) establishes an organizational structure, procedures, institutional 
responsibilities for implementation, and a budget and source of financing for each 
activity.  
 
The EIA and the EMP were reviewed by the World Bank and found to comply with 
Bank safeguard policies. All above reports have been made available in Vietnam and in 
the Public Information Center (InfoShop) of the World Bank.  
 
Comprehensive environmental monitoring programs have been designed for both 
construction and operation phases. Monitoring includes water quality, noise, hydrology, 
construction dust and noise, as well as soil erosion and vegetation restoration. The PMU 
will be in charge of environmental monitoring during the construction and the operation 
phase. The EMP includes a comprehensive environmental compliance monitoring 
framework based on environmental supervision during construction, a system of penalties 
for non-compliance, and an Independent Monitoring Consultant. The selected 
Environmental Monitoring Consultant will conduct monitoring and write reports of the 
monitoring results to PMU on a quarterly basis during the construction phase and twice a 
year during the operation phase.  
 
All personnel of the Project Office Environment Protection Section and relevant 
construction personnel will receive environmental training at least one time before 
commencement of construction. Key environmental administrative and monitoring 
personnel will also go through technical training provided by the project.  
 
Resettlement Action Plans. The VEC has prepared three Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs), one for each of the three Provinces through which the road passes. The RAPs are 
fully compliant with the requirements of the Bank's OP 4.12 on Involuntary 
Resettlement, which provides for mitigation measures to address adverse impacts caused 
by acquisition of private assets on affected households.  The RAPs were prepared based 
on the proposed alignment of the Expressway at the feasibility stage. Following approval 
of the project by the government, the final Detailed Measurement Survey (DMS) will be 
carried out during the initial stages of project implementation based on the detailed 
engineering designs and demarcation of affected areas by local authorities and VEC. Cut-
off date would be established based on the DMS. The borrower will provide the updated 
information in the form of a short report for the relevant section of the expressway to the 
Page  8
Bank for information in case of: i) significant difference (more than 10%) in the number 
of DPs based on the DMS and the numbers provided in the RAP for any section or phase 
of the project; ii) any impacts identified that are not covered in the RAP; and iii) a section 
of the road causes the physical displacement of 20 or more households that were not 
included in the census carried out as part of the original RAP. Upon completion of 
resettlement, the Borrower would also submit to the Bank a final consolidated 
Resettlement Completion Report.  
 
VEC, as the main implementing unit, will be responsible for resettlement 
implementation. VEC will be assisted by consultants in resettlement implementation. 
While the VEC staff is not very familiar with WB procedures, they have managed 
resettlement in several large scale projects and have some experience of addressing 
resettlement issues, including those in JBIC funded projects. All the three provinces (Da 
Nang, Quang Nam and Quang Ngai) have some experience in resettlement planning and 
implementation in the World Bank funded projects, particularly in Da Nang.  However, 
Bank would continue to provide technical guidance to the provincial and district level 
officials, particularly in Quang Ngai and Quang Nam provinces to ensure that 
resettlement implementation is carried out in accordance with the final RAPs.  
 
Major infrastructure projects such as this expressway project offer unique opportunities 
to promote within Vietnam the concept of biological offsets - enhanced protection of 
habitat to compensate for cumulative biodiversity impacts of the project. Although in the 
case of this project, the actual cumulative biodiversity impacts are minor, the project 
proponent has agreed to inclusion of a compensatory offset.  Given the biodiversity 
importance of the Phu Ninh reservoir area, located several km from the project area, the 
project includes a small investment to facilitate the change of the reservoir area from 
forest reserve to protected area and to consolidate and implement an integrated 
management plan for the Phu Ninh Nature Reserve (details are in the EMP). During 
preparation the Bank team determined there would be no restriction of access to the area, 
thus not triggering the need for a Process Framework under the Involuntary Resettlement 
OP, and no environmental impacts from this support.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Two rounds of public consultations were carried out in the early and final stages of EIA 
preparation. The public consultation involved directly affected inhabitants and local 
authorities through public meetings, questionnaires, interviews, and panel discussions. 
Important information such as EIA TOR, the preparation status of the EIA, and the public 
consultation plan has been disclosed by local media. The results of the public 
consultation indicate that most of the affected people are supportive of the Expressway 
project and are in favor of the potential benefits arising from the Expressway. Concerns 
included policies concerning land acquisition, relocation and house demolition, 
community isolation and that appropriate mitigation measures will be adopted. Other 
concerns raised were about the general disruption of their traditional movement and 
community life patterns , accidental leaks of toxic substances,  contamination of soils, an 
increase in the ambient noise they experience, and decreased air quality. The results of 
Page  9
the consultation were incorporated into the Environmental Management Plan and the 
project mitigation measures.  
 
Extensive consultation with the potentially affected communities was carried out during 
the RAP preparation. Information on the project objectives and likely impacts, and salient 
features of the compensation and resettlement policy was disseminated. The participatory 
approach helped reaching consensus on the resettlement policy and entitlements for 
various adverse impacts. A similar participatory approach will be pursued further during 
project implementation to ensure implementation of the RAPs. Further consultations 
with, and participation of, civil society organizations is proposed during resettlement 
implementation, especially in planning and designing rehabilitation assistance strategies 
for severely affected households and their relocation. Further, participation of civil 
society is proposed through the Independent Grievance Redress Committees (GRCs) that 
would be established at the Da Nang City PC, provincial districts and commune/ward 
level. Participation of community representatives and civil society would also be 
encouraged through an informal community level conflict resolution mechanism to 
resolve grievances.  
 
The project design also incorporates good practice examples based on the lessons 
learned and feedback from several ongoing projects in Vietnam. In addition to 
establishing the Grievance Redress Mechanism, described above, other examples include:  
 
(i) 
Both the registered and non-registered affected businesses are provided 
compensation equivalent to average monthly income for 3 months.  
 
(ii) 
Appointment of professional appraiser to conduct a Replacement Cost Survey 
(RCS) to determine prevalent market rates for different types of affected assets. The rates 
thus established would be compared with the provincial rates, which if necessary, would 
be revised for application in the project. The proposed RCS is to be carried out in parallel 
with the Detailed Measurement Survey (DMS) of affected assets.  
 
(iii) 
VEC will contract an experienced Independent Monitoring Agency (IMA) for 
external monitoring of resettlement implementation. The IMA will submit its bi-annual 
report to VEC with a copy to the Bank. The IMA will also conduct an evaluation of 
resettlement implementation 6-12 months after the completion of all resettlement 
activities to assess whether or not the severely affected DPs have been able to restore 
their livelihood and incomes at pre-project levels. If this evaluation indicates that 
severely affected DPs have not recovered their lives according to the Project objectives, 
additional assistance would be provided to the DPs to achieve the project objectives.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/09/2010 
 
Page  10
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/20/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/05/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/24/2011  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/15/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/20/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/05/2011 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Page  11
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paul Vallely 
02/15/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu 
02/15/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Tuan Anh Le 
02/15/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
02/15/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
02/15/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jennifer J. Sara 
02/15/2011 
Comments:   
