Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5479 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/19/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P113151 
Project Name: Vietnam Industrial Pollution Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Jiang Ru 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 23, 
2012 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2012 
Managing Unit: EASVS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other industry (100%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed PDO is to improve environmental compliance of industrial zones on a pilot basis. 
This will be achieved through strengthening of the institutional and regulatory environment, 
improved monitoring and enforcement, improved CETP construction and operation for proper 
wastewater treatment, and information disclosure and public participation in two or three 
provinces. Key performance indicators are (a) percentage of industrial zones with adequate and 
good monitoring data on pollution discharges; (b) extent of pollution information disclosed; (c) 
percentage of public complaints responded and resolved; (d) collection ratio and collected 
amount of non-compliance fines; and (e) rate of wastewater treatment compliance in industrial 
zones.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project cost, not including counterpart funding, is $50 million to be financed 
through an IDA credit. Terms and conditions of the IDA credit will be determined during project 
preparation. The proposed project components are:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Enforcement. This component will focus on 
environmental enforcement and support environmental authorities to: (a) review and update 
environmental regulations and promote wastewater treatment compliance of industrial estates 
through effective inspection and enforcement; (b) establish water quality monitoring systems in 
the participating provinces;  (c) develop and employ an effective information disclosure platform 
and public participation mechanisms; and (d) perform effective inspection and enforcement.  
 
Component 2: Pilot Financing for Wastewater Treatment. This component will provide 
financing assistance for industrial parks in the participating provinces to properly construct and 
operate CETPs and ultimately to comply with environmental requirements. Detailed financing 
terms and conditions will be decided during project preparation as well as possible participation 
of IFC in financing arrangements.  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance for Industrial Estates and Project Implementation. This 
component will provide an array of technical assistance to support (a) industrial zone 
management authorities to effective perform their environmental management responsibilities; 
(b) proper design and operation of CETPs; and (c) accurate and timely self monitoring and 
reporting by the industries. In addition, this component will support (d) project management 
activities (including monitoring and evaluation); (e) studies related to project implementation; 
and (f) knowledge management activities.  
 
Implementation Arrangements. The Government of Vietnam has indicated that MPI will be the 
project owner and its Department of Economic Zones Management will lead project preparation.  
MPI has agreed to engage fully MONRE, the Ministry of Industry and Trade and the 
participating provinces in project preparation. Detailed implementation arrangements will be 
confirmed during project preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
It is expected that two to three provinces will be selected, covering only a few river basins. 
Willingness of the provincial authorities to participate in the project to control wastewater 
pollution from their industrial zones will be a key criterion for provincial selection.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Safeguards will be managed directly at the Provincial level.  The Project Preparation Unit 
(during preparation phase) and Project Management Unit (during implementation phase) will be 
responsible for ensuring that all project investments follow procedures and requirements laid 
down in the Environmental Management Framework. If capacity-building is required, this will 
be included under the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS) 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASVS) 
Mr Tuan Anh Le (EASVS) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Although the main objective of the project is to improve environmental performance of 
wastewater treatment in industrial parks, some adverse environmental impacts could potentially 
occur as a result of poorly operating treatment plants or as a result of how residual sludge is 
treated and disposed.  
 
The project will develop an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that will 
include procedures to address possible adverse social or environmental impacts. It will provide a 
process to assess the potential impacts and to propose alternatives or relevant mitigation 
measures and strategies. The EMF will establish clear directives and methodologies for the 
evaluation of sub-projects to be financed by the project. It will also provide control points for 
decision making, institutional responsibilities and the environment instruments that will be 
required for each sub-project.  
 
The EMF will also address (unless such issues are completely and adequately covered in 
other documents or approaches) processes to ensure there is an adequate inventory of industrial 
units in participating industrial zones; that information will be available and considered on pre-
treatment standards; that alternatives will be considered for wastewater treatment technologies; 
sludge disposal options, and CETP siting; that consideration will be given to impacts on 
receiving waters of effluent; and that sludge disposal issues will be carefully addressed.  
 
In many or most cases, EIAs or environmental assessments of some kind will already exist 
for CETPs in industrial zones. In that case, they will be screened to ensure they are acceptable to 
the Bank and to the requirements of the EMF. Relevant industrial specific IFC EHS Guidelines 
will be used.  
 
Any investments in CETPs that will be known by Appraisal will be evaluated as per the 
guidelines of the EMF.  
 
Finally, the project will ensure that industrial zones receiving funding from the Bank project 
will be legally required to operate and satisfactorily maintain CETPs; a legally-binding 
operational manual would be one possible means to achieve this.  
 
The EMF will be subject to public consultation prior to appraisal and will be available in 
both English and Vietnamese. It will be disclosed in the InfoShop and locally. The approach 
toward translation and disclosure of safeguard documents of sub-projects prepared during 
implementation will be spelled out clearly in the EMF and in project documents.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
All project-financed construction will take place exclusively on the grounds of industrial 
zones so there will be no impacts on natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not involve any financing of or involvement in forested areas or plantations 
so this OP is not triggered.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Not triggered as no pesticides of any kind will be procured or used under the project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
This OP is not triggered as there is no known physical cultural resources in project sites. As a 
standard practice, the EMF will include a chance find procedure.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
A
screening for presence of IPs in the project's impact zone will be done during project 
preparation by the task team to confirm if OP 4.10 is triggered or not. This will be documented in 
a
note to files.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
If the Recipient cannot guarantee that there will be no land acquisition under the project, a 
simple RPF will be prepared to address compensation/purchase mechanisms, if any, related to 
involuntary acquisition of lands to allow installation of water quality monitoring stations in 
project provinces. This will be confirmed during project preparation and if the RPF is required it 
will be prepared and disclosed by appraisal. In the event that land acquisition was already 
completed for monitoring stations, due diligence will be carried out and documented.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project does not involve construction of any dams and is not dependent on any reservoir 
area upstream.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Subsequent to the safeguards review meeting, the TT consulted with legal counsel in the 
Bank and confirmed that this policy is not triggered because the rivers to which the project-
supported CETPs would discharge effluents are not conected to any international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
No part of the project will take place on any disputed territory.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/01/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies, if needed, and their timing will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jiang Ru 
12/30/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
01/19/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jennifer J. Sara 
01/10/2011 
Comments:  approved 
