Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5472 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/03/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P116846 
Project Name: VN-Clean Production & Energy Efficiency 
Task Team Leader: Alberto Ugalde Ang Co 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 18, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 17, 2011 
Managing Unit: EASVS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (67%);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
2.37 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.78 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
0.00
1.78 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to strengthen the Government of Vietnam's capacity for the 
effective delivery of the Vietnam national energy efficiency program in key industrial sectors, 
thereby improving energy efficiency and reducing associated greenhouse gas emissions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project seeks to achieve the project development objective through the following 
components:  
 
Component 1: Formulation of energy efficiency action plan for industry sectors  
 
a. 
Formulation of industrial sector strategy and action plan  
 
Page  2
This component will target critical industries such as beverage/food, brick/ceramic, paper, and 
textile and formulate long-term industrial sector strategy and action plan for energy-efficient use. 
Initially, this component will analyze the energy savings potential of key technological fields for 
specific process optimization in each selected sector as well as horizontal technologies that can 
be commonly used in many processes and/or systems. Specific action plan will outline a 
framework of priority policies and measures with a view to achieve the targeted or identified 
savings potential in each selected sector. The action plan will be also intended to mobilize 
public-private partnership in reducing energy consumption intensity in Vietnam's key industries. 
This component is not planning to assist enterprises with projects that increase the capacity to 
produce coal or directly increase production or use of coal.  
 
b. 
Demonstration of voluntary agreement  
 
This component will support the design and demonstration of pilot voluntary agreements as a 
policy mechanism for increasing energy-efficiency in top designated energy-intensive enterprises 
to start with (in conjunction with Component 1a). At least five enterprises will be selected for 
pilot voluntary agreements. Expert technical assistance and training will be further provided in 
participating industrial enterprises to build their capacity in reviewing the current energy-
efficiency potential and assessment of their facilities, finalizing energy-efficiency targets and 
energy conservation plans, and implementing these plans in order to achieve the agreed-upon 
targets (this is also relates to the requirements of Vietnam's recently approved Law on Energy 
Efficiency and Conservation). The project will design and provide incentive scheme for the 
"early adopters" of the voluntary agreement program based on verifiable energy savings. The 
government will introduce other policy mechanisms, such as (but not limited to) government 
facilitation, industrial assessments, regulation, and/or national recognition to assist the 
enterprises in reaching their energy-efficiency targets. Although the project will not be financing 
actual investments in the candidate enterprises selected for pilot program, the project will ensure 
that the participating enterprises will mitigate any adverse impacts from any demonstration 
activities and will ensure compliance with the all applicable Vietnamese air and water pollution 
standards or any other relevant environmental regulations.  
 
Component 2: Development of energy service industry and third-party service providers  
 
This component will provide continuing support to "project agents" for large capacity building 
of core technical competency, market positioning on target segments, and incorporating risk 
mitigation elements into energy conservation projects. The project will support design of funding 
mechanism to demonstrate energy performance contracting (EPC) model adapted to Vietnamese 
market rules and conditions. This component will also raise broad awareness and legitimization 
of the energy service industry and help develop policy support.  
 
Component 3: Capacity building for energy efficiency program management and supervision  
 
This component will build on the resources under MOIT's Energy Efficiency and Conservation 
Office (EECO) to strengthen the management and supervision of the national energy efficiency 
program, including engagement of sufficient expertise to assist MOIT as well as overall 
coordination, supervision, and management of the MOIT/WB/GEF Vietnam Clean Production 
Page  3
and Energy Efficiency Project, and periodic reporting about Project progress and existing 
problems, with consequent recommendations.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project Management Office will be located in Hanoi. The demonstration projects will be 
located in key cities and provinces in Vietnam.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency, Ministry of Trade and Industry (MOIT), has been collaborating with 
the Bank through various energy-efficiency programs in Vietnam including the Vietnam 
Demand-Side Management and Energy Efficiency Project (2003-2010). They are very familiar 
with Bank safeguard and Vietnamese Government safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
This proposed project would involve technical assistance, training, and capacity building in 
order to improve energy efficiency in selected sectors and enterprises. The project will not have 
any adverse environmental impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
No natural habitats will be impacted in any way through this project's TA and capacity 
building activities.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not impact in any way forests or forest management schemes.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
No pesticides will be procured through this project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
As the project involves no physical investments nor actual construction or excavation, there 
will be no impacts on PCR.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
No ethnic minorities are impacted by the project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
As the project involves no physical investments nor actual contruction or land acquisition, 
there will be no involuntary resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project does not involve financing of any dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project does not involve any international waters as defined by the World Bank's policy.  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
No part of the project will take place in or involve any internationally disputed area.   
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
02/21/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alberto Ugalde Ang Co 
02/09/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
02/09/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jennifer J. Sara 
02/11/2011 
Comments:  approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
