Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/24/2011 
Report No.:  AC5617
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P084871 
Original Project Name: Second 
Transmission and Distribution Project 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P114875 
Project Name:  Second Transmission and Distribution Project  Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Joel J. Maweni 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 7, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
192.40
192.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the parent project is the efficient development of Vietnam's transmission 
and distribution system.  The additional financing seeks to scale up the impact of the 
transmission system expansion and reinforcement subcomponent of the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The parent project consists of three components as follows:  
 
Component 1: Transmission and Distribution System Expansion and Reinforcement  
 
This component comprises three subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent 1.1 - 500kV and 220kV transmission lines (TL) and substations (SS)  
 
Subcomponent 1.2 - 220/110kV Gas-insulated switchgear substations; and  
 
Subcomponent 1.3 - Regional Distribution System Expansion and Reinforcement  
 
Component 2: Electricity Market and System Operations Modernization.  
 
Page  2
This component supports the replacement of national and regional dispatch and control 
systems.  
 
Component 3: Market Transition Support  
 
This component provides technical assistance for reform and restructuring of the 
Vietnam Electricity (EVN) and its subsidiaries as part of the transition support towards 
an electricity generation market.  
 
The AF loan will scale up Subcomponent 1.1, i.e. finance additional 500kV and 220kV 
transmission lines and substations. It will also finance, capacity building (under 
component 3) for EVN's newly established subsidiary, the National Power Transmission 
Company (NPT) which is taking over responsibility for implementing components 1 and 
3
from EVN.  
 
At the 500kV level, about 139 km of transmission lines will be constructed to improve 
the reliability and availability of power in the northern part of Vietnam by completing the 
VHV transmission loop around the greater Hanoi metropolitan area. About 2,250 MVA 
transformer capacity will be added at various locations, mainly in the southern regions, to 
support efficient evacuation of power from major generation stations. At the 220kV level, 
about 599 km of transmission lines will be constructed and 1,200 MVA transformer 
capacity will be added, primarily in the southern provinces.  
 
A
baseline list of seven subprojects has been identified for Bank financing together with 
a
reserve list of three subprojects. The subprojects in the baseline list have been appraised 
and safeguards issues assessed.  The details of the appraised subprojects are summarized 
here.  
 
Subproject 1 - The 500 kV Quang Ninh-Hiep Hoa double circuit transmission line 
(139km) will link the existing Quang Ninh 500kV substation to the Hiep-Hoa 500 kV 
substation (under construction) and will help to complete and  reinforce the power 
transmission loop in the northern power transmission system around Hanoi, thereby 
contributing to increased power availability and reliability in the region.  
 
Subprojects 2 and 3 (TL and SS)-The Vinh Long-Tra Vinh 220kV transmission line and 
the 220kV Tra Vinh substation will be constructed to increase the electric power supply 
for Tra Vinh province.  
 
Subprojects 4 and 5 (TL and SS) - The 220kV Tan Dinh-Uyen Hung transmission line 
and Uyen Hung 220kV substation subprojects are designed as part of the overall plan to 
encircle the greater Ho Chi Minh City area with a 500-220kV system to meet growing 
demand, particularly in the fast growing industrial zone south of the city.  
 
Subproject 6 - (SS) Addition of a second transformer at the 500 kV Song May 
substation also forms part of the overall plan to improve power transmission capacity to 
Page  3
the greater Ho Chi Minh City area and to adjacent provinces such as Dong Nai and Binh 
Duong.   
 
Subproject 7 - (SS)The proposed expansion of transformer capacity at O Mon 500kV 
substation is part of the overall plan to evacuate power from two big power generation 
complexes in the western area of South Vietnam, O Mon power generation complex 
(total 2,700MW) and Ca Mau power generation complex (1,500MW), to the greater 
Mekong delta area.  Some elements of the overall plan are already being financed under 
the parent project (like the original 500kV O Mon substation and 500kV O Mon-Phu 
Lam transmission line.  
 
The subprojects in the reserve list will replace drop outs from the baseline list, if any, 
and will be appraised in accordance with the criteria agreed under the parent project, 
which includes safeguards issues. The safeguards documents-the Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs), the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and the Ethnic 
Minorities Development Plans (EMDPs) for these subprojects will be prepared in 
accordance with the frameworks and guidelines which have been adopted by the GoV 
and disclosed at the Vietnam Development Center in Hanoi and at the World Bank 
Infoshop in Washington DC.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The topographical features vary from mountainous and hilly landscape in Quang Ninh to 
flat peri-urban areas around HCMC, the yellow-red soils in the Northeast of Mekong, and 
to the wetlands in the Mekong Delta.  The Mekong Delta has extensive river systems and 
areas of acid sulfate and saline soils.  
 
The proposed transmission lines and substations are mainly in the peri-urban, 
agricultural and forest areas planted for production, but would not cross protected areas 
with significant biodiversity value or natural habitats.  
 
Construction on the Mekong Delta will require special care to avoid significant impacts 
on the acid and saline soils with regard to temporary use of lands, as well as to minimize 
the disturbance to the inland waterways navigation.  
 
Social characteristics.  Resettlement process including consultations with DPs to 
mitigate  adverse economic and social impacts including  land acquisition and livelihood 
restoration for populations residing in the project areas,  are  the main social issues in the 
Project. Results of the social assessments for the baseline subprojects show that some 
ethnic Khmer peoples in the Tra Vinh province will be impacted by two proposed 
subprojects.  However, according to the data gathered the impacts on the economic assets 
lost for the majority of DPs would be minor.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASVS) 
Ms Yen Thu Thi Cao (EASVS) 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As for the parent project the subprojects will have positive environmental and social 
impacts since improvements in the transmission system will: (i) enable the siting of 
power plants away from population centers and at locations where impacts can be more 
easily managed; (ii) reduce the number of smaller "dirty fuel" back up and auto 
generation plants; and (iii) result in improved efficiency and, therefore, some reductions 
in GHG emissions.  Negative environmental and social impacts for the transmission 
activities to be financed by the additional financing are, as for the parent project likely to 
be minor and temporary, and would include: impact of access roads on population 
settlements and of construction activity on the water quality in areas with high densities 
of rivers and canals.  
 
The additional financing activities will not cause new impacts; hence the same 
safeguard policies triggered under the parent project- Environmental Assessment 
(OP4.01), Indigenous People (OP4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) will be 
triggered for the additional financing loan.   No new safeguards policies have been 
triggered by the seven subprojects in the baseline list for which all safeguards documents 
have been prepared, reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed.  These subprojects 
total $171 million or 95% of the Loan amount.  In the event additional subprojects are 
proposed for Bank financing during project implementation, EMP, RP and EMPD if 
applicable for each project will be prepared in accordance with the  Environmental 
Framework Guidelines for Transmission Projects, Policy Framework for Resettlement, 
Compensation and Rehabilitation of Project Displaced People and Policy Framework for 
Ethnic Minority Development Plan which have been approved by the Bank and adopted 
by the Government.    The safeguard documents of additional subprojects will be 
submitted to the Bank for prior review before they can be considered eligible for 
financing.  
 
(1) 
Environmental Assessment (OP4.01)  
Page  5
During preparation of the parent project, Environmental Assessments (EAs) and  
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) prepared for phase 1 subprojects and a policy 
framework (Environmental Framework Guidelines for Transmission Projects) was 
prepared to guide the preparation of environmental safeguards documents during the 
project#s implementation phase. The EAs and EMPs prepared by the Borrower using 
these frameworks were appraised by the Bank team and found to be of adequate quality 
with appropriate baselines. Copies of all safeguard plans are provided to the Bank and 
also disclosed publicly and made available at project sites.  
 
During implementation, independent consultants have been required to monitor the 
execution of the safeguards plans. While the Bank has considered implementation of 
safeguards policies to be satisfactory throughout the life of the project to date, there were 
some weaknesses with regard to the quality and timeliness of the work carried out by the 
independent monitoring consultants and the capacity of implementing agencies to 
supervise the independent agencies and to report on progress.  Remedial measures were 
put in place including intensified supervision effort by the task team, training of 
consultants, use of a larger pool of consultants to perform independent monitoring and 
increased attention management oversight by EVN's project management  As a result 
there has been a good degree of improvement and the Bank is closely monitoring 
performance.  
 
The environmental assessments (EA) prepared by the Borrower and their consultants for 
the proposed additional activities, indicate that  all the proposed project investment 
components are clearly within the definition of Category B projects, as defined by 
paragraph 8(b) of OP 4.01 (i.e., they are of a type and scale whose potential adverse 
environmental impacts are less than those of Category A projects). The team's 
environmental specialists also concluded that the impacts of the proposed subprojects are 
likely to be site-specific, not sensitive, or irreversible, and in every case, mitigation 
measures can be designed to reduce negative impacts.  
 
Appropriate Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) have been prepared for all 
subprojects in the baseline list. . The same project management boards that are 
implementing the ongoing project will also implement the additional activities including 
the safeguards policies.  They will employ independent monitoring agencies and the 
Bank#s task team will closely supervise the implementation of safeguards policies.  
 
(2) Natural Habitats (OP4.04)  
 
No baseline subprojects have identified impacts on natural habitats. For subprojects in 
the reserve list, potential natural habitats will be assessed during subproject appraisal as 
set out in the Environmental Guidelines  
 
(3) Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11)  
 
Page  6
No physical cultural resources have been identified as impacted; chance find 
procedures, as set out in the Borrower's regulations have been instituted for baseline 
subprojects. Similar provisions will apply to reserve subprojects.  
 
(4) Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12)  
 
During preparation of the parent project, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), were 
prepared for phase 1 subprojects and a Policy Framework for Resettlement, 
Compensation and Rehabilitation of Project Displaced Persons (RPF) was prepared to 
guide preparation of the RAPs for subprojects that were to be appraised during the 
project#s implementation phase. Involuntary resettlement activities were  carried out in 
accordance with the safeguards instruments; the only issues being delays and sometimes 
the quality of reports of the independent monitoring parties.These issues have been 
largely addressed through intense Bank supervision:  more competitive selection of 
independent monitoring agents and supported capacity building. The capacity of the 
implementing agencies to prepare and implement RAPs has been considered satisfactory.  
 
For the seven projects under the additional financing, the number of affected people is 
much smaller.  Only one subproject, the Quang Ninh - Hiep Hoa 500kV TL will impact 
about 2,195 households (9,411 people) of which 165 households (975 people) will have 
their houses impacted .  Impacts on houses will be mostly partial and generally will not 
require the physical relocation of families outside their residential plots.  These 
households will receive compensation for the impacts on their houses at replacement 
costs and a special allowance to cover livelihood losses during the period when their 
houses are reconstructed or reallocated. All DPs will also be assisted with allowances in 
order to restore their livelihood at least at the pre-project level.  
 
In most cases the impacts will be involving some temporary loss of land to transmission 
tower foundations, substations and line stringing. Rights of way (ROW) of transmission 
lines will involve some restriction on land use to ensure safety, although can still be used 
for agriculture purposes, been most land impacts temporary. Crop compensation will be 
delivered in cash at current market rates. Land and other assets will be compensated at 
replacement cost. Particular attention will be paid in assuring that compensation rates 
indicated in government regulations will be adjusted to actually correspond to the current 
replacement costs.  
 
(5) Indigenous Peoples (OP4.10)  
 
During preparation of the parent project, none of of the phase 1 subprojects triggered 
OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples).  However, a Policy Framework and Guideline for Ethnic 
Minority Development Plans was prepared to guide the preparation of Ethnic Minority 
Development Plans for those subprojects that would be added during implementation .  
The policy was subsequently triggered for 2 subprojects under the second phase and 
EMDPs were prepared and executed satisfactorily.  
 
Page  7
For the proposed additional financing, impacts on ethnic minorities have been identified 
in two of the seven baseline subprojects; namely the Vinh Long- Tra Vinh 220 kV 
transmission line and the Tra Vinh 220kV substation in the Mekong Delta. About 188 
households (868 people) and 11 households (43 people) belonging to the Khmer ethnic 
group will be affected by the transmission line and substation respectively.  There will be 
some minimal permanent loss of land, and no physical households relocation is involved. 
Most land acquisition will be temporary during the construction period. Permanent 
acquisition of land will be about 0.36% of the total landholdings of the Khmer people s. 
The Khmer people were consulted during project preparation  and meaningful 
information was provided in culturally appropriate manner.  
 
The EMDPF prepared under OD4.20 has been updated based on the revised OP4.10 and 
has been cleared by the Bank and adopted by EVN. It will be applied in the preparation 
of EMDP for any subprojects that may be added to the project during its implementation 
phase that triggers ethnic minority policy.  
 
Linkages to other projects  
 
The Bank has reviewed the possible linkage of the Quang Ninh -Hiep Hoa 500 kV 
transmission line to the Quang Ninh 500 kV substation and to the Quang Ninh and Mong 
Duong thermal power plants and concluded that there is no linkage.  The conclusion has 
been confirmed by the economic analysis carried out by a Bank consultant and the 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator has concurred with the approach and the conclusion 
reached.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The EA has shown that in general the potential impacts are minor, temporary and within 
the national environmental standards. These impacts will be mitigated and monitored as  
 
provided in the EMPs. Several actions have been proposed in the EMPs/EIAs and these 
include:  
 
(i) Construction of access roads, substations, and transmission lines, with associated tree 
cutting  
 
(ii) Increased levels of dust and noise from the use and movement of equipment (iii) 
Road damages and other transport disturbance due to the transportation of building 
materials.  
 
(iv) Impacts on forest, reserved land and biodiversity.  
 
(v) Soil erosion and landslide.  
 
(vi) Electromagnetic radiation and other health hazards.  
 
(vii) Unexploded ordinance.  
 
(viii) PCB leakage or disposal.  
 
Successful appraisal of baseline subprojects was conditional on preparation of EMPs 
and EAs and their implementation is a project covenant to ensure that the mitigation 
measures will be included in the technical design and bid specifications. Subprojects 
drawn from the reserve list will require EMPs and EAs to be appraised, and implemented.   
Page  8
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives have been analyzed in all individual EMPs/EIAs regarding the route 
alignments as to minimize impacts mainly on resettlement and in some circumstances on 
environment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has provided EAs, EMPs RAPs and where applicable EMDPs for all 
baseline subprojects. The Borrower has also updated Environmental Guidelines and the 
Ethnic Minority Development Policy Framework which have been adopted by the GoV 
and NPT. For subprojects drawn from the reserve list to be appraised successfully, EAs, 
EMPs and RPs and EMDPs must be prepared and appraised by the Bank. The local 
Departments of Natural Resources and Environment (DONREs) have been fully involved 
in the process by providing environmental certificates for subprojects, as required by the 
GoV. The 500 kV subprojects are subject to EIA clearance by MONRE.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
EA Disclosure and Consultation: For baseline subprojects, consultation has been 
conducted effectively throughout the EIA process, including meetings with local 
authorities, and public meetings with project affected households, DPs including ethnic 
minorities. Project stakeholders concerns were incorporated into the project design and 
EMP. Final EMPs/EIAs documents were locally disclosed, in accordance with the Bank's 
requirements, at various times during project preparation as they were completed. They 
were also disclosed at the Infoshop.  
 
RAPs/EMDPs Disclosure and Consultation: consultations have been conducted 
effectively throughout the resettlement planning process, including inventory and 
socioeconomic surveys, interviews, and public meetings. The local people's participation 
processes are documented in the RAPs and EMDPs. All the RAPs/EMDPs have been 
locally disclosed in Vietnamese at the communes and districts offices in which the 
subprojects are located.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/06/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/21/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/21/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  9
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/16/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/21/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/16/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/21/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The disclosure date for the EA and EMP refers to the date of disclosure of the EA and 
EMP of the largest subproject (the Quang Ninh- Hiep Hoa transmission line) since there 
are seven appraised subprojects each with its own separate EA and EMP.  The Policy 
Framework for Resettlement, Compensation and rehabilitation of Project Displaced 
Persons was originally disclosed on January 1, 2005 for use under the parent project. It 
has been re-disclosed on April 21, 2010 for use under the Additional Financing Loan   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  10
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joel J. Maweni 
08/03/2010 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Yen Thu Thi Cao 
08/02/2010 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui 
08/02/2010 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy 
02/24/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sajjad Ali Shah 
02/24/2011 
Comments:  Acting Safeguards Advisor 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jennifer J. Sara 
02/24/2011 
Comments:  I approve the updated ISDS 
