Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC6004 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/14/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P122629 
Project Name: North East and Red River Delta Regional Health System Support Project 
(NERRDHSSP) 
Task Team Leader: Bukhuti Shengelia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 30, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 17, 2012 
Managing Unit: EASHH 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (70%);Compulsory health finance (13%);Public administration- Health 
(12%);Other social services (5%) 
Theme: Health system performance (90%);Other social development (5%);Other public 
sector governance (5%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
180.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
18.00
18.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve the population#s access to essential health 
services in the provinces of North East and Red River Delta in accordance to the national health 
system development strategy. This development objective will be achieved through supporting 
district level health service capacities in the project provinces. In addition the project will 
support provinces in increasing population coverage with health insurance and strengthening 
their capacity for health workforce production   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is considered as Specific Investment Lending (SIL) operation in the 
amount of US$180 million IDA credit. The project will cover 18 provinces in the NERRD 
Region with the total population of 35.8 million people. The NERRD provinces are very diverse 
in terms of their economic development and health sector capacities.  Even though the project is 
proposed as a SIL, the bulk of the project funds will be disbursed based on outputs. The outputs 
Page  2
will be related to some essential health services included in the primary health care package. 
Selection of the health services and related outputs will be done during the preparation phase.  
 
The project will consist of three components.  
 
Component One # Output based financing of essential health services (US$100 mln)  
 
This component will support through output based financing four types of activities: (a) 
essential health services, (b) refurbishment of the Community Health Stations (CHS), (c) 
enrolment of uninsured into the social health insurance scheme, and (d) training of health care 
professionals.  
 
Essential health services # From the list of the essential health services that constitute the 
primary care package in Vietnam some key health services will be selected for the project 
support. The exact list of services to be supported by the project will be agreed on during the 
preparation. For each of the health services one or several specific outputs will be identified. The 
outputs shall be highly relevant to the selected health services, easily measurable (countable) 
through the routine health information system, and estimation of the unit cost of the output shall 
be straightforward and feasible.  
 
Refurbishment of the community health stations #The project will consider refurbishment of the 
CHS as an output eligible for funding through the output based funding. This will include fixing 
the physical structure of the CHS and supplying lacking medical instruments/equipment and 
furniture.  
 
Enrolment of uninsured population in the social health insurance scheme # Increasing health 
insurance coverage is high priority goal for the government of Vietnam. The project will provide 
incentives to the Vietnam Social Security Administration (VSS) to identify and enroll the near-
poor and the rest of the eligible population into the scheme. For the purposes of the project, each 
additional individual enrolled in health insurance will be considered as a project output eligible 
for financing.  
 
Training of health care professionals # The project will finance training of health care personnel 
based on outputs. Unit of the output will be #one health care professional trained through a short-
term training# or #one level-1 specialist trained through two-year training#.  
 
The component will be implemented in the following manner:  
 
Each province will develop an annual plan where the amount of outputs and the required costs 
will be specified. The provinces will receive an advance payment (e.g. 40% of the estimated 
costs) from the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU). At the end of the year verification of 
outputs will be conducted by an independent verification agent (the exact TORs and institutional 
profile of such agent to be agreed on during the preparation). Payment of the remaining funds 
will be executed based on the actual outputs produced and verified. Provinces which demonstrate 
a
higher implementation rate will be allowed a higher budget ceiling during the subsequent 
Page  3
planning cycles. Those provinces that demonstrate below 70% implementation rate will face a 
reduction of the budget ceiling amount for the next planning cycle.  
 
Component Two # Strengthening provincial level health services (US$65 mln)  
 
This component will be implemented through a traditional input based financing. The 
component will support district hospitals with basic medical equipment in the poorest districts of 
the region. Only those districts will be selected which have not received adequate funding from 
the so called #government bond program#. According to the preliminary estimates the total 
number of such district hospitals will be 60-80. The size of the medical equipment package per 
district hospital will be about US$200,000, which is in line with the district hospital medical 
equipment packages financed in the most recently approved project in the Central North region.  
 
The proposed project will also support the medical universities (total 5 universities in the 
NERRD region) and some medical colleges with the educational materials and teaching 
equipment. This activity will contribute to improving the quality of health care workforce and 
reducing the shortage of medical professionals in remote districts. This assumption is line with 
the recent analytical work conducted by the World Bank, which demonstrated that the medical 
graduates from the provincial level medical schools are more likely to seek employment at the 
district level facilities then those who receive training in Hanoi or HCMC.  
 
Component Three # Management capacity building  (US$15 mln)  
 
This component will consist of activities aimed at building capacities at the MoH level and 
Provincial Departments of Health in planning, program budgeting, and monitoring and 
evaluation. The component will support training in management, health systems analysis, and 
program monitoring and evaluation. Under the component provinces and the CPMU will receive 
technical assistance aimed at improving their planning and program management capacities. The 
component will also support strengthening routine health information reporting systems, and 
incremental operating costs related to the supervision, coordination and day-to-day management 
of the project activities. The component will fund the central level Project Management Unit 
(CPMU), which will be adequately staffed to exercise supervision and monitoring and evaluation 
of the province level activities.  
 
The project will provide technical assistance to the MoH and the Provincial Departments of 
Health in developing 5-year health sector development plans and medium term expenditure 
frameworks. Vietnam has joined the multidonor supported global initiative called #Joint 
Assessment of National Health Strategies#. This initiative envisages provision of technical 
assistance to the country in order to develop high quality national health strategy. The Project 
will support expansion of this activity to the NERRD provinces.  
 
The bulk of the funds under this component will be devoted to monitoring and evaluation, 
particularly on the auditing and independent verification of the project outputs. The proposed 
project design requires very strong monitoring and auditing arrangements. This includes auditing 
of financial management as well as independent verification of the program outputs.   
 
Page  4
D.  Project location (if known) 
Red River Delta:  
 
1.
Hanoi  
 
2.
Hai Phong  
 
3.
Vinh Phuc  
 
4.
Bac Ninh  
 
5.
Hai Duong  
 
6.
Hung Yen  
 
7.
Ha Nam  
 
8.
Nam Dinh  
 
9.
Thai Binh  
 
10.
Ninh Binh  
 
North East  
 
1.
Lao Cai (3 district: Si Ma Cai, Muong Khuong, Bac Ha)  
 
2.
Lang Son  
 
3.
Tuyen   Quang  
 
4.
Yen Bai (2 districts: Mu Cang Chai, Tram Tau)  
 
5.
Thai Nguyen  
 
6.
Phu Tho (1 district: Tan Son)  
 
7.
Bac Giang (1 district: Son Dong)  
 
8.
Quang Ninh  
 
*
Note: districts in bracket are among the 61 most disadvantaged districts. The list was 
excluded 3 districts that are under other Bank's support project   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower may need local technical assistance in defining safeguards issues and policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS) 
Ms Pilar Larreamendy (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
range of environmental impacts can be expected during the implementation of this project. 
As most of the financed investments will be output-based and their location and details will not 
be known by Appraisal,  during preparation an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. The following sections detail the kinds of expected 
impacts and how they will be addressed in the ESMF.  
 
The various investments of the project are intended to increase the utilization of health 
services and thus it can be expected there will be an increase in volumes of medical waste at 
targeted facilities. In order to mitigate potential environmental impacts, all participating hospitals 
will commit as a criterion of eligiblity to follow agreed guidelines on healthcare waste 
management, incl
uding the development of hospital waste management plans. The plans would 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
have to address issues related to collection and disposal of healthcare wastes. Based on current 
Vietnamese regulations and World Bank requirements, the guidelines will be defined during 
project preparation and included in the ESMF. A major parallel project of the World Bank in 
Vietnam on management of health care wastes has created a wealth of expertise and a range of 
guidelines for different kinds of waste and institutions that will be drawn on.  
 
The project will support rehabilitation of health care facilities which could generate a range 
of minor impacts during construction. To address typical impacts of such minor investments, the 
ESMF will include Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs), Screening for impacts on 
physical cultural resources (PCR) and Guidelines for assessment and mitigation of site specific 
impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
The project will support investments in health care institutions that are located in urban areas 
or in densely populated rural areas that will have been completely converted from original 
natural habitats. No impacts on natural habitats will result from project investments.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not support any investments in forestry and will have no impacts whatsoever 
on forested areas and therefore this policy is not triggered.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not procure any pesticides nor support any activities that would result in 
increased uses of pesticides or herbicides so this policy is not triggered.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Because of the small scale of the investments and the focus on rehabilitation rather than 
construction, it is unlikely that any investments under the project will result in impacts on 
physical cultural resources. However, this will be looked at further during preparation to 
determine if the policy should be triggered.  
 
In any event, the ESMF will include a Chance Finds Procedure to ensure that any potential 
impact on PCR will be fully and adequately addressed during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Unlike Northern Upland and Central Highland provinces, ethnic minorities in NERRD 
provinces constitute a small share of the population and they are for the most part culturally 
assimilated with the main ethnic Kinh group.  However, the project area will likely include some 
populations of ethnic minorities that would constitute indigenous peoples as defined by the Bank 
OP 4.10.  
 
During project preparation the Social Safeguards Specialist will conduct screening to 
determine the presence of ethnic minorities in the project provinces. The screening will 
determine whether social assessment needs to be undertaken.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The project does not plan any new construction and therefore OP4.12 is unlikely to be 
triggered. However if during the preparation it is decided that some new constructions could be 
financed, screening will be conducted to determine whether OP 4.12 is triggered or not.  As part 
of the screening the following information will be collected:  
-
Whether the sub
-
projects require any new land, and whether the land will be acquired by 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
open market   purchase or through exercise of eminent domain;  
 
-
The availability of land on the market ; and  
 
-
Whether the land to be required is occupied by any users including squatters.  
 
If screening determines that OP4.12 is triggered, a Resettlement Plan Framework (RPF) will 
be prepared and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for any investments whose details are known 
by Appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project does not involve dams in any way and thus this policy is not triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project does not involve emissions into any international waterway nor affect in any way 
an international waterway so this policy is not triggered.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
No investment under the project will take place in any disputed area so the project does not 
trigger this policy.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/20/2011 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bukhuti Shengelia 
02/03/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
02/14/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juan Pablo Uribe 
02/14/2011 
Comments:  I appreciate the specialized support received from the Country office in this process. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
