Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2011 
Report No.:  AC5900
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P101608 
Original Project Name: VN-Avian & 
Human Influenza Control &Prep 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P123783 
Project Name:  VN-VAHIP additional financing 
Task Team Leader:  Lingzhi Xu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 26, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: July 28, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASHH 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);Solid waste 
management (10%);General public administration sector (10%);Other social services 
(10%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (40%);Other communicable diseases (30%);Rural 
services and infrastructure (30%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 
Avian and Human Influenza Facility 
13.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Repeater [] 
 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To increase the effectiveness of Government services in reducing the health risk to 
poultry and humans from avian influenza in eleven high priority provinces and thus 
contribute to addressing Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza at the national level by (a) 
controlling the disease at source in domestic poultry; (b) early detection and response to 
poultry and human cases; and (c) preparing for the medical consequences of a human 
pandemic.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A : HPAI Control and Eradication in the Agricultural Sector  
 
Page  2
Sub-component A1: Strengthening of Veterinary Services: Under the existing VAHIP, 
good progress has been made in: (a) improving the quality management of the nine 
national and regional veterinary laboratories to ensure that they have the necessary 
capacity and capability to perform all necessary testing for avian influenza to 
international quality standards and in improving their biosafety facilities, and (b) 
improving the commune-based early warning and disease reporting in 90 districts in 11 
project provinces through the provision of training for commune animal health workers 
(CAHW) and supporting monthly meetings between district veterinary stations and 
CAHW. To consolidate the impact on the ground, the AF will support the operation of 
seven regional labs and two central labs, and costs associated with commune-based early 
warning and disease reporting e.g. training, meetings between DVO and CAHWs.  
 
Sub-component A2: Enhanced Disease control. Under the existing VAHIP, good 
progress has been made in (a) upgrading Ha Vi live bird market in Hanoi and some 
selected live bird markets and slaughterhouses in project provinces, (b) constructing a 
poultry destruction and disposal site in Lang Son for smuggled poultry; and (c) 
developing bio security standards for smallholder- and commercial farms. The 
achievements under VAHIP have provided a foundation for future control and prevention 
of avian influenza along the production and market chains. The AF will include 
continued support to strengthening operations of Ha Vi live bird market in Hanoi and 
culling and disposal site in Lang Son for smuggled poultry for another 2 years (a testing 
period) to ensure smooth operations of the facilities as they have just been completed.  
 
Sub-component A3: Disease surveillance and epidemiological investigations: Under the 
existing VAHIP, good progress has been made in (a) introducing a market-based and 
risk-based surveillance approach; and (b) improving the quality of surveillance activities, 
including sampling, laboratory analysis, data analysis, and reporting. As HPAI viruses 
are continuing to circulate in the natural environment and poultry flocks, the AF will 
support risk-based disease surveillance and epidemiological investigations at local levels.  
 
Sub-component A5: Emergency Outbreak Containment Plan: The current VAHIP has 
provided disinfectants, supplies, and basic equipment for effective outbreak containment 
in- and outside the 11 project provinces. Provincial and district rapid response teams have 
been established in all project provinces. Joint simulation exercises prove to be very 
useful for improving coordination between animal health sector and human health sector 
in responding to epidemics. These also helped improve responding capacity of commune, 
district, and provincial levels to respond and control other emerging diseases such as 
H1N1, malaria, dengue fever, etc. To consolidate experience and lessons, and deepen the 
impacts, the AF will finance stockpiles of emergency supplies and simulation exercises.  
 
Component B: Influenza Prevention and Pandemic Preparedness in the Health Sector  
 
Sub-component B1: Improving Surveillance and Response System: Evidence in 
Vietnam suggests that the weakest part of the response systems tend to be at the grass-
root level, and cross-sectoral collaboration at the district and commune levels is one of 
the critical factors to strengthen the response systems. Under the existing VAHIP, good 
Page  3
progress has been made in (a) developing and piloting an improved surveillance system 
in Project Provinces; (b) establishing and operating rapid response mechanisms; and (c) 
improving surveillance capacity. The AF will focus on filling the gaps in human health 
sector in these areas while supporting the collaboration of animal health and human 
health in surveillance and joint simulation. The AF will support improvement of the 
quality of disease surveillance and expand the coverage of the internet-based (infectious) 
disease reporting system in 54 additional project districts in the eleven Project provinces. 
It will also support multi disciplinary Rapid Response Teams (RRTs) pilots in a few 
selected districts to improve the linkage between the surveillance systems in animal and 
human health sectors.  
 
Sub-component B2: Improving Technical Quality and Efficiency of Curative Care 
Preparedness: Under the existing VAHIP, good progress has been made in (a) reviewing 
and updating technical guidelines and training materials on influenza clinical 
management (diagnosis and treatment), infection control, management of patients with 
respiratory failure, and operation of mechanical ventilation systems; and (b) improving 
capacities to control infection in hospitals at central, Provincial and District levels. This 
component will scale up the pilot activities under (a) and (b) in 54 additional project 
districts. It will also support development and implementation of health sector pandemic 
preparedness plans at District level, piloting establishment of human influenza (HI) 
surveillance in two to three Provinces, and upgrading isolation wards in three Provinces. 
The new activities are aimed at improving hospital infection control and health sector 
pandemic preparedness at District level. The Project may also explore the possibility of 
categorizing Vietnam according to the HPAI risks, estimate the potential impact in case 
of any outbreak, assess effectiveness of different response strategies, and quantify the 
cost under the different outbreak scenarios.  
 
Sub-component B3: Strengthening BCC and Risk Communication for Emerging 
Infectious Diseases: Under the existing VAHIP, good progress has been made in (a) 
training for Provincial, District, commune and village health workers in BBC skills and 
provision of equipment for Provincial and District communications units; and (b) 
conducting community awareness, information, education and communication 
campaigns. The AF will scale up training on BCC and other campaigns at the community 
level in 54 additional districts. In addition, it will finance the development and piloting of 
risk communications models through: (i) developing national Risk Communication Plan 
(RCP); (ii) developing a toolkit for risk communication on EIDs; (iii) training of 
spokespersons within health sector; and (iv) impact evaluation skills for preventive 
medicine staff.  
 
Sub-component B4: Strengthening the Preventive Health System at the Local Level: 
Strengthening the capacity of District health systems would improve the country#s 
overall capacity in early detection and early response to HAPI or similar infectious 
diseases. Identification of a significant number of avian influenza outbreaks in Vietnam 
was promoted by identification and reporting of human infection of HPAI (H5N1). Such 
a
strategy is particularly important when the country is running vaccination campaigns 
that may prevent large scale of deaths among domestic poultry. Investments under 
Page  4
VAHIP in the 28 pilot Districts have improved the District preventive medicine system in 
selected Provinces and demonstrated good impact on helping control H5N1, H1N1 and 
other emerging epidemic diseases. In the AF, the pilot model developed under VAHIP 
will be replicated in 54 additional Districts in the eleven Project Provinces to improve the 
emergency response capacity at District preventive medicine centers, including provision 
of equipment and training of staff.  
 
Component 3 Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project Management  
 
This component will support Project management, monitoring and evaluation, and 
coordination between agriculture sector, human health sector and other concerned 
agencies implementing the Integrated and Operational Program Plan (OPI).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The AF project would still be carried out in eleven provinces: Lang Son, Ha Tay, Thai 
Binh, Thua Thien - Hue, Binh Dinh, Long An, Tien Giang, Dong Thap, Thanh Hoa, Ha 
Tinh, and Tay Ninh.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Huy Toan Ngo (EASVS) 
Mr Tuan Anh Le (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Experience learnt from the parent project, with the repeated activities but in the smaller 
scope and scale, show that the AF project is not expected to have any large-scale, 
significant and/or irreversible environmental and social impacts as it is focused largely on 
capacity building and strengthening readiness for dealing with outbreaks of avian 
influenza and preventing or reducing possible human infections by strengthening 
emergency preparedness and response. In addition, the AF project continues to 
Page  5
incorporate its design to other beneficial measures such as upgrading the regional/central 
laboratories, improving the biosafety in farms, live bird markets and strengthening the 
culling and disposal site. In regard with Health Sector which the AF project will mainly 
focus on, the project will still support facilities, equipment, and training to improve the 
capacity, preparedness and readiness of the respond and curative care system in the 
provinces and districts. This will have positive human health and environmental impacts. 
As such, the AF project is still assigned an Environmental Category B.  
 
Among the Bank#s safeguards policies, only the policies of OP 4.01 Environmental 
Assessment and OP 4.10 Indigenous People are triggered.  
 
OP 4.12 # Involuntary Resettlement (which was triggered under the parent project) is 
not applicable, and thus is not triggered under the AF project because there will be no 
land acquisition planned under the AF project.  
 
OP 4.10 # Indigenous Peoples remains triggered under the AF project since ethnic 
minority peoples are present in the project area and they experience difficulties in 
communication if communication campaigns for behavior change are not designed in a 
way that is culturally appropriate to them. An Ethnic Minority Policy Framework and 
Ethnic Minority Communication Plan are in place to ensure EM peoples receive benefits 
that are culturally appropriate to them. There is no adverse project impact anticipated on 
EM peoples.  
 
The Bank#s policy on Pest Management is not triggered since the project (a) will not 
procure any pesticides, nor (b) will the use of pesticides increase as a result of the project. 
However, the chemicals to be used for the disinfection of farm facilities/personal 
protection equipment will be evaluated on a case by case basis for conformity with OP 
4.09 for Pest Management. Similar to the parent project, the AF will not trigger the 
policies of OP 4.04, OP 4. 36, OP 4.11 on Natural Habitat, Forest and Physical Cultural 
Resources respectively given that not any proposed activities affecting the natural habitat, 
forest and cultural resources.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project would not cause or contribute to long term or cumulative negative impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are no viable long term alternatives to effectively address avian and human  
 
influenza in an integrated manner. In fact, this project is following with the Integrated  
 
National Operational Program for Avian and Human Influenza (the OPI, or Green 
Book),  
 
endorsed by the Government of Vietnam and the donor community for the medium to  
 
long term control of avian influenza, and in line with the Emergency Disease  
 
Contingency Plan for Control of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in Vietnam and  
 
approved by MARD on December 5, 2005 and the government#s draft Plan on 
Influenza Control and Prevention for 2011 to 2015 towards #One Health#.   
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In accordance with OP 4.01, the client has updated the EIAs of both animal and human 
components. The measures taken by the Borrower are to be considered according to 
safeguard issues, as follows:  
 
On controlling avian influenza, although not any temporary construction related impact 
will be proposed, the client will be responsible for the operation of the live bird market 
and culling and disposal site which was financed by the parent project.  The mitigation 
measures and monitoring plan during the operation of live bird markets and disposal site 
will be strictly followed as agreed. Training will be given for commune animal health 
workers through procedures for safe handling of AI materials. Consideration for personal 
hygiene and waste management during upgrading the regional/central laboratories will be 
taken. The project would require adoption of and adherence to international standards for 
laboratory safety in accordance with OIE standards. The project design includes technical 
assistance and independent inspection of the lab facilities and practices to ensure that the 
appropriate standards are met.  
 
In the event of human infections of AI, the project will also support development and 
implementation of health sector pandemic preparedness plans at district level. As part of 
this Plan, the specific healthcare waste management plan will be developed and 
investments will be undertaken for heath care waste management equipment and 
consumables. Grounds clean-up and restoration during upgrading the isolated wards in 
preventive medicine centers will improve current hygienic conditions. Health staff from 
district preventive medicine centers will be trained on healthcare waste management 
procedures. In addition, the training for provincial, district and commune village health 
workers in Behavior Change Communication (BCC) skills will be given to raise the 
community awareness on the Emerging Infectious Disease.  
 
In terms of how to ensure EM peoples receive benefits from the project, an Ethnic 
Minority Policy Framework (EMPF) was prepared (from the parent project) in free, prior, 
and informed consultation with ethnic minority communities in the project to ensure that 
affected ethnic minorities have an equal opportunity of sharing project benefits and that 
there is a broad-based community access and support established for the project.  An 
Ethnic Minority Communication Plan (EMCP) (prepared since parent project) is 
employed under the AF project to ensure that information, education and communication 
campaigns/ activities of the project are appropriately done to EM peoples in the project 
areas. EMCP and EMPF provide guidelines on how cultural traits (typical to ethnic 
minority groups) are considered to ensure communication on avian influenze are 
effectively made to them to promote their adoption for reducing the risk of AI exposure 
within their communities.   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders of the AF project include: (i) poultry farmers throughout Vietnam, and in 
particular those of the projects provinces where most of the projects activities will be  
 
implemented; (ii) state institutions such as the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development, the National Institute for Veterinary Research, and the Ministry of Health;  
 
(iii) and provincial and local officials.  
 
During project implementation, when more information, education and communication 
materials (IEC) are prepared for ethnic minorities groups, free, prior and informed 
consultation will be conducted with involved EM peoples to ensure the IEC materials are 
appropriately designed for EM peoples to effectively enable their behavior change in 
relation to avian flu.  
 
Safeguard documents (EIA/EMPF/EMCP) are disclosed at local levels in Vietnamese 
and at Vietnam Development Information Center and InfoShop in English prior to 
appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/05/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/05/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/05/2011 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/05/2011 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/05/2011 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  8
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Lingzhi Xu 
04/04/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
04/05/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Tuan Anh Le 
04/04/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juan Pablo Uribe 
04/06/2011 
Comments:   
