Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/26/2011 
Report No.:  AC5741
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P084773 
Project Name:  VN-Trung Son Hydropower Project 
Task Team Leader:  Richard Jeremy Spencer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 6, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2011 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Other rural 
development (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
330.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
81.57
81.57 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to supply least-cost electric power in a safe and 
environmentally and socially sustainable way.  
 
Trung Son Hydropower Plant (TSHPP) is a multipurpose project, providing power 
generation, flood control and irrigation benefits. At completion, the project is expected to 
produce an average of 1,019 GWh of electricity a year, help control annual flooding in 
the river valley downstream, and supplement water supplies for agricultural use during 
the dry season.  The project will address the main sector issue of supplying least cost 
power to Vietnam#s electricity system.  It will support improved social, environment and 
dam safety practices in the hydropower sector by ensuring that the social and 
environment impacts and safety of the TSHPP follow good international practice.  It will 
foster their further adoption by supporting the preparation of other projects.   
 
3. Project Description 
TSHPP will be constructed on the Ma River, near Co Me village in the territory of Trung 
Son commune, Quan Hoa district, Thanh Hoa province.  The plant will have an installed 
capacity of 260 MW and a dam 84.5 meters high and 513 meters long at the crest that 
Page  2
will create a 38.5 km long reservoir with an area of 13.13 square kilometers (km2).  
Ancillary works will include improvements to an unmetalled road to allow access to the 
dam site, and construction of power lines to supply and evacuate power from the dam.  
 
The project area is defined by the areas affected by environmental or social impact in 
the Trung Son hydropower project, primarily by the reservoir but also including 
downstream of the dam, by the access road and the transmission line corridor.  
 
The project will include resettlement, compensation and restoration of the livelihoods of 
approximately 10,600 people who will be directly or indirectly impacted by the 
construction of the dam and the ancillary works.  It will also include mitigation of the 
environmental consequences of construction and operation of the dam.  Technical 
assistance to scale up the project by identifying and supporting preparation of one or 
more additional projects will also be included.  
 
Total project cost is estimated at $411.57 million, for which an IBRD loan of $330 
million is sought.  The project will consist of four components as follow, costs given 
below not including contingencies.  
 
Component 1: The Dam and Ancillary Construction Component (total cost $262.86 
million, of which IBRD $233.76 million) consisting of four subcomponents:  
 
#
Subcomponent 1a: Dam and Appurtenant Structures (cost $200.18 million, of 
which IBRD $199.65 million) will support construction work and supply of goods for the 
main roller compacted concrete (RCC) dam, the power generation facilities (forebay, 
intake, penstocks, turbine and control buildings, discharge canal and electrical 
switchyard) and emergency fuse-gate and spillway.  
 
#
Subcomponent 1b: Access Road and Bridges (cost $25.21 million, of which 
IBRD $25.21 million) will consist of the upgrading of the 20.4 km road from Co Luong 
village to the project site at Co Me village, two major bridges at Co Luong Co Me and 
five minor bridges along the route.  
 
#
Subcomponent 1c: Construction of Power Supply Lines (cost $2.43 million, of 
which IBRD zero) will finance the extension of the existing 35 kilovolt (kV) line from its 
termination at Co Me village to the construction site, and upgrading of the supply as 
demand grows.  
 
#
Subcomponent 1d: Project Management (cost $35.03 million, of which IBRD 
$8.89 million) will consist of the consulting services to support implementation of the 
component including design consultants, engineers for supervision and construction 
management, quality assurance, monitoring, including independent environment and 
social monitoring, the dam safety review panel, and individual consultants.  
 
Component 2: The Transmission Line Component (cost $18.61 million, of which IBRD 
$18.61 million).  This component will finance the 220 kV transmission line  TSHPP#s  
switchyard to a grid connection point an estimated 65 km away in Tan Lac District in 
Hoa Binh Province.  
 
Component 3: The Social and Environment Impact Mitigation Component (cost $35.47 
million, of which IBRD $16.53 million) will consist of three subcomponents:  
 
#
Subcomponent 3a. Resettlement, Livelihoods and Ethnic Minorities Development 
(cost $32.46 million, of which IBRD $13.52 million) will be the basis on which the 
Resettlement, Livelihoods and Ethnic Minorities Development Program (RLDP) will be 
implemented.  The RLDP is the program by which TSHPP meets its social obligations to 
those affected by the project.  
Page  3
#
Subcomponent 3b. Health Support (cost $0.60 million of which IBRD $0.60 
million) will finance the implementation of the Public Health Action Plan (PHAP), which 
targets resettlers and others in the area, to ensure that any adverse health impacts 
resulting from the project are detected and mitigated  
 
#
Subcomponent 3c. Environment Management (cost $2.41 million of which IBRD 
$2.41 million) will finance other activities not covered by requirements placed on 
construction contractors which are financed under Component 1.  It will include actions 
for the management of biodiversity and protected areas and physical cultural resources,  
further studies on water quality, maintaining a part of the Ma river intact and cumulative 
environment impacts and training and capacity building.  
 
Component 4: Capacity Development and Scale-up Component (cost $3.0 million, of 
which IBRD $3.0 million).  The Capacity Development and Scale-up Component will 
take advantage of the lessons learned during the development of Trung Son Hydropower 
Project.  It will finance capacity strengthening activities to bring other EVN hydropower 
projects up to international standards.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Trung Son Hydroelectric Plant (TSHPP) will be built on the upper Ma River, about 
170 km from Hanoi, 48 km from the Lao border and about 200km from the river mouth. 
The Ma River rises in Dien Bien province in Northern Vietnam. It then flows through 
Lao territory and back into Vietnam into Thanh Hoa province.  It is joined by the Chu 
river close to Thanh Hoa city before finally discharging into the East Sea about 30km 
below the confluence. The Ma River has the fifth largest catchment area in Vietnam.  The 
total area of the Ma-Chu river basin is 28,400 km2 of which 62% (17,600 km2) is in 
Vietnam territory and 38% (10,800 km2) in Laos. The main stem of the Ma River is 512 
km long, of which 410 km is in Vietnam. The area of the project presents unique 
ecological and cultural characteristics which make this project particularly challenging: a 
shared watershed with Lao PDR, sensitive but threatened ecosystems, and a sensitive 
socio-economic setting.  
 
The area houses important, albeit degraded, terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.  The 
project will be located between three provincial level nature reserves: Pu Hu Natural 
Reserve (Thanh Hoa Province), Xuan Nha Natural Reserve (Son La Province) and Hang 
Kia - Pa Co Natural Reserve (Hoa Binh Province). These reserves are characterized by 
tropical and sub-tropical evergreen forests still with high biodiversity values: 936 species 
of vascular plants, 79 species of mammals, 258 species of birds and 30 species of 
amphibians. A total of 216 species are considered at risk; 41 species of plants and 33 
species of animals are considered as internationally endangered; 93 species of plants and 
five species of animals identified in the natural reserves are endemic to Vietnam.  This 
biodiversity is threatened significantly mainly by habitat destruction through economic 
development, but recently by the rapidly increasing wildlife trade.  
 
In the vicinity of TSHPP, 198 fish species of 141 genera, 57 families and 13 orders have 
been identified.  This represents 19 percent of the total number of fish species in the 
country.  Ninety-six percent of these species are native to Vietnam while the remaining 
four percent are classified as exotics.  Nine of the 198 fish species are listed in the 
Vietnam Red Data Book but not in the Red List of IUCN 2006 because they are all 
Page  4
widely distributed in rivers of North and Northern- Central Vietnam.  There is a 
conspicuous migration of brackish fish species into the upper catchments of the Ma River 
with four species migrating further than 100 km upstream to the upper catchment.  
 
TSHPP will be located in a remote area with extremely poor and culturally sensitive 
communities.  The reservoir and main facilities are located in three districts.  Quan Hoa 
and Muong Lat Districts have small populations (respectively around 42,000 and 29,000 
people), while Moc Chau has a larger population of 138,000 people.  The project area is 
sparsely populated with population densities ranging from 36 inhabitants per square 
kilometer in Muong Lat, 42 in Quan Hoa, to 68 in Moc Chau.  There are around 71 
villages, 4,982 households and 25,723 people in the project area.  
 
Muong Lat District is recognized as one of the poorest districts in Vietnam.  
Infrastructure and services are underdeveloped and income sources other than agriculture 
and forestry are limited.  Son La, Thanh Hoa and Hoa Binh provinces have the highest 
infant mortality rates in Northwest Vietnam (24-32 per thousand).  There is high under 
nutrition among children under five years of age and a low uptake of contraceptive 
methods for family planning.  
 
The project is set in districts with a population that is almost fully from four ethnic 
minority groups: the Thai, from the Tay-Thai ethno-linguistic family, the Muong, from 
the Viet-Muong ethno-linguistic family, the H#Mong, from the H#mong-Dao ethno-
linguistic family and the Kho Mu from the Mon-Khmer ethno-linguistic family. The 
distribution of the population within the project area among these three ethnic groups is: 
Thai (85%), Muong (13%), and H#Mong (2%).  There are about 800 Kho Mu in the 
project area (less than 0.04%).  Of these groups, the H#mong have significantly higher 
poverty levels than the other three groups.  
 
The Thai and the Muong display a relatively small cultural gap with the mainstream 
Vietnamese society. They generally live in mixed villages but maintain strong traditions 
in terms of social organization, roles of traditional leaders, housing preferences, and their 
animist religion.  The Kho Mu moved from living at high altitude to river valleys in about 
1984, and settled among Thai villages in Ten Tan commune of Muong Lat District.  They 
intermarry with Thai people and use Thai as a common language and appear to be well 
acculturated into Thai communities for  most practical purposes.  The H#Mong retain a 
significant cultural gap both with the mainstream Vietnamese society and with the three 
other groups.  They live in fully or mostly H#Mong villages and no intermarriages are 
reported.  Cultural sensitivities, in tandem with widespread poverty, limited skills, 
remoteness from markets and other services and lower levels of integration combine to 
create significant challenges to successful resettlement and livelihoods development.  
 
Archaeological investigations found 11 sites of interest, seven of which are within the 
new reservoir area.  The area also has some places of significance for the local 
populations: Khieng San village#s sacred place where rituals are performed and 
cemeteries with traditional stone markers.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (SASDE) 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (ECSOQ) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The major environmental consequences of the project stem from the dam and the 
reservoir it will create. However, beyond the normally expected impacts from dams and 
reservoirs, the construction of the dam itself poses perhaps the highest environmental and 
social risk.  
 
Construction impacts.  The construction of the dam and its ancillary infrastructure will 
entail potentially significant negative impacts on communities and surrounding terrestrial 
and aquatic habitats. The proper management of excavation materials, river and drainage 
crossings, and the reduction of nuisances such as dust, noise, increased traffic, pedestrian 
safety concerns, and the presence of a large work force in or near small rural 
communities, will require careful engineering planning, close supervision, and a 
continuous and intense community information program. During the construction period, 
construction and material carrier vehicles will use new, existing roads and village roads. 
The presence of communities and some schools along some of these roads pose a 
significant risk for pedestrian and student safety. Traffic management during construction 
will require strict controls.  
 
Downstream Impacts.  Changes in the river flows downstream from the dam could have 
negative impacts on fish biodiversity, erosion and sedimentation patterns. The diminished 
flows downstream will create unsuitable conditions for fish in the immediate downstream 
segments of the Ma River. Increased erosion is expected to be significant downstream as 
a
result of flow variations and the lower sedimentation loads of project waters released 
from the dam.  
 
Water Quality.  Water quality in the reservoir can be deteriorated by the flooded 
vegetation and the formation of weak stratification in the reservoir. Reservoir quality 
modeling have demonstrated that the low density of flooded biomass (less than 24 ton/ha) 
and the low retention time of the reservoir (water renewal rate of 16 days) will ensure 
proper levels of water quality albeit there might be some deterioration in the earliest 
stages of flooding. The models have also shown a moderate tendency for thermal 
stratification.  
Page  6
Construction/upgrading of roads/transmission line.  Potential impacts include 
resettlement, erosion, slope instability, dust, traffic safety risks, increased access to nature 
reserves. The construction of the transmission line can also exert impacts, mainly land 
acquisition, along its alignment.  
 
Construction of resettlement sites.  For those communities which are being relocated, 
new sites will entail the construction of houses, communal buildings such as schools and 
in one case a health clinic, roads, irrigation channels and other small infrastructure.  It 
will also involve some land acquisition.  New livelihoods activities will require some 
conversion of land to agricultural and garden use.  
 
Terrestrial Biodiversity and threatened species.  Terrestrial biodiversity has been 
declining dramatically in the TSHPP area for several decades.  This is common over all 
forested areas of Vietnam.  In part, the loss is due to habitat destruction through 
economic development, but the larger part of the loss is caused by the rapidly increasing 
wildlife trade, which is driven by a growing urban market for wildlife for consumption 
and for export. These threats will continue in spite of the presence of the project but the 
project could exacerbate these threats. At the same time, the project might well become a 
vehicle for protecting the valuable resources of the project area.  
 
Aquatic Habitats, Fish and Fisheries.  Impoundment of 30 km of the Ma River and the 
formation of the reservoir, plus changes in thermal characteristics of the reservoir, will 
displace many species not able to adapt to the new conditions. The reduced flows from 
the dam and the variation in water levels will reduce fish populations in the immediate 
downstream segments of the river.  
 
Historical sites.  Two historically important sites will be flooded by the reservoir. Local 
cemeteries and ritual sites (Khieng San) in three communities will also be flooded. There 
is a high probability of chance findings during construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Cumulative Impacts. The immediate cumulative impacts from project activities will be 
the increased pressure on harvesting of wildlife for food and medicine in protected areas. 
Hydroelectric development in the Ma river watershed will be intensive in the next 
decades. Four hydroelectric projects are known to be planned for the basin, with one (Cua 
Dat on the Chu branch) already under construction. This development will have 
significant impacts on water quantity (flows), water quality, fisheries, and sediment 
transport. A set of issues at the watershed level have been identified in the EIA of the 
Trung Son project and other strategic reports carried out in Vietnam during the last few 
years.  Potential key direct and indirect impacts caused by the proposed project and 
medium and long term development in the region: hydrology; vulnerability to flooding; 
fisheries; water quality; navigation; water supply and irrigation; and aquatic biodiversity. 
Of special concern are the cumulative impacts on aquatic biodiversity.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The analysis of alternatives included consideration of the need for additional peaking 
power being met by more aggressive energy conservation, demand side management and 
transmission and distribution loss reduction, thus avoiding any further generation plant. 
Page  7
Given that this approach alone would not meet the rising demand for power and hence 
the need to add capacity, alternatives to the strategy of developing hydro as the best 
source of peaking power were reviewed; hydropower was found to be the most cost-
effective option.  TSHPP was compared with other hydro options including more 
attractive hydro projects that should be built in its place (or before ) as well as with 
imports from Laos, Cambodia and China.  
 
Specific site and project configuration options for a hydro project in the Trung Son 
section of the Ma were examined.  The evaluation of alternative configurations was based 
on a trade-off analysis between optimal hydro production on the one hand, and 
environmental and risk considerations on the other - including minimization of 
geotechnical risks, minimizing the number of project affected persons, and avoiding 
reservoir impacts in Laos (which constrained the full reservoir elevation to 164 meters 
above sea level). Thus, the analysis of alternatives included several dimensions: 
alternatives to supply side expansion, hydroelectricity in the optimum capacity expansion 
strategy, alternative hydro projects to Trung Son, and alternative dam sites at the Trung 
Son project level; and finally, alternative reservoir operating level for the selected site.  
 
Economically, when social mitigation costs, the value of forest lost in the reservoir, and 
GHG emissions from reservoirs are taken into account, Vietnam#s strategy for 
hydropower generation is justified and TSHPP is one of the best projects in terms of its 
cost of electricity.  The current site for TSHPP was chosen because it was likely to cause 
the least social and environmental impact while meeting the objectives of this project 
with a potential for high investment returns.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest Management 
(OP 4.09) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11)  
 
A
stand-alone Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the reservoir area has been 
developed based on the findings of the Environmental Impact Assessment and the 
Supplementary Environmental and Social Impact Assessment which addresses 
Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest Management 
(OP 4.09) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11)..  OP 4.36 was not triggered because 
the natural forests in the TSHPP area have been significantly exploited for household and 
commercial purposes.  Natural vegetation in the area has been severely exploited, leaving 
land with low biodiversity value.  The main elements of the EMP are discussed below.  
 
Construction Impacts Management Plan.  Measures to minimize negative impacts of 
construction activities on local communities and the natural environment, to reduce the 
induced impacts of camp followers, and prevent pollution.  Appropriate management of 
construction activities include sediment and erosion control, quarry and disposal sites 
management, traffic management, nuisances (dust, noise) reduction measures, 
management and prevention of oils and fuels and spills, wastewater and solid waste 
management plans, and decommissioning and restoration of all affected areas.  
Environmental supervision of all construction activities will be part of the compliance 
framework.  All contractors# activities during construction, including the setting up and 
management of the workers# camp will be tightly managed and regulated through the 
Construction Workers# Camp Plan.  The workers camp will be required to provide 
Page  8
alternate fuel sources for cooking to minimize the demand for firewood.  Canteens and 
restaurants under the control of contractors will be prohibited to serve wild meat.  Strict 
worker behavior rules regarding poaching, hunting, and illegal logging will be enforced.  
Additional control of entrance and exits in camps and construction areas and access roads 
to minimize poaching and environmental education awareness campaigns to workers and 
local communities will be implemented.  A Health Management Plan has been designed 
to address health issues at the workers camps.  Thorough demining for each site within 
the project area will be required before the initiation of any construction works.  
 
Biodiversity and Protected Areas Management Plan.  The Biodiversity Plan puts in 
place measures to ensure protection of local and regional biodiversity and minimize 
project impacts on three adjacent protected areas.  The plan will support the three 
Reserves# Management Boards to strengthen their patrolling and control measures and 
implement reserve management plans.  Support to community fisheries and aquaculture 
programs will be provided as part of the livelihood restoration activities.  A minimum 
environmental flow of 15m3/s will be maintained at all times downstream of the 
reservoir.  It is expected that hydrological conditions will stabilize once the discharge 
from major tributaries come into the Ma River downstream of the dam. This will 
guarantee a minimum of aquatic conditions for fish during the dry season.  Monitoring 
programs for embankment erosion will be implemented downstream. Based on the results 
of this monitoring additional appropriate measures will be implemented (see adaptive 
management approach below).  
 
Vegetation Clearing and Salvage Plan. The plan includes measures to minimize biomass 
loss as a result of reservoir clearing and to coordinate timing to allow salvage benefits to 
local communities.  Intensive water quality programs in the reservoir and downstream of 
the dam will be implemented.  
 
Environmental Monitoring Plan.  To ensure project compliance, and the success of 
proposed mitigation activities under this plan will continue baseline monitoring and 
review environmental and social performance.  It will include water quality, fish, health, 
and pollution indicators.  
 
Community Relations and Safety Plan.  To inform local communities on progress of the 
project and ensure community safety, this plan will include feedback, complaint and 
grievance and conflict resolution mechanisms for non-resettlement and/or land 
acquisition matters.  The main contractor will be required to work closely with the 
community relations and information program.  
 
Public Health Action Plan.  This plan puts in place measures to manage health risks in 
local communities, the workforce and camp followers.  TSHPCo will implement a 
regional health plan to mitigate project impacts on the health of local populations, 
including resettlers at resettlement sites, and health issues at the regional level.  
Environmental and social awareness programs for workers will be implemented and 
procedures to ensure hazardous materials such as pesticides and medical waste are 
properly handled.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources Management Plan.  To prevent any inadvertent loss of 
physical and cultural resources during construction and operation, procedures and 
measures for their mitigation and management of physical cultural resources have been 
prepared.  Two sites have been proposed for further study and excavation before 
impoundment.  Chance find procedures during construction have been prepared and will 
Page  9
be included in all bidding documents and contracts.  Special procedures, according to 
traditions and existing laws will be followed for all Khieng San and cemeteries.  
 
Management of infrastructure projects in resettlement sites.  To address the minor 
environmental impacts of all infrastructure projects to be built in resettlement sites, an 
Environmental Management Framework has been designed and is included as an 
appendix to this EMP. The framework includes the actions, responsibilities and measures 
to guarantee that the impacts from all infrastructures built in resettlement sites are 
minimized. The Framework provides screening criteria, potential impacts and typical 
mitigation measures, and reporting and monitoring requirements for all project types to 
be built.  
 
Environment management for access road and power lines.  A standalone EMP for the 
access road to the dam site has been prepared. Environmental specifications for 
contractors include measures for erosion control dust and traffic control, slope 
stabilization, road signage and enforcement of maximum speeds.  Environment 
Guidelines (EG) for power lines have been prepared for use by TSHPCo and National 
Power Transmission Company (NPT).  The EG will be used to prepare the EMP for the 
power lines that will be built by TSHPCo to supply the construction site.  They will be 
used by NPT to prepare the EMP for the transmission line that will be used to evacuate 
the power from the completed TSHPP.  
 
Additional studies.  Additional studies are planned to improve information for the 
project and improve future decision making.  One means of mitigating the effects of 
hydropower development in the Ma River is to ensure that selected branches of the river 
system remain unaltered and unaffected.  This would need to consist of a complete 
unaltered sub-basin with no dams or barriers and a high level of protection from other 
impacts such as mining-related pollution, forestry, wastewater pollution from urban 
areas, and destructive fishing practices. Having a completely unaltered system would 
preserve the ecological connectivity within one branch of the system and provide species 
with inter-habitat migration from one part of the basin to another.  
 
Fish biodiversity studies carried out for Trung Son recommended that two complete 
river sub-basins of the Ma River should be kept free from barriers and activities that 
impact fish biodiversity.  Keeping these two sub-basins intact will ensure that a full 
sequence of fish habitats and migratory routes is protected in the Ma River.  Potential 
candidate sub- basins are: for such an intact rivers scheme are the Buoi River and the 
Luong River. The EMP includes provisions, budget and terms of reference for a study to 
evaluate the feasibility of keeping any sub basins intact.  
 
In addition, the EMP also includes the budget and terms of reference for a 
comprehensive cumulative impacts assessment at the regional level from development 
programs in all development sectors.  Other studies include additional water quality and 
sediment transport studies.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12):  
 
Resettlement, Livelihoods and Ethnic Minorities Development Program (RLDP)  
 
The RLDP identifies the principles, measures and procedures to improve or at least 
restore livelihoods of local residents and to minimize or mitigate other negative social 
impacts on vulnerable ethnic minorities in the area affected by the dam and reservoir. The 
RLDP starts during planning, continues during construction and operation. The RLDP 
has been designed to ensure that all affected people have their livelihood improved or at 
Page  10
least restored.  The RLDP defines a core area for resettlement and livelihood 
development.  These are the seven communes which will experience resettlement impacts 
as a result of the reservoir and the construction area and are expected to be the main 
beneficiaries of the three inter-related plans that constitutes the RLDP.  
 
The three plans that make up the RLDP: Resettlement Plan (RP), Community 
Livelihoods Improvement Plan (CLIP) and Ethnic Minorities Development Plan (EMDP) 
form a single program because a significant proportion of project affected households are 
eligible for all three plans, and because implementation will be carried out in a largely 
integrated manner.  Because almost all of the people residing in the project area are from 
ethnic minorities, the RLDP applies in its totality to ethnic minorities and has been 
designed in every part to address their vulnerabilities.  
 
Resettlement Plan.  The RP relates to losses of houses, land and other livelihood assets.  
The plan makes provisions for full compensation and relocation of all affected residents.  
Eleven resettlement sites are planned for four communes: four villages in Trung Son 
Commune; three in Tan Xuan; and two each in Trung Ly and Muong Ly Communes.  
Resettlement sites were first identified in 2004 but modified in 2008 following feedback 
received through local consultation.  All planned resettlement sites are within the affected 
communes so that relocated households will be able to continue to manage their 
remaining land and other properties outside the project affected areas, and maintain social 
relationships.  
 
Average distance from affected sites to resettlement sites is 2 km (actual distance by 
village).  There will be a decrease in unused land (as officially designated) to allow the 
creation of residential land and new paddy fields.  A detailed assessment of water 
resources was completed as part of the resettlement master plan.  The planned relocation 
sites can provide water for household consumption through gravity systems to a total of 
540 households. Households requiring resettlement were provided with three options: (a) 
relocation to resettlement sites as planned; (b) relocation to a site within the project area 
instead of resettlement sites as planned; and (c) Relocation out of the district/province 
area with additional assistance.  Most households have stated a preference to continue to 
live from the land, and have therefore opted to relocate either to resettlement sites, or 
sites within the project area, including #up and back# within their own current village of 
residence.  
 
Community Livelihoods Improvement Plan.  The CLIP is a development plan for all 
villages affected by resettlement under the main project.  Details are available for each 
participating village. Provisions for livelihood restoration will include: (i) enhancement 
and improvement of existing farming systems for most households. The majority of 
households have a preference for land-based livelihoods. The plan will provide options 
for households to adjust their farming systems to land and water resources in their new 
locations; and (ii) diversification into non-agricultural occupations through vocational 
training for some young people, and support to local microenterprises that will create 
local jobs. The plan also pays attention to retain human resources, i.e. to avoid that the 
majority of relocated households with higher formal education levels move out of the 
area. It provides to these households opportunities to stay in the project area.  
 
Preliminary CLIPs have been prepared for all villages entitled to one.  To test whether 
the CLIPs are realistic and implementable, and will have the desired outcome of restoring 
livelihood to at least pre-project levels, pilots are planned immediately following the loan 
Page  11
approval.  Training needs assessments, will also be carried out based on the requested 
vocational training for younger people affected by the project.  
 
Ethnic Minorities Development Plan.  The EMDP builds upon a social assessment 
process and free, prior and informed consultations with potentially affected ethnic 
minority communities. The scope of the EMDP addresses impacts on ethnic minority 
communities not covered by other plans within the RLDP, providing supplemental forms 
of assistance to facilitate livelihoods development and social adaptation to changed 
surroundings. This includes an emergency grants program for households in vulnerable 
communities, grants for women#s groups, and support for ceremonies associated with 
relocation of villages and graves.  The EMDP, along with other measures incorporated 
into other aspects of the RLDP, are expected to ensure that the development process 
fosters full respect for the dignity, human rights and cultural uniqueness of ethnic 
minorities in the project affected area, and takes into account their development needs 
and aspirations.  
 
Access Road Resettlement  
 
Because the access road must be completed before the main construction work of the 
dam can begin, a RP for the road has been prepared and largely implemented.Some 486 
households in Mai Chau District of Hoa Binh Province and Quan Hoa District of Thanh 
Hoa Province are affected by the road, 66 of them will need to be relocated.  The RP 
makes provision for full compensation and relocation of all affected residents by offering 
(a) land for land or cash for land at replacement value and the option for relocation of all 
households who lose more than 25 percent of their land holding; (b) compensation for 
affected structures and other assets on land; (c) allowances to cover the cost of moving, 
re-establishing livelihoods and new houses and other costs. Special provision is made for 
severely affected poor households, which will receive additional allowances.  All of those 
who must relocate their houses can do so within their own land holdings and there are 
consequently no new resettlement sites.  Compensation for assets at replacement cost has 
been provided, in accordance with both local Vietnamese requirements and Bank policy. 
Consideration of impacts on ethnic minorities is included in the RP for the road.  
 
Under the RP prepared for the access road, the definition of severely affected 
households only extended to those households having to relocate their houses or losing 
more than 25 percent of their productive land.  There are 41 households which will lose 
more than ten percent of their productive assets but less than 25 percent; these households 
are considered severely affected as defined by OP4.12.  Since the RP is now largely 
complete, TSHPMB has undertaken to ensure that they receive the same compensation as 
others considered severely affected and a covenant in the Project Agreement has been 
introduced for that purpose.  
 
Power Lines Resettlement  
 
A
separate RPF and Ethnic Minorities Planning Framework (EMPF) has been prepared 
for the power lines that will supply power during the construction phase and evacuate 
power during the operation phase of TSHPP.  The RPF has been approved by the Prime 
Minister and will guide the preparation of the RP for the power lines and the transmission 
lines.  The EMPF will guide the preparaton of the EMDP for the power lines, if they are 
needed.  
 
Implementation of EMP and RLDP  
Page  12
The EMP details the environmental management and supervision organizations and 
responsibilities, mitigation measures, capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget 
estimates for implementation.  Relevant elements of the EMP will be incorporated into 
bidding documents and contracts to ensure effective implementation throughout the 
preconstruction, construction and operation phases of the TSHPP.  
 
EMP implementation will be managed by Trung Son Hydropower Project Management 
Board (TSHPMB) and its successor, Trung Son Hydropower Company (TSHPCo) when 
it is formed.  An environmental management unit has been established in TSHPMB with 
dedicated environmental staff.  Qualified environmental staff will be required to be 
assigned in contractor and environmental supervision engineer teams to ensure effective 
implementation of EMP.  
 
TSHPMB and its successor, TSHPCo, is responsible for the implementation of  the 
EMP and RLDP in coordination with provincial and local institutions.  Its duties include 
the following:  
 
#
Implementation of additional studies on environment (intact rivers, cumulative 
impacts and water quality).  
 
#
Implementation of the RP, CLIP and EMDP,  including the inventory of losses, 
preparation of compensation and allowance plans, contracts for construction of the 
resettlement sites and associated infrastructure, delivery of compensation and allowances, 
in particular by preparing detailed schedules and plans, and monitors progress.  
 
#
Management of the community relations program and the related business of the 
Independent Grievance Panel (IGP).  
 
#
Implementation of communication activities jointly with the dedicated 
communications staff in TSHPMB or TSHPCo.  
 
#
Supervision of the environment and social aspects of the work carried out by the 
construction supervision consultants.  
 
#
Contracting and supervision of Independent Monitoring Consultants for social 
and environment monitoring of all construction activities.  
 
To undertake these activities, the Social and Environmental Division of TSHPMB, has a 
current staff of 11 (eight working on social issues and three on environment).  Six new 
staff will be hired, three to work on the CLIP and three on environment.  The head of the 
Social and Environment Division reports directly to the Director of TSHPMB.  
Additional expertise on gender, ethnic minorities poverty reduction and monitoring and 
evaluation will be hired either as staff or on long term consultant contracts. Where 
necessary local expertise will be supplemented by specialists with international 
experience.  All staff will transfer into TSHPCo when it is formed.  
 
Consultants and contractors, hired by TSHPMB or TSHPCo will: support the 
preparation and implementation of the individual plans within the RLDP; carry out 
construction of resettlement sites and associated infrastructure; and conduct independent 
monitoring of each of the plans within the RLDP.  
 
All EMP and RLDP activities have been adequately budgeted.  EMP implementation is 
included in the contractual commitments of the civil works contractors, and these are 
estimated to be about 8 percent of the main civil works contracts.  Hence EMP costs from 
this source are about $11 million, with a further $2.4 million budgeted for other support 
and monitoring activities.  The RLDP costs are estimated at $35.5 million, which amount 
Page  13
includes cost of land acquisition, compensation payments, livelihoods restoration and 
support for ethnic minorities.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37)  
 
TSHPMB has established a Dam Safety Review Panel (DSRP) which has undertaken 
two missions at the feasibility stage and detailed design stage of the project.  It has 
reviewed the quality assurance, O&M, instrumentation and emergency preparedness 
plans prepared by TSHPMB and found them satisfactory.  The DSRP has reviewed the 
proposed revised design incorporating a fuse gate dam and emergency spillway.  It has 
accepted the design proposal and EVN is now completing the detailed design of the new 
structure.  All the other recommendations of the DSRP have been met and the DSRP has 
issued a letter providing its clearance of the plans.  In consequence TSHPP now meets the 
requirements of OP 4.37 and international practice with respect to dam safety.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50)  
 
EVN briefed the Lao PDR Ministry of Energy and Mines on the TSHPP in late 2008, 
providing a summary of the project design features, an assessment of the social and 
environment impacts and noted that it had requested World Bank financing.  It was 
agreed that EVN would provide annual updates on the project.  Lao provided its written 
no objection to the project on January 29, 2009.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation of Safeguards Impacts  
 
The EMP and RLDP include monitoring and evaluation activities which are adequately 
planned and budgeted.  
 
Implementation of the EMP by contractors is monitored by the construction supervision 
consultant and independently monitored by the IMC, which also monitors the 
performance of the construction supervision consultant.  Progress in implementing the 
EMP will be monitored at least annually and following major incidents.  In addition a 
review will be undertaken at the request of project stakeholders.EMP completion and 
success in reducing impacts as expected are intermediate indicators and satisfactory 
compliance with the EMP is an outcome indicator for the project development objective.  
 
The RLDP has a specific results framework, with the outcome of improvement or at 
least restoration of pre-project livelihoods and maintenance of cultural identity reflected 
in the project outcome indicator and thence is linked to the project objective. Internal 
monitoring of livelihoods by TSHPMB will be continuous, with summaries being 
prepared every six months and based on the household database developed to support 
resettlement.  It will be mainly focused on process but the Safeguards Team will be 
responsible for maintaining data to allow impact monitoring to take place.  Community 
monitoring will be on a continuous basis, by village monitoring groups.  Risks to ethnic 
minorities will also be monitored once per year, using participatory assessment methods.  
 
External monitoring of the RLDP will take place six-monthly using sampling of villages 
in the project area (including downstream villages).  A mid-term impact evaluation will 
conduct a quantitative household survey to assess current livelihoods and predict 
livelihoods and incomes at expected project completion.  A control group will be used for 
comparison purposes.  
 
The monitoring of dam safety is the explicit responsibility of the DSRP.  
 
Expert Panels  
 
An Environmental and Social Panel of Experts (PoE) was established at the start of 
project preparation to provide independent review and guidance on the treatment of 
Page  14
environmental and social issues associated with the Trung Son project.  Among other 
duties, the PoE provides reports to TSHPMB and the Bank on the status and compliance 
with EMP and RLDP requirements.  The PoE has already produced two reports on the 
preparation of the environmental and social documentation for the project. The 
recommendations from the panel have been incorporated in all of these documents.  The 
PoE is expected to have a continuing role during project implementation.  Members of 
the PoE will participate in the Independent Grievance Panel (discussed below) and 
continue to monitor project performance.  It is expected to have a role in guiding the 
additional studies that are proposed to be carried out.  An important role of the PoE 
during project implementation will be to ensure that lessons learned are adopted.  
 
The DSRP, in addition to its role in relation to OP 4.37 has provided technical advice 
during preparation of a broader nature, including providing information on sediment 
transport, water quality and procurement.  TSHPMB has found this useful and in 
consequence the role of the DSRP will be absorbed by a Project Technical Advisory 
Panel (PTAP) which will, in addition to meeting the requirements of OP 4.37, be tasked 
to provide more general project technical and engineering advice.  It is planned to 
continue to function until at least two years after first impoundment of the reservoir.  
 
Adaptive Management  
 
TSHPMB recognizes that the proposed plans may need future adjustments.  An adaptive 
management approach will therefore be adopted for environmental and social 
management components.  Safeguards will be managed in a flexible manner in order to 
fully reach the objective of meeting the requirements for management of: fish and 
fisheries in the reservoir and downstream; water releases and environmental flows; 
increased erosion downstream; water quality in the reservoir and downstream; health 
impacts; and resettlement and livelihood development. Adaptive management is expected 
to be important in at least four areas:  
 
#
Response to updates in the legal framework.  
 
#
Actual circumstances on the ground.  If monitoring of any part of the environment 
or social management indicates that circumstances have been changed, or there have been 
oversights in preparation (for example if a household not included in the census is 
eligible for compensation) the application of the principles set out in the SESIA, EMP 
and RLDP will apply.  
 
#
Budget.  The Environment and Social Mitigation component budget of the project 
is a cost estimate which will be adjusted as needed during implementation. Contingencies 
have been included to allow budget increases.  
 
#
Schedule.  The schedule reflects the sequence of planned operations as of 
December 2010. It will be revised as frequently as needed during implementation. The 
mitigation plans are programmed for a five-year period from end-2010 until end-2016. 
The programs will close at the end of 2016 if and only if the objective had been reached.  
 
Adaptation will only take place if the outcome of this adaptation is conducive to better 
achievement of the project objectives and principles. Adaptive management cannot be 
used to justify actions that would conflict with legal principles or Bank policies. 
Prohibited changes would include, among others:  
 
#
Altering or reducing environment standards that result in not restoring the project 
area to its pre-project condition to the greatest extent possible, or failing to mitigate 
known environment impacts.  
Page  15
#
Ignoring or avoiding dealing with emerging environment or social issues.  
 
#
Restriction or elimination of entitlements and eligibility criteria, or reduction of 
compensation rates.  
 
#
Lowering the resettlement objective to below the requirement to at least restore 
incomes or living standards to below pre-project levels (or accepting a substandard 
outcome as satisfactory).  
 
#
Imposing activities on ethnic minority communities without free, prior and 
informed consultation resulting in expression of broad community support.  
 
The project operations manual will establish decision-making guidelines for adaptive 
management, distinguishing between actions that may be taken by TSHPMB or, later, 
TSHPCo or local implementing agencies on their own initiative and actions that would 
require prior approval of the World Bank.  
 
Grievance Processes  
 
The national procedure for grievances is set out in the Land law. It consists of four 
steps, starting at the Commune People's Committee, and working through District and 
Provincial People's Committees before being heard by the Provincial People's Court. 
Grievances are received orally (in the Vietnamese language or a local ethnic language) or 
in written form. Assistance provided by the TSHPMB or, later, TSHPCo social team will 
include (a) recording all grievance files and report them in the monthly monitoring 
process and follow up to ensure timely resolution, and (b) exempting persons registered 
as residents in project affected communities from administrative or legal fees associated 
with pursuit of grievances. Grievance resolution will take place within a set maximum 
number of days in accordance with regulations.  
 
During the mediation process, TSHPMB managers ensure that grievance redress 
committees meet in a timely manner. They ensure that those seeking grievance redress 
are actually given the choice to accept mediation or to seek redress at a higher level.  The 
formal grievance mechanism suffers from a risk, real or perceived, that the same group of 
people who cause the grievance # the People#s committees at various levels # also hold 
responsibility for putting them right.  This weakness leads to the need for a system that is 
perceived to be more fair.  
 
TSHPMB has established the Independent Grievance Panel (IGP), a grievance 
mechanism independent of the system established under Vietnamese law.  The Manager 
of the Social and Environment Department in TSHPMB will provide a monthly 
monitoring report to monitor all complaints and grievances.  
 
Complaints or grievances are received through a variety of sources, including, for 
example direct from either the individual or a group, or through a representative, such as 
the village head, a representative of a mass organization or an NGO (in the Vietnamese 
language or a local ethnic language) or in written form.  They may also be reported 
through the Commune People#s Committee, which informs the safeguard team; or  
directly to the safeguard team during monthly compliance monitoring.  The complainant 
may be assisted by others throughout the process.Key principles in the informal process 
are: (a) to deal with the matter at the lowest possible level; and (b) to address complaints 
as quickly as practicable to avoid minor issues becoming major ones.  
 
The complainant#s first point of contact with TSHPMB/TSHPCo is the project 
Community Relations Officer (CRO), a member of the Social and Environment 
Department.  The CRO will take up the matter with relevant members of the Department 
Page  16
to try to reach a solution.  If no solution satisfactory to the complainant can be achieved, 
the complainant meets the Manager of the Social and Environment Department, who 
addresses the issue in conjunction with heads of other departments in 
TSHPMB/TSHPCo, contractors and, as necessary, local authorities.  Records of meetings 
between complainants will be maintained and reviewed by the project IMCs. Meetings 
are conducted in a language acceptable to the complainant and in a setting appropriate to 
the needs of the meeting (which may include the site of the complaint, or the offices of 
TSHPMB/TSHPCo).  
 
If the complainant is not satisfied with the solutions on offer from the mnager of the 
Social and Environment Department, the IGP will hear the case.  The IGP is composed of 
the mnager of the Social and Environment Department, and at least one member of the 
independent Environment and Social Panel of Experts (PoE).  It is chaired by the 
Director of TSHPMB/TSHPCo.  It may co-opt additional members as required including, 
for example, independent social and environment monitoring consultants, a technical 
expert or an NGO.  It may also take independent advice from consultants or other experts 
at its discretion.  
 
Complaints received by the IGP will be publicly disclosed when they are received.  The 
IGP will hear the complaint in a face-to-face meeting, at which the complainant and any 
advisor or representative may be present.  The IGP will publish its findings promptly 
after it has completed its deliberations and one member of the IGP will be delegated to 
communicate the findings to the complainant in a suitable form and language.  
 
The IGP will convene quarterly to review all complaints dealt with by either the CRO or 
the head of the Trung Son Safeguards team, and to discuss any ongoing complaints.  The 
IGP can be convened by any individual member to deal with urgent matters which cannot 
wait until the next scheduled meeting.  
 
Project information leaflets provide practical information about grievances to local 
residents such as contacts and addresses. They mention both the legal mechanism and the 
IGP, and provide information about how to get in touch with both.  
 
Other Activities in the Project Area  
 
All seven of the communes that constitute the core RLDP area are considered by the 
government to be difficult and remote.  They are therefore included in a number of other 
programs targeting poverty reduction.  104.  These projects are not considered linked 
within the definition provided by OP 4.12, since they are  not directly related to the Trung 
Son Hydropower Project, nor necessary for it to achieve its objectives.  With good 
coordination, several of the projects can be expected to reinforce the expected outcomes 
of the proposed project.  
 
Assessment of Borrower Capacity to Plan and Implement the Measures  
 
The Borrower#s capacity to plan and implement the measures outlined above is assessed 
as satisfactory, given the planning and implementation already undertaken during project 
preparation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultation is a key component of the TSHPP.  The objectives of consultation 
are:  
Page  17
#
Inform the affected households and communities, local authorities and civil 
society organizations about potential project impacts and proposed mitigation measures.  
 
#
Collect opinions/feedback to enable the preparation of resettlement plans and 
frameworks, and, in the later stages to complete the RLDP and EIA/EMP; and  
 
#
Obtain broad support for the project.  
 
The main consultation activities undertaken during project preparation have been:  
 
#
2008 (January and April): 5 access road affected communes, 12 villages for 
preparation of access road RP.  
 
#
2008 (March): 5 reservoir affected communes, 10 villages in a systematic 
household survey and focus group discussions, 3 workshops, leaders, local institutions, 
local NGOs for preparation of CLIP (analysis of livelihood challenges and opportunities).  
 
#
2008 (April-June): 5 reservoir affected communes in core RLDP area and 1 road 
affected commune, 11 villages, 440 people of which 190 from relocated households, 
leaders and health sector staff for health impact assessment.  
 
#
2008 (May-August): 6 reservoir affected communes, 499 persons in meetings, 30 
in-depth interviews, 57 district and commune officials, 3 access road affected communes 
for Social Assessment.  
 
#
2008 (July): 14 villages in main project area affected by relocation for preparation 
of resettlement sites.  
 
#
2008 (October): all related villages for second round of consultation for CLIP, 
replacement cost study, and host communities.  
 
#
2008 -2009 (December - January): 34 villages affected by access road, 
construction sites, reservoir, upstream and downstream impacts for identification of 
environmental and social impacts and land loss not involving relocation.  
 
#
2010 (January-March): RLDP consultation with all affected people, at 
community, commune and district level, national civil society for consultation on RLDP 
and EMP and project design.  
 
Consultation with affected communities has evolved over time.  Initial consultations 
were designed to provide information to affected communities, and to elicit information 
from them.  This stage tended to be of a top-down nature aligned with the suggestions of 
the commune people#s committees and village heads, during which project staff provided 
factual information. Information from those affected by the project tended to be gathered 
in quantitative measures.  The latter stages of consultation, particularly the second and 
third rounds of consultation in late 2008 and early 2009 and again in late 2009 and early 
2010 have aimed at presenting the plans based on the earlier consultation with the 
intention of building consensus, as well as responding to concerns voiced by those 
affected by the project.  
 
The third round of consultation, on which the finalized versions of the EMP and RLDP 
are based is of particular note.  Consultation was conducted in 56 affected villages or 
communities and took place in three steps  
 
Before the consultation.  During December 2009 and January 2010 and at least three 
weeks before the consultation meeting, information of appropriate form and in local 
languages was provided at district, commune, village and household level.  The 
information varied depending on the level at which it was supplied.  Full versions of the 
EMP and RLDP were made available at the district and commune level.  A summarized 
and simplified version of about 20 pages was provided to the commune people#s 
Page  18
committee and village head.  Information sheets, posters and calendars which included 
some project information, frequently asked questions and contact details were given to 
village heads and distributed to all households.  Audio recordings of the project 
information, frequently asked questions and contact information, with a machine on 
which they could be played were provided at village level. Recordings were in four 
languages: Vietnamese, Thai, Muong and H#Mong.  
 
At the consultation.  Consultation meetings were carried out during January and 
February 2010 in each affected village with participation of as many villagers as possible 
and any other interested individual/organizations.  Extra efforts were taken to encourage 
women and others who might otherwise be excluded to attend; consideration was given 
to having separate meetings with any group that was reluctant to attend the village 
meetings. A short oral summary of the project, its impacts and proposed mitigation 
measures was presented in the meeting. All questions/ feedback and requests were 
properly recorded and responded as appropriate. Group discussions were held if needed. 
In addition to Vietnamese, translation of the discussions into local languages was 
provided as necessary. Photographs and video recording were taken but only if they did 
not inhibit the consultation process. Minutes were prepared for each consultation and 
agreed to with participants. A summary report to describe the consultation process and 
main findings was prepared no later than one week after completion of the consultation.  
At least one observer from a Vietnamese NGO was present at each of the village 
consultations.  
 
After the consultation.  All questions were collated and summarized, and responses 
provided.  Where appropriate, changes were introduced into the EMP and RLDP.  The 
questions, responses and revised versions of the EMP and RLDP were provided to all 
affected villages.  
 
Both formal and informal links have been developed with civil society, in particular 
with: Vietnamese mass organizations such as the Women#s# Union and Farmers# Union, 
many of which are present in project affected areas; Vietnamese and international NGOs, 
including those concerned with advocacy and those working on programs in or close to 
the project area; academia; and private citizens.  TSHPMB has developed an active 
dialogue with the Vietnamese NGOs which monitor and report on conditions in the 
project area.  
 
Formal consultation with civil society organizations took place in March 2010, managed 
by the World Bank in collaboration with the TSHPMB and chaired by an independent 
facilitator. The draft RLDP and EIA/EMP disclosed at the project affected area was 
provided to all participants.  Presentations were made by TSHPMB on the project and on 
the results of the consultations.  A representative of the NGOs which had attended the 
village consultations reported on its findings.  Participants included representatives of 
mass organizations, Vietnamese and international NGOs, academics, concerned 
government institutes and journalists.  
 
At the district level, consultation was carried out in Muong Lat and Quan Hoa districts 
of Thanh Hoa Province, Mai Chau District of Hoa Binh Province and Moc Chau District 
of Son La Province.  Participants were from relevant district/communes authorities, at 
least one representative from each affected village in the respective district and 
representatives from provincial authorities as appropriate.  At provincial level, 
consultation has been implemented in three provinces including Thanh Hoa, Son La and 
Page  19
Hoa Binh with participation of relevant departments such as the provincial electricity 
department, Ethnic Minority Department, Agricultural and Rural Development 
department, Natural and Environmental Department, and Department of Labor, War 
Invalid and Social Affairs. These consultations have covered all aspects of the project, 
including the frameworks for the transmission lines.  
 
The following were general comments from Project-affected households: (i) welcome 
and support the construction of TSHPP; (ii) believe that quality of life should improve 
with additional community services and infrastructure; (iii) concerns of local people on 
compensation rates for land areas required and agricultural production and bamboo 
affected by the project; (iv) state policies should financially assist impacted villages, 
especially after construction and resettlement; (v) environmental policies minimize the 
extent of environmental pollution; (vi) implementation of mitigation measures specified 
in EMP and programs in RLDP; and (vii) village security and environment shall be 
sustained.  
 
Agricultural land and its productivity are the main concerns of local villagers. 
Resettlement land and its productivity need to be of equal or greater value to the lost 
land. Bamboo takes approximately six to seven years before it can be harvested; 
therefore, adequate financial or #land-for-land# compensation will be vital in supporting 
villages during and more importantly, after construction. Resettled and affected areas will 
also receive financial support and health, education and community services and 
programs.  
 
Village security and maintenance of social order were also common concerns. The rapid 
population increase, particularly the number of males in the Co Me and Chieng Po 
communes, could dramatically increase the amount of gambling, prostitution, theft, drugs 
and disease. Several villages have requested state guards during construction.  
 
One of the most significant outcomes of consultation with communities during 
preparation has been the revision, in two out of four communes, of the resettlement sites 
that had been initially planned. New, smaller sites have been selected with more fertile 
soils and higher water resources. Through consultation, all H#mong communities have 
expressed a preference for relocation within their village; which can be accommodated 
through a #back and up# process.  All the resettlement sites are currently planned for a 
wholly Thai/Muong population, with a few Kinh households. Consultation with local 
social organizations has led, among other elements, to inclusion of prevention of 
HIV/AIDS and women and child trafficking in impact mitigation measures.  
 
Free Prior and Informed Consultation Has Led to Broad Community Support  
 
The principle of free, prior and informed consultation in ethnic minority villages has 
been pursued during project design and will be continued during implementation.  In 
practice this has meant provision of written, visual and audio materials in form, substance 
and language appropriate for the audiences well in advance of consultations.   The 
consultations have been held at hamlet or village level, and led by respected members of 
the community.  Minority or under-represented groups, including women and young 
people have had opportunities to express their opinions in all meetings.  Communities 
will continue to have opportunities to voice concerns.  
 
Reports of consultations provided by consultants indicate support for the project.  This 
is supported by firsthand experience of the task team and Bank management through 
several field visits throughout the project area over the period from 2008 to date.  In the 
Page  20
most recent field visit, in October 2010, several communities expressed continuing 
support for the project, and requested acceleration of project implementation.  In the 
opinion of the task team, there is broad community support for the project.  
 
Consultations have continued since the last major effort in early 2010, as needed to 
finalize environment or social plans. Consultation will continue during project 
implementation through monitoring and evaluation activities.  
 
Document Disclosure  
 
All environment and social safeguards resettlement instruments have been disclosed at 
the project site in Vietnamese, in the Vietnam Development Information Center (VDIC) 
in Vietnamese and English and the Public Information Center (Infoshop) of World Bank 
located in Washington, DC in English, at least three weeks in advance of consultations.  
They have been updated as new information has become available.  
 
In keeping with the principles of transparency and engagement with civil society that 
EVN and the World Bank have adopted for the project, it has been agreed that a broader 
range of documents used for preparation of the safeguards instruments and for other 
aspects of the project will be disclosed.  In addition, the Strategic Environment 
Assessment of the Hydropower Master Plan, the Master Plan for the Ma River and the 
Environment Impact Assessment for the Trung Son Hydropower Project approved by 
MoNRE in 2008 have also been disclosed.  Consistent with the disclosures already made, 
these documents will be available through TSHPMB#s web site, VDIC, the Infoshop and 
the dedicated web site for the Trung Son Project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/05/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/05/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/05/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2010 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/22/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/05/2010 
 
Page  21
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2010 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  22
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Jeremy Spencer 
01/24/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
01/25/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson 
01/25/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr John R. Butler 
01/26/2011 
Comments:  Acting Safeguards Advisor 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Jennifer J. Sara 
01/26/2011 
Comments:  this is a very comprehensive ISDS and is cleared by SM 
