Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5845 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/17/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID: P121648 
Project Name: Gaza Solid Waste Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 14, 
2011 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2012 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (92%);Sub-national government administration (8%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (69%);Municipal governance 
and institution building (21%);Other urban development (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.50 
 Special 
Financing 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
13.50
25.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall project objective is to improve solid waste disposal services in the middle and 
southern Gaza Strip. This objective will be met through the provision of efficient waste 
management and environmentally friendly sanitary waste disposal services in middle and 
southern JSCs member municipalities which could be extended to other potential client 
municipalities in the Gaza Strip.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project cost is estimated at US$25 million and Bank#s contribution would be about US$10 
million. A beneficiary contribution of about US$1.5 million equivalent for land acquisition and 
incremental operating cost is expected. Furthermore, donors# contribution in the order of 
US$13.5 million equivalent is estimated to be required. Several donors have already expressed 
interest in cofinancing this project including the European Union, French Development Agency 
and Islamic Development Bank. Specific commitment is expected with the finalization of the 
Page  2
feasibility study and clear identification of needed investments. This project would be 
implemented over a period of five years and consists of the following components:  
 
Component 1: Infrastructure Development (US$18 million) for constructing a sanitary landfill 
(including land acquisition) and at least one transfer station; sanitary closure of dump sites in the 
targeted area; and provision of collection equipment and containers, waste management 
equipment at the landfill and transfer station(s);  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (US$1m) for improving the institutional capacity of 
participating JSCs in solid waste collection and disposal services and sustainable cost recovery; 
strengthening monitoring and reporting on environmental aspects of transfer stations, the new 
landfill facility, and the closure and rehabilitation for interim use of dump sites; and public 
awareness on SWM at the regional and local levels;  
 
Component 3: Pilot development of waste recycling and composting systems (US$3 million), 
for feasibility studies, technical assistance and financing of pilot waste recycling and composting 
schemes; and  
 
Component 4: Project Management (Estimated at US$3 million), for incremental operating 
cost, Municipal Development and Lending Fund (MDLF) management fees, and technical 
assistance in public awareness, construction supervision and monitoring and evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in the middle and southern Gaza Strip. The specific location of 
the new sanitary landfill and transfer station has not been identified. However, considering the 
limited land available in the Gaza Strip, a location near Sufa, Rafah Governorate, has been 
proposed by the local counterparts. This location will be subject to a detailed assessment by the 
Feasibility and Environmental and Social Impact Studies that will be prepared for this project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Two scenarios have been identified: (1) The DB-JSC; and (2) The Municipal Development and 
Lending Fund (MDLF)  in cooperation with the DB-JSC through #grant implementation 
agreement# as already practiced under the Bank#s on-going Municipal Development Project. In 
the second scenario, the MDLF would have overall management of the Grant including fiduciary 
and safeguard aspects, and the DB-JSC for ownership and operation and maintenance of the new 
facilities and equipment. In the first scenario, substantial capacity building during project 
preparation would be required to comply with Bank fiduciary and safeguard policy and 
procedures. In the second scenario, the MDLF has the fiduciary and safeguard experience and 
could, through the project, build management capacity of the DB-JSC.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mario Antonio Zelaya (MNSSD) 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSO) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project is classified Environmental Category "A" in accordance with World Bank 
Operational Policy 4.01, "Environmental Assessment," as it is likely to have significant adverse 
environmental impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. A full environmental impact 
assessment will be carried out as part of project preparation to ensure the design takes into 
account mitigation measures. The Project will benefit from the experience in the West Bank 
where a Bank-financed project for the construction of a sanitary landfill facility and a transfer 
station to service the northern areas of the West Bank (commonly referred to as the Jenin project) 
which has proven to be a successful operation since project completion in 2009. The proposed 
project would be located in the southern part of Gaza where there is more vacant land that would 
meet the siting criteria of more than 500 meters from populated areas and, in the particular case 
of Gaza, located outside the security zone within Gaza imposed by Israel, which recently has 
been increased from 500 meters to 1000 meters from the border. The site is underlain by fresh 
water aquifers, which constitute the main source of drinking water and irrigation water for Gaza. 
The project, however, will be designed for "zero" leachate and drainage discharge into the 
ground and surface water resources. Environmental impact would also result in the vicinity to the 
proposed landfill site from the increased traffic of solid waste disposal trucks from the various 
communities in Gaza using the proposed sanitary disposal facility. The feasibility study, 
however, will also study and recommend improvements to the main access roads that would be 
used by all vehicular traffic to mitigate the impact on the roads users.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
To be decided   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
The contracts will include provisions for chance find. However, during the feasibility study 
efforts will be made to gather information on any already identified sites of cultural heritage 
value.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
To be decided   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The proposed Project would not result in involuntary relocation of people as the current land 
owners have expressed interest in selling or leasing the land. The proposed Project would result 
in the loss of income of people now involved in resource recovery. The project, however, will be 
designed with provisions for compensating these people. The project will benefit from the 
experience gained in the West Bank at both, the Jenin project and the ongoing Southern West 
Bank Solid Waste Management Project for Hebron and Bethlehem governorates.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/24/2011 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/14/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. 
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. The ESIA 
is optimistically planned to start in April 2011 and the draft ESIA and EMP would be 
disclosed by end August 2011. A slippage of two to three months is possible.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
12/03/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
01/10/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna M. Bjerde 
01/10/2011 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
