Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5322 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/07/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: World 
Project ID: P118145 
Project Name: 1W: MED. Sustainable Governance & Knowledge Generation 
Task Team Leader: Sergio Margulis 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 7, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2011 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);General information 
and communications sector (50%) 
Theme: Water resource management (30%);Climate change (20%);Environmental 
policies and institutions (20%);Pollution management and environmental health 
(20%);Other environment and natural resources management (10%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
6.60
6.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to provide decision makers with knowledge and tools that 
will strengthen the integration of environmental issues into sectoral and development policy 
decisions in Southern and Eastern Mediterranean countries. The proposed PDO comes in support 
to, and complementary to, the existing initiatives in the MED region with similar objectives. 
Achievement of the development objectives will be assessed through the following key 
performance indicators:  
 
#
Mainstreaming: Environmental issues more central in sector policies and activities, and in 
the regional development agenda;  
 
#
Knowledge: Increased technical knowledge on common and priority environmental 
issues;  
 
#
Funding: Identification of strategic investment plans and commitment of funds;  
Page  2
#
Coordination: Sustainable MED activities in synergy with other initiatives leading to 
better combined results.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is intended to complement the country specific investment projects 
developed under the Sustainable MED Program with the necessary sustainability elements 
starting by enhancing the existing governance structures to the development of tools such as 
economic instruments, enforcement schemes of environmental laws, monitoring of trends and 
indicators, and enhancing public participation. This would complement the activities of the 
countries and other bilateral and regional organizations with similar objectives, particularly the 
UNEP-led Med Sustainability Partnership Program, and Horizon 2020, a similar initiative 
funded by the European Union.  
 
The Governance and Knowledge Project will address in its first phase the broader aspects of 
enhanced water and coastal resources management by building capacity, testing pilot 
instruments, technologies and practices, and fomenting the dissemination of knowledge and 
experience. A critical element is also an improved governance system whereby environmental 
and natural resources are managed in a participatory manner, in line with principles of new 
economies, modern regulatory regimes and overall sustainable development. In addition, as the 
project aims to support and leverage the overarching Sustainable MED Program, which will 
replicate and scale-up pilot projects, the proposed project will focus on improved knowledge, 
dialogue/coordination, and regional TA to support new types of country and sector investments.  
 
The project adds value by developing a portfolio of coherent projects that can maximize on-the-
ground impact and build capacity for countries to mainstream newer environment concerns into 
sector development programs.  The additional leverage and coherence through a coordinated 
program means that much more will be achieved than through fragmented projects.  
 
In terms of innovation and additions, the project has a strategic objective and approach 
(mainstreaming), shifting the sustainable development agenda from a narrower environmental 
focus at the country level to a broader multi-sectoral and economic focus. It also has the central 
objective of coordinating and bringing consistency (and synergy) among various projects, 
certainly a welcome idea in the development agenda in any region in the World Bank.  
 
The two key components of the proposed project are: (i) the Governance component; and (ii) 
the Knowledge Generation and Technical Assistance Component (Know-MED). While the 
current phase of the Sustainable MED investment projects (co-financed by the International 
Waters Program of the GEF) benefit MNA countries only, the Governance and Knowledge 
project is intended to engage all Mediterranean Countries in MNA and ECA. It is also important 
to note that given this project's consultative nature, most of the activities currently envisaged are 
to be eventually confirmed and endorsed by participating countries according to their individual 
needs and perceptions, although maintaining and aligned with the project and the Sustainable 
MED Program broader objectives and structure.  
 
Component 1: Governance  
 
The governance component has six main pillars:  
Page  3
(1) 
Technical assistance and policy discussions on countries environmental management 
systems: to help countries to identify and to focus on a narrower set of environmental priorities 
which are compatible with legal frameworks and with existing capacity, and commensurate with 
their environmental, social and economic costs and benefits. This includes support to the 
identification of priority problems, cost-effective mitigation measures, more effective and 
efficient management instruments, and coherence of investment projects with existing policy and 
legal frameworks.  
 
(2) 
Mainstreaming environmental issues in sector policies: to promote a stronger integration 
of environmental issues into sector policies and programs with the promotion of bilateral 
discussions with the environmental sector, reviews of legal and regulatory frameworks, 
identification of inconsistencies of incentives, etc. There will be a specific focus on 
strengthening the economic approach to environmental problems. Priority sectors will include 
water, tourism, agriculture, industry, energy, transport, housing, health and education. The 
component will also attempt to engage governments at highest levels to identify and reach a 
shared vision into commitments to reforms and investments, particularly the ministries 
responsible for budgeting.  
 
(3) 
Fostering regional approaches among MED countries: to identify the common 
sustainability agenda among countries in the region and to promote and support joint approaches. 
Specifically the component will support the identification of interests and existing incentives 
towards common sustainability objectives among the various countries. It will also include 
learning and possible replication of similar regional initiatives (Black Sea, Baltic Sea, etc).  
 
(4) 
Coordinating initiatives and projects (within and outside Sustainable MED): to support 
and to promote a better integration between existing initiatives which are relevant to the project 
development objectives. Help liaise existing initiatives, programs and institutions working on 
relevant sectors and themes among beneficiary and donor countries to create synergies and 
advance common agendas and objectives, contributing to to strengthened governance in the 
Mediterranean region and adoption of policies to achieve common regional objectives.  
 
(5) 
Enhancing North-South and South-South cooperation: to promote the cooperation, 
technology transfer and sharing best practice experience among MED countries, and also 
between them and other developing countries, as well as with relevant Northern partner countries 
through the creation and/or strengthening of a network of experts and centers of excellence on 
issues related to the sustainability of the Mediterranean.  
 
(6) 
Activities to foster private capital mobilization: Focusing on the environment as a 
business opportunity rather than a constraint for the private sector, the component will: (i) 
identify commercially attractive investment opportunities in the field of environment; (ii) support 
the development of innovative financial instruments to enhance private sector investments with 
positive environmental impacts (such as PPP or risk sharing arrangement to leverage private 
sector participation which would otherwise not be commercially feasible); (iii) strengthen the 
enabling environment for green business, green jobs creation and clean technology investments; 
(iv) support the emergence of financial products for environmental investment in local capital 
markets by mobilizing local banks; (v) support to corporate social responsibility programs.  
 
The governance component is process oriented and is fundamentally centered on consultation 
with MED countries. It is a facilitating mechanism to achieve better understanding of problems, 
and to promote coordination, integration and synergy. It is the needed instrument to elevate the 
national interests to a more regional level. The component's ultimate success lies within the 
Page  4
anticipated transformational change in environmental policy making across all sectors, at both 
national and regional levels.  
 
In this sense, the component starts being implemented at its concept and design stage through 
the identification of how these issues are directly perceived by the beneficiary governments, and 
it will be based on a constant dialogue and interaction with them. The existing projects under the 
Sustainable MED will serve as a platform for dialogue and consultation with the individual 
governments, which in time will be scaled-up to include Ministries beyond the direct domain of 
the environment and natural resources.  
 
Also given its nature, the component will be implemented in close collaboration with sister 
institutions and development partners (nationally and at donor headquarters levels) and with 
existing processes such as the Union for the Mediterranean and the UNEP/MAP in its capacity as 
technical secretariat of the Barcelona Convention and the Mediterranean Commission on 
Sustainable Development (MCSD) which includes representatives of ministries of environment, 
environmental IGOs and NGOs, experts and members of the scientific community.  
 
Lastly, despite its name the governance component will not create new institutional structures. 
Depending on its level of success or evolution particularly in terms of creating investment 
platforms new organizational arrangements might be judged appropriate. But this will eventually 
be a result of the process created by the project and this specific component, rather than one of 
its specific objectives.  
 
Component 2: Knowledge Generation and Technical Assistance (Know-MED)  
 
Know-MED will provide the substantive platform on which the governance component will be 
able to operate. The aim of the component is to generate and diffuse knowledge within and 
outside the Sustainable MED Program in order to create the conditions for the implementation of 
appropriate political measures impacting the environment and to support informed decision 
making (public policies, commitment on common objectives, investments), targeting non-
environmental specialists and high level executives in both public and private sector.  
 
Know-MED will not only support exchange of information and expertise, transfer of 
knowledge and sharing of best practice between Sustainable MED investment projects and 
technical assistance projects, but also between Sustainable MED and other regional programs 
and specialized centers. It is intended as a solid platform to bridge the gap between learning and 
implementation. Based on consultations with governments and partner institutions, Know-MED 
will complement and supplement existing activities. It will also provide the knowledge base to 
identify appropriate new investments projects.  
 
Know-MED has four main pillars:  
 
(1) 
Knowledge generation: Gathering data, information and studies of both technical and 
economic nature which would provide a basis for the Program design in terms of identifying 
priority problems (sectorally and regionally), cost-effective interventions and their relevance in 
terms of economic growth, poverty reduction and environmental sustainability objectives. This 
would cover knowledge on the various aspects of environmental and social vulnerability 
pertaining to the most relevant economic sectors and most critical locations at both local, 
national and regional levels. The component includes integrating studies developed under more 
Page  5
specific sectoral perspectives to capture broader sustainability objectives. Priority sectoral 
themes to be addressed include water resources management, coastal zone management, 
pollution prevention, and MBIs (market-based instruments).  
 
(2) 
Knowledge transfer and information sharing: This involves more standard knowledge 
dissemination activities and information sharing, including workshops, printed and electronic 
publications including short policy notes in Arabic language addressed to policy-makers, 
creation of web pages, working tours with on-site visits, and facilitating access to information 
and the involvement of civil society in decision making.  
 
(3) 
Capacity building: Training and other activities which focus on human capital, on 
software and on information which support and help improve the overall environmental 
management system.  
 
(4) 
Identification of investment opportunities: Identifying investment opportunities 
supporting and in line with the Sustainable Med Program broader development objectives. The 
main entry points are the investment projects which are under the Sustainable MED, but other 
strategic investment opportunities will be sought in conjunction with the knowledge activities 
and the policy dialogue maintained with the environmental sector as well as the economic sectors 
prioritized in each country.  
 
On a more substantive side, Know-MED builds on METAP's experience and the knowledge 
comparative advantage of the World Bank. Many areas of intervention could be identified as a 
result of the needs assessment and gap analysis to be undertaken during the first year of 
implementation. Yet, in its initial phase it will focus on water resources management, including 
climate impacts on water resources, and coastal and marine ecosystems. In specific support to the 
governance component, Know-MED will also include in its early phases studies and knowledge 
activities aiming at:  
 
#
Identifying social incidence of environmental problems, as well as social mechanisms 
and practice to address them;  
 
#
Strengthening environmental regulatory and judiciary systems;  
 
#
Identifying innovative instruments for environmental financing and promotion of green 
business;  
 
#
Promoting the use of environmental economics to mainstream environment in the 
economic development agenda (e.g. environment valuation, cost of degradation, cost of 
mitigation);  
 
#
Promoting the use of tools for strategic environmental assessments of development in 
economic sectors (e.g. tools for assessment of vulnerability and development of impacts 
scenarios);  
 
#
Analyzing environmental issues in sector legislation: agriculture, water, infrastructure, 
tourism, and other key sectors.  
 
The Knowledge and TA activities developed under this project and other individual TA and 
investment projects under Sustainable MED would serve as a model for replication in other IW 
programmatic efforts of the GEF in the MNA region as well as other regions.  
 
Annual reporting on key indicators using the GEF4  IW Tracking Tool will also be undertaken  
as part of the Monitoring and Evaluation process of the proposed project, and included in the 
Know-Med annual work plans. The project will be linked to the initiatives which are supported 
Page  6
by Sustainable MED, MAP and/or GEF, such as IW:LEARN and regional events and 
conferences and GEF bi-annual international waters conferences.  A project website will also be 
established in accordance with the IW:LEARN guidelines.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Governance and Knowledge project is intended to engage all Mediterranean Countries in 
MNA and ECA. The ECA countries will be involved in shared events but will not be direct 
beneficiaries.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
NA.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Tracy Hart (MNSEN) 
Mr Guillaume Meyssonnier (MNSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
02/28/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sergio Margulis 
02/16/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
02/17/2011 
Comments:  None 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti 
02/17/2011 
Comments:  Song Li, Environmental Reviewer & Hana Salah, Social Reviewer 
