                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 5/10/2011                         62099
I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Global                              Project ID: P126821
                                             Additional Project ID (if any): Stand alone
Project Name:

Task Team Leader: Federico Silva
Estimated Approval Date: May 6, 2011         Estimated Completion Date: June 30, 2012


Managing Unit: SDNCA                       Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector: Urban
Theme: (AAA) Information for Urban Management
Other financing amounts by source:
   1. Co-financing Partner #1 (Inter-American Development Bank): $ 50,000



Environmental Category: C (Technical Assistance)
Simplified Processing             Simple [X]                  Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project     Yes [ ]                     No [ X]


B. Project Objectives:

The project aims to support the on-going work of the Global City Indicators Facility (GCIF) to
improve the knowledge of cities worldwide and to build a partnership between Cities Alliance
and GCIF that will contribute to the development of the World Bank Knowledge Platform on
Urbanization and improve data gathering and analysis on urban poverty.

Specific objectives of the project are:

1. To support the expansion of the Global City Indicators Facility (GCIF) membership;
2. To raise the profile of GCIF and increase awareness of the Facility and enhance the use of
   its data by its intended audiences including policy and decision makers, practitioners and
   researchers, among others;
3. To expand and refine the current set of indicators while ensuring data quality; and
4. To improve the GCIF online database for the use of its members.

C. Project Description:

The Global City Indicators Facility (GCIF) is positioned to be the definitive and authoritative
compilation of validated, self-reported, worldwide urban data. For the first time a database
hosting globally comparative city data based upon a globally standardized methodology provides
a platform for comparative global research. The Facility also provides a solid base for evidence-
based policy and management at the local level to build more sustainable cities, and can serve as
a supportive database for the World Bank’s Knowledge Platform on Urbanization.
Headquartered at the University of Toronto, the GCIF is rapidly becoming a global leader and
centre of excellence on globally standardized city metrics. As cities worldwide increasingly take
centre stage in the sustainable development and prosperity of nations, and become pivotal in
confronting the global challenges of poverty, climate change, and security, the need for globally
comparable data and knowledge on cities has never been greater.

The Facility hosts a standardized system of global city indicators with support from the World
Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the University of Toronto, the Government of
Canada, and a worldwide network of participating cities. Currently 115 indicators across more
than 135 cities are collected annually GCIF member cities are representative of all regions of the
world, and the GCIF aims to increase membership to 250 cities by 2012 and 1000 cities by 2015

To date, no city data conforms to a standardized methodology that can ensure sound comparative
urban research for global learning on sustainable cities. The GCIF provides cities with a free,
web-based system to enter city data, track progress over time and facilitate capacity building and
knowledge sharing. Globally comparative data strengthens cities’ policy leverage and
performance management through evidence-based decision making. Citizens and businesses are
empowered through transparent access to accurate performance information about their cities
and other cities in a comparative global framework. The GCIF also provides support for
international development agencies’ provision of validated, worldwide urban data.

This growing database will enable ground-breaking research using data that has never before
been available. Currently, the Facility is at a turning point as policy-relevant information is
being aggregated to inform policy and management and provide strategic advice to citizens,
communities, city leaders, senior government officials, industry partners and international
agencies.
The following table outlines the components and deliverables of the proposed project:

Component results                   Deliverables                                Indicators
Increase GCIF Membership            Participation in two             Increased member cities from 135
                                    international conferences;       to 175+
                                    Communication Strategy
Raise GCIF Profile: Data Analysis   Dissemination of GCIF data      Results of GCIF data
and Policy Reports                  through: 2 Policy Briefs, 2     disseminated;
                                    Newsletters, 2 Speaking events  Expanded strategic partnerships;
                                                                    3 New International Corporate
                                                                    Advisory Board Members.
Expand Indicators and Ensure Data   Progress Report of the Working Established GCIF-Cities Alliance
Quality                             Group;                          Working Group;
                                    Identification of a new cluster One year of validated data for the
                                    of indicators on slums.         2011 GCIF Report Year.

Improve GCIF online database        New visual tools, tables,        Improved data visualization
                                    graphs, maps to be included in
                                    annual report

All project’s activities and deliverables are of analytic nature and will serve as inputs for future
research, analysis and decision-making in urban development. Project activities will not involve
any direct buying of equipment and/or building/construction and no World Bank parallel,
associated or follow on investments are expected, which include physical work. The project’s
environmental and social impacts will be negligible and will not produce any irreversible
environmental or social impacts that could trigger safeguards policies.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

N/A. This project focuses on information gathering and knowledge management activities with a
global scope. Project activities will be undertaken by the team of the GCIF based at the
University of Toronto, Canada.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
The Global City Indicators Facility will be responsible for the implementation and financial
management of each of the project’s components/main activities.
The Global City Indicators Facility (GCIF) is well positioned in terms of management and
financial capacity to undertake this work. The GCIF is based in the University of Toronto that
was founded in 1827 and is overseen by the University’s Governing Council as established by
the University of Toronto Act, 1971, which is the senior governing body that oversees the
academic, business and student affairs of the University. The GCIF, based in the John H. Daniels
Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and Design at the University of Toronto, reports to the Dean
of the Faculty whose financial management is overseen by the business accounting practices and
audit procedures of the University.
In addition, a number of key international agencies serve in the GCIF Board of Directors
including ICLEI, IDRC, OECD, UN-Habitat, World Bank. GCIF works closely with the World
Bank on numerous activities and initiatives and the World Bank provided initial funding to
establish and finance GCIF for its first three years.
And as stated above, project activities are analytical in nature and will have negligible
environmental and social impacts. Therefore no Environmental and Social Management Plan is
required.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist:

The Team Task Leader for this project is Federico Silva, Junior Professional Officer, SDNCA.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                     Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                              X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                               X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                     X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A


IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Federico Silva                                                 05/10/2011
    Approved by:
    Cities Alliance Safeguards Focal               Phyllis Kibui                                                  05/18/2011
    Point or Regional Safeguards
    Coordinator:
      Comments:
    Program Manager:                               William Cobbett                                                05/20/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
