Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5831 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/06/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P122594 
Project Name: Fourth Public Works Project 
Task Team Leader: Ali Khamis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 7, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 5, 2011 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (40%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (30%);Health (10%);General transportation sector (10%);Other social services 
(10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Water resource management 
(20%);Participation and civic engagement (20%);Other financial and private sector 
development (20%);Social risk mitigation (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.50 
 Local 
Communities 
3.50
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective (PDO) is to assist GOY in (i) providing needed 
infrastructure to improve access to basic services and environmental conditions, and (ii) creating 
short-term employment.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is a follow on to the first two phases of PWPs and the ongoing Third PWP.  
It aims to scale-up the impact of previous PWPs by increasing the number of people with access 
to improved basic services by increasing the number of sub-projects to be delivered.  The need 
for basic infrastructure services remains high, as evidenced by the close to 17,000 requests from 
communities pending financing and execution. PWPs have worked very well over the last 14 
years mainly due to the following: (i) responsiveness of the project design to the needs of the 
people, labor market, the country#s geographical conditions and the living habits of the people; 
Page  2
(ii) existence of a well established and experienced PMU; and (iii) continuous monitoring and 
evaluation of realistic and achievable project performance indicators. Based on the current 
market prices, the average cost of a sub-project would approximately be US$130,000  with an 
implementation period ranging between 6-12 months.  Within this average cost, which includes 
8% price contingencies, the proposed project is expected to deliver 504 sub-projects.  Sub-
project selection and distribution of project allocations between the country#s 21 governorates 
would follow the same procedures used under the ongoing Third PWP with some modifications 
to mainly factor in evolving issues related to safeguards.  Sub-projects will be screened against 
the following nine screening criteria: (i) not less than 5% community contribution; (ii) minimum 
labor content of 30%; (iii) investment cost per person-month is within benchmark for each 
sector; (iv) contribute to poverty alleviation; (v) investment cost per beneficiary is within 
benchmark for each sector; (vi); improvement in environment; (vii) include plans for 
sustainability; (viii) there is no involuntary resettlement/land acquisition ; and (ix) any sub-
projects proposal that would involve trans-boundary aquifers or other international waterways in 
accordance with OP/BP 7.50.Baseline surveys for all sub-projects regardless of size and type are 
conducted before a sub-project is selected to ensure that it is feasible in term of economic of 
scale and operational considerations. Additionally, distribution of project allocations of 
US$67.15 million under Component 1 would be as follows: (a) 50% population size; (b) 30% 
poverty index; and (c) 20% remoteness  and deprivation.  The design of the project will be kept 
flexible, responsive and conducive to the existing conditions on the ground and will finance the 
following three components:  
 
--Community Infrastructure (US$67.15 million): This component would provide infrastructure 
services and goods in sectors such as health, education, water supply and sewage networks, 
water harvesting schemes; roads; and training centers.  
 
--Technical Assistance/Consultancy Services (US$4.46 million):  This component would 
finance preparation of sub-project design and supervision including: (i) preparation of 
engineering design, bidding documents and construction supervision; (ii) auditing and benefit 
assessment surveys; (iii) training and workshops and; (iv) environmental assessments, 
monitoring and other necessary technical advisory services.  
 
--Project Management (US$3.39 million):  This component would finance incremental 
operational costs of the PMU including training of staff.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The sub-projects will collectively have national coverage with emphasis on areas with poverty, 
high unemployment, and which are deprived of basic infrastructure services. Sub-projects will be 
selected from proposals submitted by communities and local governments.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's Implementing Agency, the Public Works Project/ Project Management Unit 
(PWP/PMU), has about fourteen years of experience in implementing basic infrastructure sub-
projects throughout the country. The PMU is staffed with qualified environmental specialists 
who are responsible for reviewing sub-project proposals against the screening criteria in the 
Manual of Procedures (MOP), and ensuring approved sub-projects are designed in compliance 
with the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The PMU undertook an Environmental 
Impact Assessment for PWP-3, which was updated for the proposed PWP-IV, and its staff has 
Page  3
updated the EMP for the proposed project taking into account the experience gained in the first 
three projects. The PMU is also assisted by consultants who ensure approved sub-projects are 
designed in compliance with the EMP requirements, and monitor construction during supervision 
of works contracts to ensure contractors' compliance with the EMP. Bank supervision missions 
have reviewed the PMU capacity to manage safeguard issues, and have reported it to be 
satisfactory.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mario Antonio Zelaya (MNSSD) 
Ms Sabine W. Beddies (MNSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project is classified Environmental Category "B" in accordance with World Bank 
Operational Policy 4.01, "Environmental Assessment," as the list of eligible sub-projects are 
expected to have generally positive health and environmental impacts. Additionally, due to the 
small-scale nature of the investments (costing on average about US$130,000), no significant or 
irreversible impacts are anticipated. However, based on the Borrower's experience in the first 
three projects, and the preliminary review of eligible sub-projects in the pipeline, negative 
impacts, if any, would be minor and could be mitigated effectively by implementing the 
mitigation measures as recommended in the EMP. The MOP includes provisions for screening 
sub-projects and rejecting any that would have a negative impact on the environment (or that 
would not result in a positive impact to improve the environment).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The MOP includes a provision in the selection criteria to exclude any sub-project proposals 
that would result in involuntary resettlement of people in accordance with OP/BP 4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The MOP includes a provision in the selection criteria for eligibility of sub-projects to 
exclude any sub-projects proposal that would involve transboundary aquifers or other 
international waterways in accordance with OP/BP 7.50.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/06/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EMP for the proposed Project was submitted to the Bank by the PWP/PMU on 
12/15/2010, and was cleared on 12/23/2010. It was disclosed in-country on December 27, 
2010 and at the InfoShop by January 5, 2011.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ali Khamis 
12/15/2010 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/15/2010 
Comments:  The PCN Review Meeting agreed to transfer the safeguard responsibility to the SM and 
TTL, and no further review of project preparation documents by the RSC will be required. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna M. Bjerde 
12/15/2010 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
