Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/10/2011 
Report No.:  AC5990
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P122594 
Project Name:  Fourth Public Works Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ali Khamis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 7, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: April 5, 2011 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (40%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (30%);Health (10%);General transportation sector (10%);Other social services 
(10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (20%);Water resource management 
(20%);Participation and civic engagement (20%);Other financial and private sector 
development (20%);Social risk mitigation (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.50 
 Local 
Communities 
3.50
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objectives (PDO) are to assist GOY in (i) providing needed 
infrastructure to improve access to basic services and environmental conditions, and (ii) 
creating short term employment.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is a follow on to the first two phases of PWPs and the ongoing 
Third PWP.  It aims to scale-up the impact of previous PWPs by increasing the number 
of people with access to improved basic services by increasing the number of sub-
projects to be delivered.  
 
The design of the project will be kept flexible, responsive and conducive to the existing 
conditions on the ground and will finance the following three components:  
 
Page  2
--Community Infrastructure (US$67.15 million): This component would provide 
infrastructure services and goods in sectors such as health, education, water supply and 
sewage networks, water harvesting schemes; roads; and training centers.  
 
--Technical Assistance/Consultancy Services (US$4.46 million):  This component 
would finance preparation of sub-project design and supervision including: (i) 
preparation of engineering design, bidding documents and construction supervision; (ii) 
auditing and benefit assessment surveys; (iii) training and workshops and; (iv) 
environmental assessments, monitoring and other necessary technical advisory services.  
 
--Project Management (US$3.39 million):  This component would finance incremental 
operational costs of the PMU including training of staff.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The sub-projects will collectively have national coverage with emphasis on areas with 
poverty, high unemployment, and which are deprived of basic infrastructure services. 
Sub-projects will be selected from proposals submitted by communities and local 
governments.  
 
The Project is classified Environmental Category "B" in accordance with World Bank 
Operational Policy 4.01, "Environmental Assessment," as the list of eligible sub-projects 
are expected to have generally positive health and environmental impacts. Additionally, 
due to the small-scale nature of the investments (costing on average about US$130,000), 
no significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated. However, based on the Borrower's 
experience in the first three projects, and the preliminary review of eligible sub-projects 
in the pipeline, negative impacts, if any, would be minor and could be mitigated 
effectively by implementing the mitigation measures as recommended in the EMP. The 
MOP includes provisions for screening sub-projects and rejecting any that would have a 
negative impact on the environment (or that would not result in a positive impact to 
improve the environment).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mario Antonio Zelaya (MNSSD) 
Ms Sabine W. Beddies (MNSSO) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is classified Environmental Category "B" in accordance with World Bank 
Operational Policy 4.01, "Environmental Assessment," as the list of eligible sub-projects 
are expected to have generally positive health and environmental impacts. Additionally, 
due to the small-scale nature of the investments (costing on average about US$130,000), 
no significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated. However, based on the Borrower's 
experience in the first three projects, and the preliminary review of eligible sub-projects 
in the pipeline, negative impacts, if any, would be minor and could be mitigated 
effectively by implementing the mitigation measures as recommended in the EMP. The 
MOP includes provisions for screening sub-projects and rejecting any that would have a 
negative impact on the environment (or that would not result in a positive impact to 
improve the environment).  
 
The MOP includes a provision in the selection criteria to exclude any sub-project 
proposals that would result in involuntary resettlement of people in accordance with 
OP/BP 4.12.  
 
The MOP also includes a provision in the selection criteria for eligibility of sub-projects 
to exclude any sub-projects proposal that would involve transboundary aquifers or other 
international waterways in accordance with OP/BP 7.50.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower's Implementing Agency, the Public Works Project/ Project Management 
Unit (PWP/PMU), has about fourteen years of experience in implementing basic 
infrastructure sub-projects throughout the country. The PMU is staffed with qualified 
environmental specialists who are responsible for reviewing sub-project proposals against 
the screening criteria in the Manual of Procedures (MOP), and ensuring approved sub-
projects are designed in compliance with the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). 
The PMU undertook an Environmental Impact Assessment for PWP-3, which was 
updated for the proposed PWP-IV, and its staff has updated the EMP for the proposed 
project taking into account the experience gained in the first three projects. The PMU is 
also assisted by consultants who ensure approved sub-projects are designed in 
compliance with the EMP requirements, and monitor construction during supervision of 
works contracts to ensure contractors' compliance with the EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
There are two categories of key stakeholders: first, the donor communities and sector 
ministries, and second, beneficiaries who include communities and their local 
representative groups such as sheikhs, local governments etc. Donors and sector 
ministries are largely interested in projects that enhance the capacity of the recipient to 
absorb and manage resources for the implementation of small scale infrastructure that 
delivers services, has an impact on the lives of the poor, and generates employment 
through the use of labor intensive works contracts.  The notable increase in the 
contribution of donors over the years from about US$2.5 million under the First PWP to 
over US$300 million under the ongoing Third PWP is testimony to the support that the 
PWPs enjoy from this group of stakeholders.  The second category of stakeholders is the 
beneficiaries, and they include members of parliament, NGOs, district councils, local 
government officials, Sheikhs, etc.  This group of stakeholders has become acutely aware 
of PWPs over the last 14 years.  They are well informed through the local media, as well 
as through word of mouth in professional associations of engineering firms, the 
contracting industry and through other communication tools such as brochures. Requests 
for sub-projects continue to come from communities at a steady pace and currently there 
are about 17,000 requests with the PMU awaiting implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/27/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/04/2011 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  6
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ali Khamis 
01/06/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mario Antonio Zelaya 
01/06/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Sabine W. Beddies 
01/06/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna M. Bjerde 
01/06/2011 
Comments:   
