Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC5911 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/17/2011 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P125135 
Project Name: RY-Road Asset Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Charles Crochet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2011 
Estimated Board Date: May 24, 2011 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%);Trade facilitation 
and market access (40%);Other public sector governance (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objectives are to assist the Government of Yemen in (i) improving 
condition and safety of existing paved road infrastructure in 3-4 governorates, and (ii) putting in 
place institutional arrangements for efficient routine and emergency maintenance of paved roads 
in Yemen.  
 
The project will seek to ensure sustainability of these efforts through broad involvement of the 
private contracting industry in maintenance management, while creating local employment 
through small-scale labor-intensive maintenance activities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would have three components: road maintenance, capacity building, and road safety.  
 
Component 1: Road maintenance  
 
Page  2
The main thrust of the proposed project would be the financing of regular road maintenance 
through several network-wide term maintenance contracts  (3-4 year terms, possibly renewable) 
which would cause a considerable expansion of the road network in Yemen under annual regular 
maintenance. The new contracts would build on experience from the Second Rural Access 
Project (RAP2) currently financed by the World Bank, and would mainstream the contracting out 
of maintenance of paved roads in Yemen. The number of contracts and the size of the network 
would be specified during preparation, but initially about 3-4 contracts (possibly for about 1500-
2000 km of roads) are expected, depending on the governorates and sizes of network areas 
selected.  
 
The project would initially focus on addressing through spot repairs the backlog of past neglect 
of routine and emergency maintenance to put the network into a stable longer term condition 
where only annual routine maintenance is needed at a much lower annual cost per km (in 
addition to emergency works). This backlog of maintenance works is now amply demonstrated 
by ravelling and cracked pavements, clogged road drainage, rock-fall and slides, damaged guard 
rails, poor shoulders, lack of vegetation control causing inadequate visibility and danger to 
traffic, and no road marking.  
 
The project would also use local consulting firms with support from an international consultant 
to prepare the tender documents based on the contracting concept now under preparation under 
the additional financing of RAP2. Quality control of works executed would be assured by 
regional consulting firms (in partnership with local consulting firms) undertaking site 
supervision and by regular technical audits by an independent consulting firm.  
 
Component 2: Capacity building  
 
The capacity building component would provide funding for: (i) strengthening management of 
road maintenance in the Road Management Fund (RMF); and (ii) corresponding support to the 
Ministry of Public Works and Highways (MPWH) in planning, programming, budgeting, and 
management of road expenditures. Support to the RMF would include the financing of technical 
staff to the maintenance management/supervision unit in the RMF and incremental operational 
costs. The technical staff would be openly recruited on a competitive basis. Support to the 
MPWH would finance staff of the planning and budgeting unit under the Minister and support to 
the Foreign Funded Projects Implementing Unit, including financing of incremental operational 
costs. The capacity building component would also provide support for equipment, vehicles and 
training, as well as support for financial management. Other capacity building activities would 
be defined during project preparation and the recommendations of the Bank's Yemen Road 
Sector Strategy Note would be used in this respect.  
 
Component 3: Road safety  
 
Given the poor traffic safety situation in Yemen and the close linkage between effective road 
maintenance and accident rates, the project would also include a road safety component. The 
details of this component have not been fully worked out yet because responsibility for road 
safety is shared between the RMF and several other agencies. The component would be designed 
on the basis of the recent road safety capacity improvement study carried out under funding from 
Page  3
the Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF). The component would in particular finance small scale 
road safety related improvements to roads in the project areas to remove deficiencies that cause 
an accumulation of accidents. There are reliable accident statistics available in Yemen and the 
study financed by the GRSF has identified several low cost and high impact measures to improve 
road safety. Such a component would also include relevant upfront preparation work and 
supervision of implementation by consultants, as well as road safety equipment and training, in 
particular to support the traffic police.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
3-4 governorates in Yemen (still to be determined)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
For environmental safeguards, the RMF's capacity is limited since their main exposure to such 
safeguards has been their current association with the Bank in the Rural Access Projects. Their 
capacity will require strengthening. They will in particular need to hire an environmental 
specialist in their team.  
 
For social safeguards, the RMF's capacity will need to be further assessed since the RMF is 
mainly in charge of road maintenance and rehabilitation. Their work has almost always been on 
the existing right-of-way and they have barely had to deal with social issues. It is planned that 
the assessment will be carried out by a Bank consultant in early February.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSO) 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani (MNSTR) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This project follows up the World Bank's Rural Access Projects (RAP) 1, 2 and Additional 
Financing. A Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA) was prepared in October 2004 and 
revised in November 2009, including a systematic analysis of projects' potential impacts on the 
environment and a framework environmental management plan that includes specific impacts 
mitigation actions. This SEA is still relevant for this newly proposed project. To ensure that 
lessons learned from the implementation of the previous and on-going RAPs are captured, an 
environmental specialist (consultant) has been recruited to review the SEA and update it if 
necessary. Following earlier good practices, the revised SEA will be disclosed locally on the 
RMF's website (including an Arabic version of the executive summary) and in the Bank's 
InfoShop.  
 
This project will provide routine maintenance to existing paved non-urban roads, which is 
expected to have minimum negative but reversible impacts on the environment. A specific 
Environmental Impact Assessment will be conducted for each subproject in accordance with the 
revised SEA and will include an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) also in accordance 
with the revised SEA. The EMP will be an integral part of any maintenance contract to be 
financed by the project. Implementation of the EMP will be supervised by the project's 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
supervision consultants. Their work will be monitored by the RMF's project implementation unit.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
It will be determined during preparation of the SEA whether pesticides will be used in 
maintenance operations (for vegetation control).   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared as the project will include road 
safety works in addition to road maintenance. These works may require some limited land 
acquisition in rural areas to widen the right-of-way. The preparation of the policy framework will 
be based on the overall principles and objectives highlighted in the RPF prepared for the 
previous Rural Access Projects. Stakeholders (including vulnerable groups) will be consulted 
during preparation of the RPF. In addition, a brief assessment of the project's possible other 
social impacts will be prepared. This will in particular deal with ways to address the population's 
water harvesting concerns, if any.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:  
03/01/2011 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of the revised SEA and RPF has been launched and draft documents are 
expected to be ready by February 2011. All operational documents will disclosed as per Bank 
procedures. Consistent with applicable safeguards policies, all safeguards documents (such as 
SEA, EIA, RPF, and RAP if any) will be disclosed in-country as well as in the Bank infoshop 
in both English and Arabic (as required).   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Charles Crochet 
02/15/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
02/15/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Patricia Veevers-Carter 
02/15/2011 
Comments:   
