Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/13/2011 
Report No.:  AC5326
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Zambia 
Project ID:  P102459 
Project Name:  Irrigation Development and Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Indira Janaki Ekanayake 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2011 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (80%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(20%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (40%);Water resource management (40%);Rural 
markets (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
115.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
23.45 
 LOCAL: 
BENEFICIARIES 
62.57
86.02 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to increase yields per hectare and value of divers 
products marketed by smallholders benefitting from investments in irrigation in selected 
sites served by the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Irrigated Agricultural Support Services  
 
(US$22.29 million total, including an IDA contribution of US$18.30 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to provide knowledge and skills, and strengthen 
capacity of beneficiaries to prepare and operate medium-to-large size smallholder 
irrigation schemes on a sustainable commercial basis through the use of partnership 
agreements between the Government, communities and the private sector. The project 
will support:  
 
(a) 
Irrigation scheme planning and preparation, including pre-feasibility studies on 
25,000 ha and feasibility studies on 20,000 ha, thereby building a large pipeline of 
Page  2
potential investment. Studies will be based on detailed consultations with the 
communities on land tenure and land (re)allocation among the three Tiers. The 
subcomponent also provides for preparation of detailed environmental and social 
assessments and resettlement action plans by a separate consulting company.  
 
(b) 
Provision of scheme operation and marketing services facilitated by a Transaction 
Adviser to help Government structure about seven viable transactions attractive to the 
communities and potential private investors. These transactions will refer to the existing 
public-private partnership framework, and include irrigation scheme development and 
operation and maintenance (O&M), as well as agricultural and marketing services.  
 
(c) 
Community mobilization and capacity building services by targeting communities 
to ensure a fully informed decision-making process has been undertaken to assess trade-
offs between expected benefits and risks. The training program will enable the 
establishment of water user associations and producer organizations, and increase the 
knowledge capacity of smallholder farmers to negotiate with their commercial partners in 
the value chains.  
 
Component 2: Public Infrastructure  
 
(US$95.49 million total, including an IDA contribution of US$66.95 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to provide the bulk water supply and associated 
infrastructure required to establish medium-to-large size smallholder irrigation schemes 
under the agreed partnership agreements. The infrastructure will be fully financed by 
IDA credit and owned by the Government. The project will support:  
 
(a) 
Irrigation infrastructure to supply water to at least 10,000 ha in seven sites, 
including: water storage and diversion, pumping and main supply, and distribution up to 
farm gate. Infrastructure will include in-field canals and structures for Tier 1 plots, while 
on-farm irrigation equipment for Tiers 2 and 3 will be funded under Component 3.  
 
(b) 
Supporting infrastructure, including access roads to project sites and service roads 
within schemes, electrification, storage facilities, and drinking water points to link 
farmers to markets and provide essential access to such services.  
 
(c) 
Implementation of site specific Environmental Management and Resettlement 
Action Plans. IDA credit will be used for implementation activities while compensation-
related resettlement will be funded by the Government.  
 
Component 3: Private and Cooperative Investment  
 
(US$72.20 million total, including an IDA contribution of US$20.40 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to facilitate private and cooperative investment in 
productive equipment and assets in and around irrigation schemes, and to stimulate the 
establishment of small- scale enterprises. Equipment will be owned by the private 
operators and farmers. The will finance:  
 
(a) 
Improving access to long and short-term financing and investment capital for 
smallholder farmers, by providing them with business development services through 
technical assistance, networking and linkage facilitation; provision of ICT services 
related to agricultural services; and strengthening the rural banking services available and 
or located in targeted sites of participating financial institutions.  
 
(b) 
Investment Support Fund (ISF) to include conditional partial grants for on-farm 
irrigation equipment for Tiers 2 and 3, including sprinkler system (Tier 2) and center 
Page  3
pivots (Tier 3) or other appropriate irrigation technologies as recommended by the 
technical studies; other on-farm equipment and assets; specialized production inputs; 
post-harvest and value-adding equipment and assets; essential inputs for production and 
marketing grant for non-traditional activities; and seed capital for small enterprise 
development. The fund includes a special window for women, youth and other vulnerable 
groups. The ISF grants will finance part of actual costs of goods/ works and services as 
applicable.  
 
Component 4: Management and Coordination.  
 
(US$11.05 million total, including an IDA contribution of US$9.35 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to ensure efficient and timely delivery of project 
resources in accordance with the project#s objectives and to strengthen the irrigation 
sector policy and institutional framework.  The component will provide funding for: (a) 
Management of the project; (b) Support the policy and institutional framework; (c) 
Safeguards issues management and oversight; and (d) Monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project's approach is based on a transparent and participatory decision-making 
process whereby entire communities need to become informed partners in a process that 
involves the (re-)allocation of land and water resources under a partnership arrangement 
between the Government, private operators and communities. The project's design allows 
for flexibility in the number and size of the sites, whereby each site will be adapted to the 
level of community participation and the scheme's attractiveness to the private sector. 
The participatory design process entails the mobilization of long term service providers to 
assist the Government and communities, and it requires a high level of certainty 
regarding the availability of funding in order to attract the interest of private operators. 
Project preparation has extended to appraising the feasibility of the approach with a 
reasonable level of confidence. Three potential sites have been proposed at project 
preparation stage to confirm the feasibility in principle of the proposed approach. Local 
communities have conveyed their agreement on this approach after a number of 
information events have been conducted. The specific boundaries and features of the 
irrigation schemes within these sites are still to be determined as an output of the 
participatory process under component 1 of the Project.  Additional sites will be 
appraised during the first year of the project.  
 
The treatment of environmental and social issues is consistent with the project's 
approach, which provides a framework with sufficient detail to attract private partners, 
but flexibility to adjust the final sites and conditions to respond to interests of the private 
sector. For that reason, although the general Project area has been identified, the specific 
sites will be selected and approved under component 1 during Project implementation 
and it is impossible at this stage to prepare the site specific environmental and social 
safeguard documents. Accordingly, the environmental and social framework and the 
resettlement framework documents are the appropriate instruments in this case. Both 
framework documents have been disclosed in country and at the Infoshop. The 
Government's project team is well aware of the safeguard requirements, and has 
undertaken preliminary assessments (these were done in 2008 prior to the Bank's 
Page  4
involvement in the project and the ToRs for the assessments were not cleared by the 
Bank) to inform the project design, such as the review of likely resettlement requirements 
for the proposed Mwomboshi site and possible environmental impacts of an eventual 
irrigation dam there. It should be noted that the preliminary assessment for Mwomboshi 
does not include an analysis of cumulative, downstream, water quality, and other 
environmental impacts. Completion, review and approval by the World Bank safeguard 
specialists, and disclosure of the final ESIAs and related RAPs will be done prior to 
bidding for any works under the Project. Executive Summaries of the ESIAs will be sent 
to the Executive Directors for information, per the requirements of OP 4.01.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will finance medium-to-large scale irrigation infrastructure and demand 
driven subprojects in various sites, some of which may have major environmental 
impacts. Technical feasibility studies are scheduled to be carried out during the first year 
of project implementation and will include site specific land use and water resources 
management plans. The main environmental safeguards issues for the project relate to air 
and water pollution, construction waste management, water abstraction and changes to 
water outflows from the rivers and associated impacts on downstream human needs and 
aquatic habitats, and biodiversity. In addition, the project will also have an impact on 
deforestation and land clearing as well as physical cultural resources, such as graves, 
through inundation during water impoundment. Most significant impacts from the project 
are those associated with construction of dams such as burrowing, soil erosion, as well as 
impacts resulting from the impoundment of water, flooding of land to form the reservoir, 
and alteration of downstream water flow. Aspects mentioned above may have direct 
potential impacts on soils, vegetation, wildlife, and human population in the project sites.  
Page  5
The project is rated Category A for Environmental Assessment (EA) as a result of 
identified potential negative impacts. The project triggers the following safeguard 
policies: (1) OP/BP 4.01 for EA; (2) OP/BP 4.04 for Natural Habitats; (3) OP/BP 4.09 for 
Pest Management; (4) OP 4.11 for Physical Cultural Resources; (5) OP/BP 4.12 for 
Involuntary Resettlement; (6) OP/BP 4.36 for Forests;(7) OP/BP 4.37 for Safety of 
Dams; and (8) OP/BP7.50 for Projects on International Waterways.  
 
OP 4.01 is triggered because of direct potential impacts associated with dam 
construction and irrigated agriculture development such as soil and water pollution 
during construction, construction waste disposal issues, burrowing and impoundment of 
water and significant changes to the environment.  
 
OP/BP 4.04 is triggered because unmitigated irrigation development may have an 
impact on the remnants of natural habitats, both downstream of the command area, and in 
the catchments where deforestation and land clearing activities may be carried out. It is, 
however, expected that no environmentally sensitive habitats will be converted under this 
project; rather environmental conservation will be encouraged in project sites.  
 
OP 4.09 for Pest Management is triggered due to potential expansion, intensification of 
agricultural activities, and diversification into new crops that often require usage of more 
frequent and combinations of agro-chemicals. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been 
prepared for another Bank-funded agriculture project and is being reviewed. The PMP 
will be adopted and included in the implementation manual to address pest management 
issues that may arise in project sites due to both area expansion under irrigation and 
expected increased productivity associated pesticide use.  
 
OP/BP 4.11 is triggered as construction activities may lead to opportunistic finds of 
archaeological artifacts and/or may have an impact on graves and other cultural sites. 
Chance find provisions will, therefore, be included in construction contracts while 
potential impacts on other identified physical cultural resources will be addressed by site-
specific environmental management plans (EMPs).  
 
OP/BP 4.12 is applicable because the project will support the development of water 
harvesting infrastructure such as valley dams and reservoirs that include water 
distributions, both of which may trigger land acquisition and involuntary resettlement.  
Land requirements for purposes of construction of a dam and ancillary facilities may 
permanently or temporarily limit access to both public or private land and other assets by 
local communities.  OP 4.12  is triggered not only when land acquisition is evident but 
also where there is no physical relocation and project activities impact assets or restrict 
access to other natural resources or negatively impact on livelihoods.  Since the scope 
and other details of dam and water distribution construction work, including the exact 
locations of the infrastructure within each project sites are not yet determined, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared and disclosed both in country 
(August 23, 2010) and at the Bank's InfoShop (August 30, 2010).  
 
Page  6
OP/BP 4.36 for Forests is triggered because of envisaged potential impacts on forest 
habitats as a result of dam construction and water collection/ harvesting and delivery 
systems. Detailed information on site specific impacts on forests will be provided in the 
ESIA to be prepared for the project.  
 
Op 4.37 is triggered because of the proposed size of dams to be constructed by the 
project. In compliance with the triggered OP 4.37, a Dam safety panel is being 
constituted to provide the necessary oversight. The irrigation dams will be designed by 
qualified engineers, and dam safety measures will be incorporated in dam operations 
guidelines. Dam Safety plans for the proposed large dam (including an Emergency 
Preparedness Plan (EPP)) will be drafted, reviewed, and disclosed. For small dam 
construction, rehabilitation, and maintenance relevant oversight procedures are included 
in the Project Implementation Manual that has been drafted and is being finalized.  
 
The OP/BP 7.50 is triggered by the Project as it will contribute to building infrastructure 
and enhancing the environment for irrigated agriculture in selected high potential sites 
across the country during project implementation that may have an impact on riparian 
water sources. Irrigation schemes under the proposed IDSP project may be located on 
tributaries of the Zambezi and Congo river basins, which are international waterways 
flowing through Angola, Botswana, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. The Riparian notification 
process per the requirements was completed on September 15, 2010. In addition, 
supplementary circulars will be sent to riparian states when project sites affect watershed 
basin riparian countries.  
 
The project sought an exception to the policy set out in OP 4.76 for Tobacco and was 
approved on August 04, 2010 by OPCS. This exception was requested on the basis that: 
(a) Burley tobacco is the second largest smallholder crop in Zambia and a large and 
sizable number of smallholder farmers are heavily dependent on tobacco as a source of 
income; (b) Benefits to smallholders participating in the tobacco value chain in Zambia is 
significant; (c) among agricultural exports tobacco exports make up a significant 
proportion (0.8 percent of total export share during the month of December 2009); and 
(d) given the total annual production fluctuations of fresh leaf between 2005 (44MT) and 
2009/10 estimated at 25 and 29MT, any increase in national tobacco production and 
marketing in subsequent years may be construed as a direct result of Bank support to 
irrigation infrastructure and therefore could be perceived as inconsistent with OP4.76. 
The project will not directly encourage the production of tobacco. The only project 
subcomponent that may indirectly influence tobacco production is the access to grants for 
on-farm irrigation set up. However, the Government of Zambia, through the Project, will 
actively encourage farmers to diversify away from tobacco into other high value crops. 
Furthermore, other on-going Bank operations such as the Zambia Agricultural 
Development Support project, as well as those of other donors, include activities 
designed to encourage crop diversification, thus helping to promote greater 
diversification of Zambia's agricultural economy.  
 
Page  7
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared for the project because of lack of site-
specific information about the potential scope project, including any adverse 
environmental and social impacts before the completion of site-specific technical 
feasibility studies which will be carried out during the first year of project 
implementation. The ESMF lays out procedures for screening and mitigating impacts 
from construction and operation of the irrigation schemes, and includes the following: (a) 
checklists of potential environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) procedures 
for participatory screening of proposed sites and activities and the environmental and 
social considerations; (c) procedures for assessing potential environmental and social 
impacts of the planned project activities; (d) institutional arrangements for mitigating, 
preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) typical environmental management 
planning process for addressing negative externalities in the course of project 
implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures; 
and (g) recommended capacity building measures for environmental planning and 
monitoring of project activities. The RPF document outlines the principles and 
procedures for resettlement and or compensation of subproject-affected people, and 
establishes standards for identifying, assessing and mitigating negative impacts of 
program supported activities. In addition, the RPF will guide the preparation and 
implementation of resettlement action plans (RAPs) for each individual sub project that 
triggers the involuntary resettlement policy.  
 
An ESIA and RAP will be prepared for each site before project implementation along 
with Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The ESIAs will provide mitigation 
measures for all the potential impacts as a result of the triggering of the above mentioned 
safeguard policies.  
 
The ESMF and RPF were disclosed both in country (August 23, 2010) and at the Bank's 
InfoShop (August 30, 2010). The ESIAs will be disclosed and consulted upon, and then 
finally disclosed both in-country and at the Bank's InfoShop.  Executive summaries of the 
ESIAs will be submitted to the Executive Directors for information.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will create irrigation schemes including small and large water impoundments 
which will result in permanent loss of land previously used for cropping, grazing, and 
residential purposes. Some natural habitats will be altered as a result of inundation. 
Limited vegetation clearing will also occur in preparation for dam construction and on 
newly irrigated land.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
During the actual site selection process for the dams and irrigation schemes, all 
alternatives will be considered and the ESIA studies to be conducted for each of these 
sites will present all the alternatives considered.   
 
Page  8
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower capacity for environmental and social safeguards implementation and reporting 
is limited. The Bank's safeguards specialists are providing close technical support to 
Government during preparation and will continue during implementation to ensure 
compliance with all safeguard policies triggered. Capacity strengthening measures are 
outlined in the project safeguard documents (ESMF and RPF) and have been fully 
accounted for in the project budget.  
 
A
safeguard specialist was employed by MACO for handling both environmental and 
social issues during preparation of a previous project. The same specialist has been 
handling safeguard issues for this project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Ministry (MACO) has held a series of consultation and sensitization meetings with 
various communities who could be potential beneficiaries from the project.  A sample of 
stakeholders from the project affected communities was taken on a study tour to an 
existing irrigation scheme within Zambia. Consultations and study tours were also 
conducted with village chiefs, community members, and tribal leaders. These 
sensitization and exchange visits related to project interventions and subsequent 
consultations have improved the understanding of the benefits that would be derived by 
increased productivity and income and access to better services on an individual, 
household, or community level. It also provided an avenue to discuss detailed design 
elements with affected communities and incorporate their contributions in the design, 
e.g., common needs of community such as drinking water, access roads, and marketing 
inputs; improved gender-specific grants and other benefits.  
 
All environmental and social safeguards documents were cleared by the Environmental 
Council of Zambia (ECZ) and the Bank. They were disclosed in country on August 23, 
2010 and at the World Bank's InfoShop on August 30, 2010. The proposed mitigation 
measures and their monitoring plans are an integral part of the project design and costs. 
Site-specific ESIAs, EMPs, the PMP, Dam Safety Plans and RAPs will be disclosed once 
they are prepared during project implementation.  Executive Summaries of the ESIAs 
will be sent to the Executive Directors for information. Borrower commitment to 
implement the provisions of the safeguards instruments will be included as specific 
covenants in the project legal documents, including a dated covenant with respect to 
establishment of ESIA and RAP in a form and substance satisfactory to IDA. Signed 
entitlement certificates will be issued to people to be resettled under the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/28/2010 
 
Page  9
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/23/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/30/2010 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/28/2010 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/23/2010 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/01/2010 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Project will use the Pest Management Plan (PMP) of the agriculture project and will 
revise and update as needed during EIA preparation. It would be disclosed both in-
country and the Bank's InfoShop before project implementation. The PMP would be 
included in the Project Implementation Manual Safeguards Module.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Page  10
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
No 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
Yes 
Page  11
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Indira Janaki Ekanayake 
01/06/2011 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
01/06/2011 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
01/06/2011 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
01/06/2011 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi 
01/06/2011 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
01/06/2011 
Comments:   
