INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA13504
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:    01-June-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:                 Afghanistan       Project ID:           P155443
Parent Project ID:    P 12872
Project Name:            ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR SECOND CUSTOMS REFORM
AND TRADE FACILITATION PROJECT (P15 5443)
Parent Project Name:     Second Customs Reform and Trade Facilitation Project (Pt 12872)
Task Team Leader(s):     Khaleda Atta, Hasan Afzal Zaidi
Estimated Board Date:    11-Jun-20 15
Managing Unit:           GTCDR
Sector(s):               Public administration- Industry and trade (70%), Information technology
(20%), General transportation sector (10%)
Theme(s):                Infrastructure services for private sector development (35%), Trade
facilitation and market access (20%), Technology diffusion (20%) Other
public sector governance (15%), Regional integration (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00  Yes
(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   21.50                 Total Bank Financing:  21.50
Financing Gap:        0.00
Financing Source                                                             Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                    21.50
Total                                                                           21.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
Is this a Transferred    No
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent


﻿To improve the release of legitimate goods in a fair and efficient manner.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The proposed USD 21.5 mil grant as Additional Financing for SCRTFP will help finance costs
associated with: countrywide computerization of Customs Clearance operations; installation of
executive information systems for Customs allowing real time monitoring of operations; development
of cross border Customs-to-Customs (C2C) links to capture reliable information on cargo; provision of
adequate Customs infrastructure to enable modernized operations; development of an adequate
regulatory, administrative and institutional framework for Customs including development of Trade
Portal, feasibility for developing a National Single Window, and support for the Afghan Customs
Academy etc. Through these initiatives the project will continue to support the Customs reform
momentum supported by the Second Customs Refonn and Trade Facilitation Project (SCRTFP)
started in 2010.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
SCRTFP is a nationwide project. However the infrastructure rehabilitation/refurbishment sub-project
locations are most likely to be Kabul, Jalalabad, Ghazni, Paktya, Farah, Andkhoi, and Ghulam Khan.
All physical infrastructure sub-projects are planned on existing Government land already available and
in-use for similar activities (tax offices, truck parks, customs houses, check-posts, warehouses, transit
facilities).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Mohammad Ateeq Zaki ( GSURR)
Sayed Mujtaba Shobair (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01    Yes           The EA Category for this project is B i.e.
the same as the parent project SCRTFP
(P112872). The existing ESMF for the
original project has been reviewed and
will suffice for this AF operation for
compliance purposes. The reason being
that (i) The AF operation does NOT
trigger new additional safeguards
policies, (ii) the AF will finance exactly
the same types/categories of activities as
the original project and (iii) the existing
ESMF referred to activities at customs
facilities nationally, and was not
location/province specific.
The majority of environmental and
social impacts of SCRTFP are generally
related to generation development and


﻿rehabilitation of ACD's Facilities.
Because the project will mostly finance
the rehabilitation and expansion of an
existing scheme, implementation of the
project components is not expected to
involve any significant adverse
environmental or social impacts.
However, there will be potential short
term impacts which could be minimized,
reduced and mitigated if relevant
measures envisioned in the project
ESMF are properly applied.
Specifically:
*      The rehabilitation and expansion
of the project relates to
construction/rehabilitation of physical
infrastructure and purchase of equipment
for customs and transit. While some
disruptions in day-to-day activities
during construction may be inevitable,
these impacts will be temporary.
Furthermore, no land or other assets are
expected to be required.
The rehabilitation of the existing
facilities will involve procurement and
installation of necessary ICT equipment
including design, supervision, and
project management; and, provide
continued technical assistance for the
ongoing ACD restructuring, automation
in the mentioned site. This is not
expected to have any impact on
environmental and social aspects.
Most potential environmental impacts
are related to sitting of facilities (such as
sub-stations), construction activities and
the possible presence of mines.
Assessment and mitigation of potential
impacts will be addressed through the
application of environmental codes of
practices, mine risk and safety
procedures all envisioned in the project
ESMF.
Also, operational level impacts should
also be considered. Water and Sanitation
in the rest areas, offices and facilities


﻿related to the Customs should be
functioning well hygienically. Offices
should have emergency exits, smoke
detectors, fire extinguishers, guard rills,
ramps for the disabled and etc. to be
ensure Environmental Health and Safety
issues during the facilities life time.
Training would also be needed for
custom officers to identify legally
banned toxic items, e.g., outdated
pesticides, W-HO banned items and etc.
to inter the country.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No
Pest Management OP 4.09                 No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     No
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There will be no potential large scale, significant and/ or irreversible impacts by the SCRTFP. Most
potential environmental impacts are related to improvement of facilities (such as sub-stations),
construction activities and the possible presence of mines. Assessment and mitigation of potential
'impacts will be addressed through the application of environmental codes of practices, mine risk and
safety procedures detailed in the ESMF.
12. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
No adverse long term impacts are foreseen. In fact the project is expected to have positive
environmental impacts after completion of construction works, including a decrease in dust generation
etc. and provision of rest area helping the cleanliness of the surrounding areas.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
NA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an


﻿assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) is the implementing ministry, and the project will be implemented by
newly established PR_U (Project implementation Unit) under the Afghanistan Custom Department
(ACD). The newly established PIU under ACD will now be directly managing and addressing
any safeguards related issues if they arise. An assessment of the institutional arrangement has
been carried out and in order to strengthen the environmental and social monitoring capacity
of the PIU, it is proposed to appoint a Safeguards Focal Officer within the PIU with
responsibility for oversight for the implementation of the existing ESMF.
As per the requirements of the ESMF, the project Focal Officer and other staff will be preparing
ESMPs or action plans for implementation of the safeguards. The provisions of the ESMPs and other
relevant safeguards framework relevant items will be included in all works contracts and its proper
implementation will be the responsibility of the Contractor(s) with oversight from the PRU.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Implementing Agency - Afghan Customs Department (ACD) - Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
NGOs
Provincial Authorities
Municipalities
Ministry of Information and Culture
Local Communities
Disclosure shall be made through local newspapers, TV, radio, websites and public announcements.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                       30-May-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                    01-June-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure 01 -June-2016
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes I I  No [Xl  NA  I I
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X]  No [ I  NA [ I


﻿Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public  Yes [X]  No [ I   NA [ 1
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X I   No I ]   NA I I
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in  Yes [ x ]  No  I I  NA  I I
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include  Yes [X]  No [ I  NA [
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with  Yes [XI  No  I 1  NA   I I
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s)':       Name: Khaleda Atta, Hasan Afzal Zaidi
Approved By:-
fa Vg s Advisor: Name: phkI-'Date: 1
Prcic  aager/Manager:    Name:                                Date


