                           fflTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
     Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring


                                                                        Report No.: ISDSR16932


Date ISDS PreparedlUpdated:           01-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       Afghanistan           I Project ID:              Ipl18028
 Project Name:                  AF: ARTF-2nd Judicial Reform Project (Pl18028)
 Task Team Leader(s):           YousifMubarak Elmahdi, Atiqullah Ahmadzai
 Estimated Board Date:
 Managing Unit:                 GG018
 Sector(s):                     Law and justice (85%), General public administration sector (15%)
 Theme(s):                      Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (67%), Legal
                                institutions for a market economy (33%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                  No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:         85.50                     Total Bank Financing:      10.00
 Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                           Amount
     Borrower                                                                                        0.00
     Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                          85.50
     Total                                                                                          85.50
 Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project?    No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?



 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The objective of the project is to increase the access to and use of legal services.
 Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
 The objective ofthe project is to increase the access to and use of legal services.
3. Project Description
The restructured project design will focus on discrete and well-defined activities by scaling back or
eliminating activities on the basis of the following criteria: (i) feasibility of execution within the
remaining implementation timeframe (by June 2017) i.e. the limited remaining implementation time
requires that that the project build on successful ongoing activities rather than new interventions which
cannot be completed during the Project lifetime; (ii) urgent needs of the JIs; (iii) and consistency with
the overall objective of the project. Consequently, project design will be changed as follows:

I.      Component 1. Partnership for Justice (US$O.2M)

This component is dropped. It was originally purposed to pilot innovative interventions in select
provinces. These included activities designed to bridge the gap between formal justice institutions and
community-based justice actors, and the automation of case management and deeds registry systems.
This was based on the underlying assumption that the administrative and institutional environment was
fertile for such activities that would contribute a positive multiplying impact on justice services at the
provincial level. These key assumptions did not hold as a result of: (i) a restrictive and conflicting
interpretation by the courts of the judiciary's engagement and interaction with community-based
justice providers than that foreseen in original project design; (ii) the overly centralized system in
place has not been conducive to the type of role expected of judiciary authorities at the provincial level
preventing the development by select provinces of provincial justice reform strategies and plans that
could be implemented with the support of the 2nd Judicial Reform Project; and (iii) institutional
capacity limitations related to supporting the introduction of modernizations to the operations of courts
at the provincial level e.g. piloting automation of the case management system and digitalization of
deeds registry. Consequently, while some activities under this component have been completed, the
component has achieved limited progress against its overall objective. Targeted provinces will
continue to receive support in the area oflegal aid, however this will now be covered under
Component 2: Legal Empowerment.

II.     Component 2. Legal Empowerment (US$2.8M)

This component will be streamlined and more narrowly focused. It was originally divided into two
distinct but interconnected sub-components - a Legal Aid sub-component focusing on helping the
Government to better plan, finance and manage legal aid, and a Legal Outreach sub-component
helping citizens to understand their legal rights and thereby enhance their ability to interact with state
legal institutions. The Legal Aid sub-component has been affected by the political transition which
constrained plans for early development of the Legal Aid Roadmap and handover of offices from the
International Legal Aid Foundation. The Legal Outreach sub-component suffered from lack of
practical strategies for public outreach. It therefore became increasingly difficult to measure the
impact of interventions under this sub-component. It is also worth noting that there are multiple actors
involved in legal outreach, especially in off-budget projects funded by bilateral donors. Consequently,
the Legal Outreach sub-component is proposed to be dropped, while the Legal Aid sub-component is
proposed to be consolidated around the following supporting activities:

(i)      Development of a Legal Aid Regulatory Framework and Roadmap. This will be overseen by
the MOJ with the support of the Asia Foundation and the Open Society. It will define an affordable
state legal aid system, and clarify the regulatory framework for legal aid including the role of
non-governmental organizations in the provision of legal aid.
(ii)     Support to Legal Aid Providers. This will involve financing the salaries of legal aid providers
and relevant consultants, and operational support to legal aid offices facilitated through the project (up
 to project closing). Operational support involves renting of offices, provision of stationery, and other
 operational costs necessary for day to day function of legal aid offices.
 (iii)     Establishment of a Legal Information Call Center. This will involve the establishment,
 equipping and technical support (up to project closing) by Mor of a legal information call center. The
 center will provide citizens with legal information and counseling including how to get legal aid,
 where to submit petitions, and direction on which entities deal with specific legal cases.
 Establishment of this center will involve installation of the necessary IT equipment such as computers
 and telephone networks and an information recording database, as well as consultants to run the center
 transitionally until MOJ is able to recruit civil servants (regular staff).

 III.    Component 3. Organization and Capacity of Justice Institutions (US$18.4M)

 This component will be streamlined and more narrowly focused. It originally intended to support key
 structural reforms in the justice sector with the ultimate goal of creating balance between the
 development of services, delivery of those services, and the fiscal sustainability of delivery over the
 short, medium and long term. The complicated political transition and resultant delay in political
 buy-in severely constrained progress under this component It was only in the second half of 20 15 that
 relevant justice institutions had fully transitioned and were better placed to engage around the
 importance of the foundational interventions planned under this component to overall justice sector
 reform. Consequently and as result of the limited implementation time remaining, the component is
 proposed to be consolidated around supporting activities already initiated (ongoing) or new activities
 of critical importance to the functionality of relevant justice institutions, and that can be completed
 within the remaining project implementation period. In line with this criteria, the component will
 continue to support the following activities:

  A.        BR Capital
. (i)       Development ofHRM Strategy: This activity is for all three JIs. While SC and AGO will carry
  out their HRM Strategy through a joint package led by the SC, MOJ is developing its HRM Strategy
  separately through individual consultants. This will help SC, AGO and MOJ in their recently initiated
  reforms, and assist all three JIs to make strategic decisions in terms of staffing numbers, type and
  quality.
  (ii)     Training Needs Assessments: Although the project will not be able to support
  recommendations emanating from these assessments, this joint package led by the SC will help the SC
  and AGO and their partners to develop targeted and focused capacity building interventions that can
  be implemented within in the next 5 years.
  (iii)    Justice and Judiciary Mapping of the Courts and Prosecutors Offices: The procurement
  process for this joint package led by the SC has been completed (currently at negotiation stage), and
  through supporting better targeting, will enable the SC and AGO to better align their resources.
  (iv)     Training: This will involve select trainings linked to the professional development of staff in
  the justice sector, and that can be completed by May 2017.
  (v)      Design and Printing: Support will be provided to the three JIs for design and printing of
  standard forms, certificates, and laws etc. This activity mainly relates to AGO for their printing of
  standard forms, while MOJ utilizes this support to print laws, and SC to print certificates when needed.

B.       Physical Infrastructure
(i)      Capital Investment Plans: These are at the latest stages of completion and will support all three
JIs to make informed decisions about capital investments in the sector.
(ii)     Construction Projects: (a) In process construction work - construction of new MOJ
headquarters and refurbishment of its old headquarters - will be completed; and (b) new construction
led by the SC will be supported for two urban courts - one in Kandahar and the other in Parwan.
(iii)    IT Infrastructure and equipment: The IT network piloted in AGO will be extended to the rest
of its buildings, and additional IT equipment will be provided to all three JIs on an urgent need basis.
(iv)     Furniture: Buildings constructed through the project including the MOJ's new headquarters,
the Prosecutor Offices in Kunar and Logar, and the building constructed for the SC will be furnished.

The following original activities are proposed to be dropped from this comp<?nent:

(i)      Case management automation and modernization: The recently introduced manual case
management system in the SC will need significant time to reach maturity, while the current capacity
in the courts is not at the level required to support an automated case management system.
(ii)     SC analysis of Court Operations and Procedures: This requires significantly longer than the
current implementation time remaining in the project.
(iii)    Activities related to land registries: Land management issues have to a large extent been
transferred to the Land Authority (ARAZI).
(iv)     MOJ Strategic Plan: The Ministry has developed this internally.
(v)      Drafting Commentaries to Civil code; Criminal Code; Civil Procedural Code; and Criminal
Procedural Code. The SC could not reach a decision on how to proceed with this activity and on which
codes should be prioritized.

N.      Component 4. Implementation Capacity (US$3.6M)

The immediate objective of this component remains to facilitate implementation of the project. Under
this component, the GoIRA will continue to operate the project management infrastructure responsible
for management of the project. The management functions will be shared among: a Project Oversight
Committee (POC), and a Project Support Unit (PSU). Relevant staffing of the Project Unit (PU) in
each of the three JIs is proposed to be consolidated into the PSU - separate PUs will therefore no
longer be supported.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The parent project had activities in four provinces in Afghanistan; Kabul, Herat, Logar, Bamyan, and
construction of urban courts in Kandahar and Parwan has been added to finance under restructuring
phase. The project activities include some construction activities, which include both new construction
and rehabilitation of old and existing infrastructures. These activities will be on government land in
urban areas and are not expected to have adverse social and environmental impacts. Given the much
localized nature of these activities, the project is not expected to have a significant environmental
footprint. Anticipated environmental and social impacts are manageable and within the scope ofthe
proposed project activities.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Mohammad Ateeq Zaki (GSURR)
Obaidullah Hidayat (GENDR)


6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes              OP/BP   4.01 is triggered because of the
                                                               rehabilitation and construction activities.
                                                               An Environmental and Social
                                                               Management Framework (ESMF) was
                                               developed for the parent project which is
                                               applicable to this restructured project
                                               too. The ESMF provides guidelines on
                                               environmental and social mitigation
                                               measures and codes of practice for the
                                               sub-projects. These measures will be
                                               incorporated in the design,
                                               implementation and monitoring of
                                               sub-projects. Four ESMPs have been
                                               developed for all planned physical
                                               infrastructure under the parent project.
                                               No complaint and non-compliance case
                                               have been recorded during
                                               implementation of the safeguards
                                               instruments under parent project.
                                               Therefore under restructuring phase, the
                                               same safeguards tools will be prepared
                                                                                           (
                                               for the two new planned infrastructure
                                               projects.
                                               Guidelines for consultation and
                                               disclosure requirements are also
                                               included, to ensure due diligence and
                                               facilitate consistent treatment of
                                               environmental and social issues. The
                                               ESMF has already been translated into
                                               local languages and disclosed in April
                                               2012 under parent project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No    This policy is not triggered, because the
                                               project components are not expected to
                                               be in the area of any natural habitat or
                                               will not have any impact on it.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No    The project activities do not impact
                                               forests in any way, as defined by the
                                               policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No    The project will neither finance
                                               pesticides nor will they be used in the
                                               project.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No    The project does not support any work
                                               that would trigger this policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No    There are no indigenous people, as
                                               defined by policy 4.10, within the project
                                               area that could potentially benefit or be
                                               adversely affected by the Project's
                                               activities.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes   This policy is triggered due to the
                                               construction work in the project.
                                               Although the project will try to use the
                                               government land to avoid or minimize
                                                              land acquisition it is anticipated that land
                                                              acquisition might be required for some
                                                              of the sub-projects, which will have
                                                              adverse social impacts. The project has
                                                              developed a Resettlement Policy
                                                              Framework (RPF) for the parent project,
                                                              which was reviewed by the RSA, and is
                                                              applicable to restructuring.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No              The project does not have any activity
                                                              involving dams.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP     No              The project does not involve any activity
7.50                                                          that will affect international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No              The project does not involve any activity
                                                              in any known disputed area.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

 1.     Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

 Activities under the project should will not entail significant environmental and social impacts,
provided they are designed and implemented with due consideration of environmental and social
issues. Component 3b, Strengthening Capacity of State Justice Institutions will finance the
maintenance and construction of courts and offices facilities. Construction activities may cause
limited, temporary, and localized negative impacts due to depletion or degradation of natural resources
such as stone, earth, water etc. used for Justice Institution (JI) construction if proper environmental
management is not carried out at design, construction and operation stages. This will be mitigated
through the implementation of an appropriate site specific Social and Environmental Management
Plan (ESMP), including environmental checklist to monitor and plan the work. Capacity building of
concerned departments of JIs, including physical and institutional management, is likely to have a
positive impact on social and physical environment.

OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because of JI rehabilitation and construction activities. The project will apply
the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) developed for the project. The ESMF
provides guidance on the approach to be taken during implementation for the selection and design of
subprojects/proposed investments and the planning of mitigation measures, guidelines and codes of
practice for an environmental and social mitigation measures to be incorporated in the design,
contracting and monitoring of sub-projects. Guidelines for consultation and disclosure requirements
are also included, to ensure due diligence and facilitate consistent treatment of environmental and
social issues by all participating development partners.

The adverse social impacts would largely result from land which may be required in connection with
the construction activities and OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement is therefore triggered. Wherever
possible, the project will utilize land that is already public property, and avoid or minimize land
acquisition. However, documentation is required that the land is free of encroachments, squatters or
other encumbrances, and that the land has been transferred to the relevant authorities. In the rare cases
that land acquisition is unavoidable, it will be undertaken in accordance with the provisions stated in
the ESMF of the parent project.

Land acquisition or relocation did not occur during the parent project. All construction work was
carried out on available government land. Therefore, no resettlement is expected to take place under
the restructured project. Further, the same framework approach for land acquisition, which was
accepted for the parent project, will be adopted for this project. The RPF was disclosed on Infoshop
and in-country on 27 and 28 of April, 2012. The client will develop an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan
as and when required during the implementation of this project. No sub-project will be funded which
requires involuntary acquisition of land or any resettlement of people affecting more than 200 persons.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Following the environmental and social screening process outlined in the checklists of the ESMF and
preparation and implementation of site specific ESMPs will address any potential negative impacts of
construction work and indirect or long-term impacts are not anticipated.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Specific projects sites are not yet identified, but by application of the ESMF and its screening
procedures, potential social and environmental impacts will be
minimized.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project during restructuring period, will undertake a number of construction, rehabilitation
activities in the selected provinces. Similar to parent project, the detailed designs of the multiple
maintenance and construction activities will be developed only at the preparation of the subproject
implementation period, while, similar to parent project the existing framework approach has been
adopted for project restructuring phase. The Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) provides general policies procedures for the management of environmental and social issues
at each site and as such constitutes a set of guidelines for the development of site-specific
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP). The JSDP maintenance, rehabilitation and
construction work does not anticipate significant and irreversible adverse impacts on the environment
or community. The likelihood of potential adverse impacts are localized in spatial extent and short in
duration, and are manageable by implementing mitigation measures that will be detailed in site
specific the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).

As for parent project, the project implementation responsibilities rest with the Supreme Court,
Ministry of Justice and Attorney General's Office. The Safeguards Nodal Officer assigned during
parent project will be retained during restructuring period and will continue to hold specific
responsibilities to oversee the implementation of the Environmental and Social Management
Framework and Site specific Environmental and Social Management Plans within the Project
Management Team ofthe central PSl). The Safeguards Focal Officer and relevant staff of JIs and
implementing agencies/Consultants and contractors have undergone trainings in the application of the
ESMF. During supervision of the project, the World Bank will assess the implementation of the
Framework directly or through third party, and if required, will recommend additional strengthening.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The stakeholders of the project include representatives from the State Justice Institutions (II) as well as
the clients being served by these institutions. However, at this stage the specific construction works
and local stakeholders are not identified. The ESMF contains specific guidelines for consultations with
project affected people. The ESMF is translated into local languages and made available in the WB
Infoshop and disclosed on the website ofMOJ, AGO and SC in April, 2012.


B. Disclosure Requirements
Resettlement Action PlanlFrameworkIPolicy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        13-Mar-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                     27-Apr-2012
"In country" Disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]          No [   ]    NA [    ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or        Yes [x ]     No [   ]    NA [    ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                           Yes [      ] No [   ] TBD [x]
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to         Yes [      ] No [   ] TBD [x]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [x]            No [   ]    NA [    ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [x ]         No [   ]    NA [    ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [x]       No [   ]    NA [    ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in        Yes [x]      No [   ]    NA [    ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [x]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [x]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?                                                                             .



III. APPROVALS


Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Yousif Mubarak Elmahdi,Atiqullah Ahmadzai
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:
Practice Manager/Manager:
