                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                                       Report No.: 101388

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           17-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       Afghanistan            Project ID:                  P117103
 Project Name:                  National Solidarity Program III (P117103)
 Task Team Leader(s):           Naila Ahmed, Susanne Holste
 Estimated Board Date:          29-Jun-2010
 Managing Unit:                 GSU06
 Sector(s):                     General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (26%), General
                                transportation sector (21%), Other social services (20%), Irrigation and
                                drainage (19%), General energy sector (14%)
 Theme(s):                      Participation and civic engagement (29%), Rural services and
                                infrastructure (29%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruct ion
                                (28%), Gender (14%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                      No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        40.00                       Total Bank Financing:         40.00
 Financing Gap:             0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                                            40.00
     Total                                                                                                40.00
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 To build, strengthen, and maintain Community Development Councils (CDCs) as effective institutions
 for local governance and social-economic development.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


3. Project Description
On October 12th 2015, the Government of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (GoIRA) requested the
Third National Solidarity Program (NSPIII) to support the Governments’ Maintenance Grant Initiative
by providing Maintenance Cash Grants (MCG) to eligible Community Development Councils (CDCs)
for the purpose of infrastructure sub-project maintenance. Revisions to the existing NSPIII ISDS and
ESMF are being done in order to include activities under the new grant scheme such as repair and
maintenance related works for existing infrastructure. This new activity is not expected to entail
significant environmental or social impacts. Social organizers and engineers hired under the MCG will
work closely with the communities to ensure no negative environmental or social impacts.

Overall, the project, which is now in its sixth year, has made remarkable project implementation
progress up to the last supervision mission held in August 2015 – especially given the challenging and
deteriorating security environment.

The cumulative results in terms of access to services achieved under NSPIII with regard to Block Grant
financed sub-projects include over 10,000 kilometers of road constructed/rehabilitated; some 3.5 million
people provided with access to improved water sources with another 23,000 improved community water
points constructed, 8.6 MW of power generated; over 147,000 hectares of land brought under irrigation
or provided with irrigation and drainage services, and some 1,500 class rooms built. About half of NSP
beneficiaries are women and NSP is making headway to mainstream gender into all its activities despite
growing restrictions on women’s participation. On average communities have contributed 13% towards
the total cost of the sub-projects amounting to US$64 million. In the last 12 years the 34,800 CDCs have
implemented over 88,000 completed and ongoing community level schemes and paid skilled and
unskilled workers at market rates an estimated $450 million for 58 million labor days generated.
Maintenance activities by their very nature are more labor intensive and are expected to therefore create
more short term employment per dollar spent.

ARTF grant disbursements have remained consistently high (93% of the revised grant amount of US$
1,050 million). The project received an unqualified audit report for FY1393, and has consistently
adhered to all financial covenants, including the timely submission of quarterly unaudited Interim
Financial Reports (IFRs). The audit report for FY1393 was received late, but this was beyond the control
of MRRD, and was due to a serious security incident in May 2015 that resulted in the death of two
auditors supporting the Supreme Audit Office. In addition to the annual financial audits, NSP activities
were reviewed in 2011 by the US Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction who found
that there were numerous internal and financial control mechanisms in place that ensured that funds
were generally used for the intended purpose. The project reasonably complied with the environmental
and social safeguards, and continued to strive to mainstream gender in all its activities.

Component 1: Capacity building of CDCs
This component finances costs related to Facilitating Partner Contracts and the expected outcome is to
have effective CDCs that are capable of performing their roles as village governance bodies and
facilitating local socio-economic development activities. Capacity building in the communities is
carried out by Facilitating Partners and NSP currently works with 27 international and national NGOs,
firms, and UN Habitat. Many of the partners have deep-rooted relationships with the communities and
excellent knowledge of the context and operating conditions.
Overall 63% of CDC elected members are male and 37% female. Overall capacity building activities for
CDC and community representatives have progressed well with trainings provided in CDC roles and
responsibilities, community procurement and accounting, basic project management, etc. which have
helped CDCs perform their mandated roles within the NSP, mobilize new development funding/projects
for their communities, and also to manage self-help projects that are financed/supported from within the
community's resources.

The quarterly reports of the Institutional Maturity Index (IMI) show that the capacity of CDCs that have
completed a repeater Block Grant is much higher (84%) compared to CDCs that have had only one
round of Block Grants. This indicates that capacity building activities and practice that CDCs
accumulate through their engagement with NSP has enabled them to help with the development in their
villages. CDCs in repeater communities are particularly strong in inclusive decision making and project
implementation and maintenance.

Component 2: Community Grants for Economic and Social Development
This component finances Block Grants to communities to fund priority development needs
(sub-projects). The component will finance Block Grants for communities that had not been reached
during NSP I and II (referred to as NSP IIIA) and repeater Block Grants for select communities which
successfully completed their first Block Grants (referred to as NSP IIIB). As of October 2015, a total of
over 88,500 subprojects have been financed under NSP (I, II and III cumulative) out of which over
73,000 are completed and handed over to communities. A total amount of US$ 1,594 million has been
disbursed as Block Grants to CDCs as of October 2015. Of this, US$ 516 million was disbursed as the
first Block Grant and another US$ 416 million as repeater Block Grants under NSP III.

Component 3: Project Implementation Support.
This component covers expenditures associated with MRRD’s overall management (excluding the FPs)
and oversight of NSP, including the salaries of all contractual staff engaged by MRRD for NSP,
technical assistance needed to support MRRD’s Program Implementation Unit (PIU) for NSP, and
MRRD incremental operating costs (IOC) pertaining to NSP, costs associated with monitoring and
evaluation of the program, and an agreed share of salaries of MRRD contractual staff who perform
certain headquarters functions for the MRRD as a whole.

Financial management and Procurement ratings for NSP III remains Satisfactory. Similarly the
compliance with environmental and social safeguards is satisfactory. The NSP safeguards unit continues
to make considerable efforts to coordinate with the FPs to strengthen safeguards compliance. Land
requirements in sub-projects are generally covered through use of community land or small-scale
donations of private land. NSP has a functioning grievance redress mechanism in place.

NSP continues to implement its multiple, layered monitoring systems including Community
Participatory Monitoring (CPM), FP contracted monitoring, NSP PMU monitoring, NSP HQ specific
technical monitoring etc.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The NSP III, after restructuring, will continue its operations in the same geographical areas across the
country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Mohammad Ateeq Zaki ( GSURR )
Mohammad Yasin Noori ( GSURR )
Obaidullah Hidayat ( GENDR )

6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01   Yes          The safeguard for Environmental
                                                   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered
                                                   in the parent project and remains
                                                   triggered under the restructuring. Due to
                                                   the likelihood of some adverse
                                                   environmental and social impacts from
                                                   the new NSP III activities planned under
                                                   the proposed restructuring the assigned
                                                   EA category will remain as “B?.

                                                   An ESMF has been prepared for the
                                                   parent project which will be applicable
                                                   for the restructuring phase. The project
                                                   structures currently exist in MRRD, NSP
                                                   III will:
                                                     - Provide a specific terms of reference
                                                   for social and environmental focal points
                                                   in the PMUs and Facilitating Partners;
                                                     - Project management unit will provide
                                                   a terms of reference to M&E officers to
                                                   specifically monitor safeguard issues;
                                                     - CDCs will appoint safeguard focal
                                                   points who will have translated versions
                                                   of the ESMF.
                                                     - NSP will document and share any
                                                   feedback from communities on social and
                                                   environmental issues with the Bank.
                                                     - Since from NSP-I and NSP-III no
                                                   significant irreversible impacts have been
                                                   observed. Therefore involvement of CDC
                                                   representatives and their relationship
                                                   with existing water users associations
                                                   (Mirabs) will be effective for
                                                   environmental and social mitigation as
                                                   well as structures maintenance.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No           This policy is not triggered, because the
                                                   project components are not expected to
                                                   be in the area of any natural habitat or
                                                   will not have any impact on it.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No           The project activities do not impact
                                                   forests in any way, as defined by the
                                                   policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No           The project will neither finance pesticides
                                                   nor will they be used in the project.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No      OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered because there
                                                 is no indication of presence of physical
                                                 cultural resources within the selected
                                                 sites for the additional financing.
                                                 However, the site specific ESMP and
                                                 ESMP checklist will include guidelines
                                                 for Chance Find Procedure according to
                                                 National Law.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No      This policy is not triggered as there are no
                                                 Indigenous Peoples that meet the criteria
                                                 of OP/BP 4.10 within the project area that
                                                 could potentially benefit or be adversely
                                                 affected by the Project’s activities.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes     No involuntary land acquisition would be
                                                 allowed under the project, but
                                                 Operational Policy 4.12 is triggered,
                                                 because there may be a need for limited
                                                 land acquisition in connection with
                                                 certain sub-projects. This will only take
                                                 place through either willing
                                                 buyer-willing seller, voluntary donations
                                                 or through mutually agreeable
                                                 community compensation, the guidelines
                                                 for which are included in the
                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                 Framework (ESMF). The ESMF also
                                                 contains procedures for recording land
                                                 acquisition, restoration of housing, and
                                                 compensation for loss of land and
                                                 livelihood by project-affected families,
                                                 all of which is done in a consultative and
                                                 mutually agreeable manner and in
                                                 compliance with OP 4.12. A
                                                 satisfactory settlement of the land
                                                 acquisition issues is a precondition for
                                                 sub-project implementation and any form
                                                 of land acquisition must be fully
                                                 documented.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No      The project does not have any activity
                                                 involving dams.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No     The project does not involve any activity
7.50                                             that will affect international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No      The project does not involve any activity
                                                 in any known disputed area.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The level two restructuring does not change the Environmental category of the project nor does it trigger
any new safeguard policies. The ESMF has been revised to reflect the new Maintenance activity.
There have been no issues faced and NSPs performance remains satisfactory. NSP already has an
Environmental and social safeguards (ESS) unit with the capacity to oversee and implementation the
ESMF. In addition, ESS focal points have been appointed at FPs field offices to ensure proper
implementation of safeguards policies and activities.

There are no significant or long lasting potential or irreversible impacts associated with activities to be
undertaken under the proposed level 2 restructuring of the project. Although there might be some minor
and reversible environmental sensitive activities, the impacts are expected to be temporary and
reversible, which are being mitigated by using the environmental and Social management plans (ESMPs
and ESMP-Checklists) already in place. Besides, there might be minor and limited land acquisition on
the basis of willing buyer-willing seller, voluntary donations and mutually agreed community
compensation, and the impact on livelihood shall be minor (i.e. less than 10% of an individual’s
holdings). To address any unlikely environmental impacts there are ample mitigation measures
stipulated in the parent project ESMF which shall be applied for the restructured NSP III.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
It is expected that the maintenance of subprojects implemented by the communities through NSP III will
remain with limited adverse impacts on social and environmental aspects. The environmental and social
safeguards (ESS) unit will be responsible for overseeing the implementation of ESMF. In addition, ESS
focal points have been appointed at FPs field offices to ensure proper implementation of safeguards
policies and activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The NSP III, after restructuring, will remain a category B project, which consists of a great number of
micro and small subprojects. These subprojects will be chosen also according to ESMF (social and
Environmental Framework), so that adverse environmental and social impacts will be avoided,
minimized or mitigated.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) has over the years gained considerable
experience and improved capacity in managing proper implementation supervision and monitoring of
safeguard issues in projects. MRRD has been implementing several World Bank funded project such as
NSP, Afghanistan Rural Access Project (ARAP), as well as AREDP project, and has long history of
working with donors. The NSP-III has an Environmental and Social Safeguards Unit and staff.
Besides, there are safeguards focal points within facilitating partners, and within CDCs. The staff has
specific terms of reference and received trainings to ensure their effectiveness. Moreover, the
community participatory monitoring approach has been extensively used in implementation of the
mitigation measures.

It is advised that more emphasis should be placed on raising awareness about social and environmental
issues among all the stakeholders in line with the Operation Manual as well as Environmental and Social
Safeguard Management Framework developed during NSP-III.
As is already the case, MRRD will continue to ensure that the proper procedures for voluntary land
acquisition or land acquisition against community compensation are followed by NSP and FP staff.
MRRD/NSP will continue to provide safeguard trainings to FPs.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The major stakeholders are the local communities/CDCs, sectoral Ministries and NSP III-FPs. The
safeguards unit of NSP III will be responsible for undertaking meaningful consultations with the
relevant stakeholders, including communities as necessary and disclosure of the safeguards policies in
local languages (Pashto and Dari).

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  13-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               17-Nov-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Afghanistan                                                                  14-Nov-2015
Comments: The revised ISDS and ESMF have been disclosed in country on the 14th of November
          2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A: Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies are not triggered.

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [      ]                           N[ X ]   NA [
                                                                                                         o
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]                              N[   ]   NA [
Bank's Infoshop?                                                                                         o
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [ X ]                            N[   ]   NA [
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to                                         o
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]                           N[   ]   NA [
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures                                        o
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ X ]                 N[   ]   NA [
project cost?                                                                                  o
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]                 N[   ]   NA [
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to                                    o
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]                 N[   ]   NA [
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project                             o
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Naila Ahmed, Susanne Holste
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:            Name: Zia Aljalaly                         Date: Nov 23, 2015
Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: David S. Warren                      Date: Nov 23, 2015
