Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/13/2005 
Report No.:  AC1322
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Western Africa 
Project ID:  P075994 
Project Name:  WAPP APL 1 (1st Phase - COASTAL TRANSMISSION BACKBONE) 
Task Team Leader:  Amarquaye Armar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
2.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
10.00 
 
KUWAIT: KUWAIT FUND FOR ARAB ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 16.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.50
40.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The 15 member states of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) 
are confronted with serious energy challenges with their countries' demand expected to 
triple to 140,000 GWh (approx. 370 kWh per capita) between 2003 and 2020. Faced with 
this power system expansion challenge, ECOWAS member states have acknowledged 
that past efforts to achieve national self-sufficiency in electricity supply have been 
uneconomical due to the high cost of establishing power generation and transmission 
infrastructure. The ECOWAS member states are convinced that the West Africa Power 
Pool (WAPP) ? a cooperative power pooling mechanism for promoting inter-utility 
cooperation in the planning of investments and operation of interconnected national 
power systems for the region as a whole will help them meet the region's projected 
electricity requirement  
 
The key objectives of this project is to support the WAPP with the aim of establishing a 
well-functioning, cooperative, power pooling mechanism among national power utilities 
Page  2
of ECOWAS member states, based on a transparent and harmonized legal, policy, 
regulatory and commercial framework that would:  
 
*
promote cross-border exchange of electricity on risk-free basis;  
 
*
assure national power utilities of mutual assistance to avoid a regional power system 
collapse, or rapid restoration of interconnected regional power;  
 
*
reduce collective vulnerability of ECOWAS member states to drought-induced power 
supply disruptions; and  
 
*
increase access of ECOWAS member states to more stable and reliable supply of 
electricity from lower cost regional sources of (hydro and gas-fired thermal) power 
generation.  
 
The World Bank is participating in the effort of building and strengthening the WAPP to 
promote cooperation and regional integration in West Africa. To this end, the "Regional 
Integration Assistance Strategy for West Africa" (RIAS) was presented to the World 
Bank Board on August 2, 2001. The proposed APL program is a key component of the 
World Bank's support for the WAPP and is designed as the principal vehicle for 
providing IDA co-financing to support the physical integration of the power systems of 
10 of the 15 ECOWAS member states.   
 
3. Project Description 
The WAPP APL Program will help achieve the medium term goal to establish a robust 
platform for the future development of a unified regional electricity market, over a long-
term (2012-2020) horizon. The components of such  platform are being put in place over 
the medium term (2004-2011), including the 330kV WAPP Coastal Transmission 
Backbone Project, based on an inter-utility cooperation agreement involving the national 
TSOs of Benin/Togo, Cote d'Ivoire and Nigeria.  
 
The institutional, regulatory and commercial aspects for the above projects will be 
embodied in a WAPP Cooperation Agreement. The WAPP APL program is structured 
horizontally into three (3) phases, the first of which will finance (in 2 tranches) the 330 
kV WAPP Coastal Transmission Backbone project.  
 
This ISDS applies to APL 1 (tranche 1) only, which is to finance the construction of the 
330 kV transmission line from Aboadze to Volta in Ghana. APL1 is structured in two 
investment tranches, and a separate ISDS will be disclosed for APL 1 (tranche 2). Under 
APL 1, the following specific project components are envisaged:  
 
WAPP Institutional Building Component:  
 
?
Support to the WAPP Task Force of TSOs for development of an ?Operational 
Mitigation and Security Plan? for the 330kV Coastal Transmission Backbone.  
 
?
Upgrade of the Volta System Control Center (Tema) of VRA into a WAPP 
?Operational Coordination Center? fully equipped to coordinate the ?Operational 
Mitigation and Security Plan? for the 330kV Coastal Transmission Backbone.  
Page  3
?
Upgrade the ECOWAS Energy Observatory (Cotonou) into the ?WAPP 
Secretariat and Information Coordination Center,? fully equipped to perform monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) functions for the WAPP APL program.  
 
WAPP Pre-investment Studies: The first IDA credit tranche of WAPP APL 1 project 
will finance pre-investment activities (engineering design and preparation of bidding 
documents, environmental impact and mitigation plans, resettlement action plans) 
required by VRA and its partner (CEB) to satisfy project triggers for the second IDA 
credit tranche of the WAPP APL 1 project.  
 
WAPP Infrastructure Components: The target is to complete and put into full operation 
(by 2009) the entire 330kV Coastal Transmission Backbone infrastructure, in two stages 
through the WAPP APL 1 project. The IDA credits for WAPP APL 1 project will be 
made available in two tranches, as follows:  
 
?
The first (FY05) IDA credit tranche for the WAPP APL 1 project will finance the 
construction of the 330 kV line segment from Aboadze to Volta in Ghana, in parallel with 
the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development (already committed) and the European 
Investment Bank (under appraisal). Ghana has already met the policy trigger for the first 
tranche. This particular 330 kV line segment is expected to become operational by 2007.  
 
?
The second (FY06) IDA credit tranche of the WAPP APL 1 project will be part of 
a
co-financing package for the remaining segments ? the Prestea-Aboadze segment and 
the Volta-Mome Hagou-Sakete segments. The African Development Bank (AfDB) and 
the West African Development Bank (BOAD) have indicated their interest to finance the 
construction of the 330 kV line segment from Volta through Mome Hagou (Togo) to 
Sak?t? (Benin), to be operational in 2008. It is expected that the second (FY06) IDA 
credit tranche for the WAPP APL 1 project will also finance the 330 kV Aboadze ? 
Prestea line segment and possibly also the reinforcement of the northern transmission 
network in Ghana (the VRA?s 161 kV Tumu-Han-Wa Project).  
 
Project Triggers. Before the second (FY06) IDA credit tranche is released, the four 
beneficiary TSOs must conclude agreements to put in place: (i)  the WAPP Cooperation 
Agreement covering institutional and commercial arrangements for project 
implementation (Project Trigger 1), and (ii) the WAPP Operational Mitigation and 
Security Plan for the 330kV Coastal Transmission Backbone (Project Trigger 2).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The APL 1 (tranche 1) investment project consists of one country project located in 
Ghana. The project is a 330 kV transmission line from Aboadze to Volta of 216 km 
length with appropriate terminations at Aboadze and Volta. The transmission system will 
consist of the transmission line itself (including about 430 towers of 40 meters height, 
conductors and their supports), its associated right-of-way (ROW), and two 450MVA 
330/161kV autotransformers to be installed at the line ends at Aboadze and Volta 
switching stations to provide a connection to the rest of the system. The total land area to 
be taken up by the ROW will be approximately 8.6 km2 corresponding to a 40 m wide 
strip running along the entire proposed 215 km route. In all, about 38 communities are 
Page  4
affected by the project. There will be no need for resettlement of persons. The land taken 
for the tower base and the access roads will be permanent, whereas the land taken for the 
ROW will allow for continued cultivation by farmers with crops not exceeding 1.5 
meters. Alterations in tower spotting will assist in circumventing a few sacred groves and 
shrines (especially Guako Grove at Pokuase), the Yenku Block "B" forest reserve, and 
the Apra Hills forest reserve.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
Mr Dan R. Aronson (AFTTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The impacts of the Aboadze Volta line of APL 1 (tranche 1) are limited to a strip of 40 
meters around the 216 km transmission line. The impacts will be limited to changes in 
agriculture around the line. The land taken for the tower base and the access roads will be 
permanent, whereas the land taken for the Right Of Way (ROW) will allow for continued 
cultivation by farmers with crops not exceeding 1.5 meters.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The suggested Aboadze - Volta transmission line is required to evacuate approximately 
200 MW from the south-western part of Ghana to meet demand in the East, including in 
Togo and Benin.  
 
The Masterplan of Ghana's power utility Volta River Authority (VRA) shows two 
alternatives for the suggested Aboadze - Volta line:  
Page  5
?
A
330 kV line, which would initially be energized at 161 kV. This option is consistent 
with the WAPP development plan and VRA's plan to create a 330kV network;  
 
?
A
161 kV line Aboadze-BSP2. This option would require a cable to be placed into the 
center of Accra.  
 
Either alternative - including the selected route for the transmission line - is adequate to 
wheel 200 MW from C?te d'Ivoire. In order to minimize transmission losses - and thus 
indirectly minimize environmental impacts of power generation - the selected option of 
operating the 330 kV line at 330 kV is preferable to the first alternative. The second 
alternative would exhibit the same environmental shortcomings. In addition, it would 
introduce the challenge of constructing a transmission line through a densely populated 
area in Accra.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
VRA has prepared an Environmental Impact Assessment and a Resettlement Action Plan 
for the Aboadze-Volta transmission line. Both were reviewed by the World Bank and 
approved after final versions were received on March 1, 2005. At appraisal, VRA will 
present an Environmental Management Plan, which will include rules for the 
management of wastes, rules for compliance with Ghana's Forestry Divisions Guidelines, 
traffic management, environmental and safety hazards (including environmental 
awareness programs for workers).  An Environmental Permit has been issued by Ghana's 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which allows VRA to commence construction 
of the transmission line.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the Aboadze - Volta 330 kV transmission line are people living in 
the vicinity of the project area. VRA has conducted consultations with these stakeholders. 
Buildings, lands, and crops will be duly compensated in accordance with the provisions 
of the law in Ghana at the appropriate values in line with VRA/Land Valuation Board 
procedures. A Property Impact Report identifying all affected property owners and 
estimated prevailing market values is being prepared.  
 
The main beneficiaries of the project are businesses and households, which are suffering 
from the high cost of electricity and the unreliability of its supply. The 1993, 1998, and 
2003 crises caused by the drying up of the 912MW Volta Dam at Akosombo (Ghana) had 
serious economic repercussions in the region, which were epitomized by the closure of 
the largest offtaker of electricity in western Ghana in 2003, the Volta Aluminum 
Company (VALCO). Other beneficiaries include independent power producers, who 
have excess capacity in Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana, as they will be assured of more reliable 
transmission capacity to transfer electricity to load centers in eastern Ghana and/or 
Benin/Togo.   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/11/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/24/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/24/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/24/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  7
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amarquaye Armar 
04/11/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
04/13/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Dan R. Aronson 
04/13/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
04/13/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Yusupha B. Crookes 
04/13/2005 
Comments:   
