The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2017| Report No: ISDSR21699




                       Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                              Country Director:    Christina Malmberg Calvo
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Robin Mearns
                            Task Team Leader:      Varalakshmi Vemuru
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project
    P152822
                                                                in the HoA
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Varalakshmi Vemuru                                          Africa
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    31-May-2016                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU07

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    175,000,000.00                                              175,000,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                      175,000,000.00
    Total                                                                                            175,000,000.00



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to basic social services, expand economic opportunities,
    and enhance environmental management for communities hosting refugees in the target areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia and
    Uganda.

    The proposed regional project will embed the essential features of ensuring citizen participation and engagement in
    identifying and prioritizing developmental needs, including socio-economic infrastructure and livelihood opportunities to
    improve self-reliance of refugee hosting communities; improving social cohesion between refugees and refugee hosting
    communities; increasing citizen voice and role in development decision making; and eliciting greater demand for social
    accountability. The operational approach will be Community Driven Development (CDD) and will involve: (i) building and
    capacitating grassroots institutions; (ii) ensuring the voice of all communities is heard in decision making; (iii)
    strengthening decentralized government administrative functions; and (iv) investing in public service delivery and social
    mobilization to enhance social cohesion among beneficiary communities.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

Project Components. The project seeks to address the social, economic, and environmental impacts of refugee presence
in the host communities through interlinked technical and investment components. There are four major project
components implemented in an integrated and sequenced fashion, focusing on mobilization and capacity building for
communities and local governments, and through an implementation process that is responsive to community priorities.

The four components and related sub-components are:
    a. Component 1: Social and Economic Services and Infrastructure. The component has two sub components:
        Subcomponent 1.1: Community Investment Fund and Subcomponent 1.2: Capacity Building for Local Planning and
        Decentralized Service Delivery. The component will focus on (i) building capacity of Local Government Units and
        Implementing Agency staff in participatory planning processes; (ii) mobilizing communities and establishing
        community institutions for planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation and oversight of sub-projects;
        and (iii) supporting investments in basic social services and economic infrastructure.
    b. Component 2: Sustainable Environmental Management. The two sub components include Sub-component 2.1:
        Integrated Natural Resources Management and Sub-component 2.2: Access to Energy. The component will focus
        on (i) environmental management including technical advisory services for implementation of environmental
        management activities through a labor intensive public works mode; and (ii) access to energy sources for cooking
        and lighting including potential public-private-community partnerships.
    c. Component 3: Livelihoods Program. There are 2 sub components, viz. Sub-component 3.1: Support to Traditional
        and Non-Traditional Livelihoods and Sub-component 3.2: Capacity Building of Community-Based Organizations
        for Livelihoods. The component will support (i) identification of beneficiaries and the traditional and non-
        traditional livelihoods to support; (ii) form community livelihoods groups and support group management
        activities; and (iii) provide individuals and groups necessary technical, business, market and financial advisory
        services.
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



      d. Component 4: Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation. Component 4 therefore supports the
         national and local level project coordination activities, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and
         management information system (MIS), fiduciary management, communication and citizen engagement, and
         environmental and social safeguards compliance.

The synergies between the three investment components are expected to amplify impacts. For instance, market, storage
and access roads created under Component 1 will enhance economic opportunities supported under Component 3. Soil
and water conservation efforts under Component 2 will support enhanced productivity of traditional livelihoods
supported under Component 3. Improved access to energy under Component 2 will provide women the opportunity to
participate in economic opportunities under Component 3 with time saved and improved physical and mental well-being.



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    For Uganda, the project will be implemented in 11 of districts of Arua, Adjumani, Yumbe, Koboko, Moyo,
    Lamwo, Hoima, Kamwenge, Isingiro, Kiryandongo and Kyegegwa. These districts are inclusive of the original
    four and 7 new ones. Specific project locations are yet not known.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Chukwudi H. Okafor, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Simon Sottsas, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Constance Nekessa-Ouma, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Sammy Ratemo Kinara, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation
                                                                      OP 4.01 is triggered for the original project for
                                                                      Ethiopia, Djibouti and Uganda; and the
                                                                      restructured project in Uganda because of the
                                                                      following activities of the project: (i) expansion and
                                                                      improvement of service delivery which will include
                                                                      small infrastructure, (ii) construction or
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                      rehabilitation of physical structures for water
                                                                      catchment management such as check-dams,
                                                                      water harvesting structures, and (iii) land-based
                                                                      livelihood activities which may have limited
                                                                      adverse environmental and social impacts. The
                                                                      specific sites for implementing these activities are
       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



                                                              not yet known, therefore ESMFs have been
                                                              prepared in all the three project countries as the
                                                              specific instrument for analyzing potential
                                                              environmental and social risks. The ESMF would be
                                                              used to develop a site specific Environmental
                                                              Management Plan (EMP) prior to the
                                                              commencement of activities mainly under
                                                              Component 1, 2 and 3. The ESMF includes standard
                                                              methods and procedures, along with appropriate
                                                              institutional arrangements for screening and
                                                              reviewing program activities and monitoring the
                                                              implementation of mitigation measures to prevent
                                                              adverse and cumulative impacts. The effective use
                                                              of the ESMF would be regularly reviewed and
                                                              audited.
                                                              Project activities in Ethiopia and Uganda are not
                                                              likely to encompass natural habitats in the original
                                                              project and this remains unchanged for the
                                                              restructured project in Uganda.

                                                              However in Djibouti, the Ali Sabieh Region is home
                                                              to unique biodiversity, especially the “Aire
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)          No                   naturelle terrestre protege d’Assamo? which is
                                                              natural habitat to the Beira antelope. No project
                                                              activities will be supported in this protected area.
                                                              The project will also not support any activities
                                                              which are likely to indirectly affect the ecosystem
                                                              critical for the survival of this species. The ESMF will
                                                              screen out any activities that could have indirect or
                                                              cumulative impacts on this habitat.
                                                              Activities under Component 2 are likely to have a
                                                              positive impact on forests with the implementation
                                                              of physical and biological measures for soil and
                                                              water conservation and afforestation. The ESMF
                                                              provides detailed procedures to screen program
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                   Yes                  activities/sub-projects for potential adverse
                                                              environmental and social impacts, and to take
                                                              measures to avoid, minimize and mitigate impacts
                                                              on forests. Project activities in Djibouti are not
                                                              likely to take place in protected forest areas. This is
                                                              applicable to the restructured project in Uganda
                                                              The Project will support activities under
                                                              Component 3 which are likely to be agriculture
                                                              based and may increase the application of
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                Yes
                                                              agrochemicals (insecticides, herbicides, fertilizers,
                                                              etc.). Therefore, the ESMF includes a guideline for
                                                              an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) to address
       The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



                                                              related environmental and social impacts of the
                                                              project. This is applicable to the restructured
                                                              project in Uganda
                                                              The Project sites and their potential cultural and
                                                              historical significance are not known. The ESMF
                                                              includes provisions and a set of procedures to
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                              screen project activities for such impacts and to
                                                              deal with chance finds. This is applicable to the
                                                              restructured project in Uganda
                                                              The policy was triggered for Ethiopia in the original
                                                              project. However for the restructured project in
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No
                                                              Uganda, the policy is not trigerred since there are
                                                              no IPs in the project areas.
                                                              The proposed project covering will not undertake
                                                              any activities that will displace people. However, it
                                                              would support small-scale infrastructure that might
                                                              affect land holdings of individual farmers. While
                                                              these interventions are yet to be identified, as a
                                                              precautionary measure, the project has prepared
                                                              and consulted upon resettlement policy
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes
                                                              frameworks for all three countries and these will be
                                                              disclosed prior to appraisal to address any issues
                                                              which might arise from economic displacement
                                                              and/or restriction of access to communal natural
                                                              resources. This is applicable for the restructured
                                                              project in Uganda and an RPF has been prepared,
                                                              consulted and disclosed.
                                                              Component 2 may support small dam construction
                                                              (less than 4.5 meters) as part of small and micro
                                                              scale irrigation schemes. The Project will use the
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              Yes                FAO ‘Manual on Small Earth Dams, A Guide to
                                                              Siting, Design and Construction? or comparable
                                                              text in French. This is applicable to the restructured
                                                              project in Uganda.
                                                              The project will finance small-scale irrigation
                                                              investments but these are not likely to be located
                                                              in international waterways basins in Djibouti. In
                                                              Ethiopia, the project is located in international
                                                              water basins such as Baro-Akobo, Genale Dawa,
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                      Awash, Terkeze and Abhay rivers. In Uganda, the
                                           Yes
(BP 7.50)                                                     project is located along rivers and streams that
                                                              drain into international water basin of River Nile,
                                                              the White Nile and the Lake Victoria. While the
                                                              impact of small-scale irrigation on these rivers
                                                              would be insignificant and the cumulative
                                                              abstraction is expected to be minor, Riparian
           The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



                                                                          countries will be notified in accordance with the
                                                                          policy.

                                                                          This is applicable to the restructured project in
                                                                          Uganda with respect to the original districts,
                                                                          though the policy is not applicable to the additional
                                                                          7 districts being added to the restructured project.
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)        No                      n/a
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The project is Category B for the IDA Credit supported activities. Nine out of the ten safeguard polices have been
      triggered for the original project: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) Forests
      (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement
      (OP/BP 4.12), Indigenous Peoples/Underserved and Vulnerable peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37),
      and International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). For this restructured project in Uganda, 7 of these safeguard except for
      the Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). Overall, the project would have positive
      environmental impacts through its activities under Component 2 which includes, among others, integrated natural
      resources management.

      Environment: Some of the local-level investment activities under Component 1 and 2 may have limited adverse
      environmental risks and impacts. These activities could potentially include: (i) expansion and improvement of service
      delivery which will include construction of small infrastructure, (ii) construction or rehabilitation of physical structures
      for water catchment management such as check-dams, water harvesting structures, etc., and (iii) land-based
      livelihood activities which could have limited adverse environmental and social impacts. The infrastructure works
      under component 1 will pose civil works/ construction related impacts including health and safety considerations,
      vegetation clearance and soil erosion, impacts on PCRs, dust pollution, disposal of construction waste, etc.
      Component 2 and 3 are expected to be positive through alleviating pressures on the poor that lead to unsustainable
      exploitation of natural resources and environmental degradation. ESMFs have been prepared in all three countries to
      avoid or mitigate environmental and social risks from these activities.

      Social: For all three countries, the project’s anticipated social impacts has triggered OP 4.12 and in line with the Bank's
      safeguard policies, the project has put in place mitigation mechanisms acceptable to the World Bank to mitigate these
      impacts. For impact on potential land take and/ or restrictions in access to communal natural resources, a
      Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared and consulted upon in all three countries. These will be
      disclosed prior to appraisal to address any potential impacts, and given the expected small footprint of the sub-project
      activities, any land acquisition will be limited, site specific and minor.

      For Uganda, additional 7 districts have been selected for project coverage making a total of 11 Districts. No safeguard
      policies have changed. The client has reviewed and updated both the ESMF and RPF to cover the 7 new districts. The
      updated RPF and ESMF documents were discussed with affected communities during preparation; and disclosed by
       The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



  the Environmental Specialist of NUSAF 3/DRDIP in all the 7 new districts. Consultations at district, sub-county and
  community level were undertaken between January 8-19, 2018. The instruments were cleared by the World Bank and
  disclosed in-country on the OPM website on January 30, 2018 and sent to the Bank Infoshop on January 30, 2018.

  The Bank’s OP 4.10 is triggered for only Ethiopia, based on the screening conducted by the World Bank and reinforced
  by the Constitution of Ethiopia, which indicate that majority of the target population identify themselves as having
  the characteristics defined under OP 4.10. Therefore, social assessment (SA) was conducted to complement the RPF.
  As part of the social assessment, extensive consultations have taken place with key stakeholders in the participating
  areas to seek broad community support for the project; and in accordance with its CDD approach, subproject activities
  will be identified, prioritized, implemented and monitored by beneficiary communities (including different social
  groups) through consultative process during implementation. The project includes cost effective and accessible
  grievance handling mechanism to ensure that any related project issues and concerns are resolved using due process.

  For the Uganda restructured project, screening was undertaken for the presence of Indigenous Peoples. Based on the
  known location of these groups in Uganda, there are no IP groups in the 11 project districts in Uganda.

  With respect to the IDA Grant to IGAD, the Environmental Assessment Category is C since the activities being
  supported relate to coordination, training, knowledge generation and dissemination; which will not require the
  triggering of any Safeguard Policies for the IDA Grant. (Note that the grant to IGAD is from the parent project and
  Uganda project restructuring does not affect it).



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  It is anticipated that the project will improve access to social services, expand economic opportunities and enhance
  environmental management for host community in the targeted areas, with no indirect and/or long-term negative
  impact in these areas. It is anticipated that the project will result in long-term positive safeguard impacts in the project
  area because of the project’s emphasis on ensuring sustainable environmental management of natural resources and
  reduction in the unsustainable exploitation of natural resources, including mitigation of risks and other challenges
  faced by affected households.

  For Uganda's restructuring, the long term impacts remain the same with an expanded coverage from 4 Districts to 11
  Districts.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The “no project? alternative would deprive host communities already impacted negatively by refugee influx, the
  opportunity to improve access to basic social services, expand economic opportunities, and enhance environmental
  management. To ensure safeguards due diligence during implementation, more expertise will be deployed at all
  levels; and the planning of sub-projects will involve full participation of beneficiary communities; and the project‘s
  activities will avoid land acquisition and will not be implemented in areas, where the government’s Commune
  Development Program is sited in Ethiopia.

  For Uganda's restructuring, the description of project alternatives remains the same - not changed.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



  In Ethiopia, the project has conducted a comprehensive Social Assessment (SA) and an extensive stakeholder
  consultations with project affected persons to secure broad community support; developed a grievance redress
  system; and a culturally appropriate benefit-sharing mechanism anchored on CDD service model. However, the
  borrower’s capacity to identify and assess potential adverse environmental and social impacts and to implement and
  monitor appropriate mitigation measures is weak across all the three countries.

  In Djibouti, the safeguards risks are associated with the Client’s capacity to implement the requisite mitigation actions.
  The implementing agency will recruit a qualified environmental specialist, before the project becomes effective, to
  address the environmental safeguards matters. Special attention will be required to ensure that activities in the Ali
  Sabieh region do not have negative impacts on the protected area in Assamo.

  Across all three countries, the borrower will designate qualified and experienced social officers and environmental
  officers to be responsible for social and environmental safeguards matters at all levels of government and they will
  receive training on World Bank safeguards policies. The World Bank will support measures that will strengthen the
  Borrower's capacity to implement safeguards instruments prepared for this project, through training and capacity
  building activities. Further, the project's operational manuals, and the planning process will be conducted in culturally
  and gender sensitive manner.

  In addition to measures put in place during project preparation, the client has reviewed and updated both the ESMF
  and RPF to guide the Environmental and social risk management for additional 7 districts bringing a total of benefiting
  districts to 11. The instruments will be cleared by the World Bank and disclosed in-country and at Infoshop prior to
  restructuring appraisal.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The host community members in the participating areas were consulted in all three countries during project
  preparation to seek their buy in and will further be consulted during implementation.

  In Ethiopia, the implementing ministry - Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, and its respective counterparts
  in the participating regions, zones and woredas and kebele administrative levels, were also consulted on the World
  Bank’s safeguards guidelines, and the Ethiopia EIA proclamation. The applicable screening documents --will be made
  available for public review at a place accessible to local people (e.g. at a local government office (i.e. kebele council,
  Woreda Offices and regional bureaus, at the EPA), and in a form, manner, and language they can understand.

  In Djibouti, the implementing agency Agence Djiboutienne de Développement Social (ADDS) held consultations with
  the relevant communities in the two regions where the project activities will be implemented, government agencies
  and non-governmental organizations. The documents will be disclosed in conformity with national requirements.

  In Uganda, consultations were held with the Office of the Prime Minister – the implementing agency, UNHCR, Uganda
  Red Cross Society, Lutheran World Federation, Inter-Aid Uganda, Action Africa Help International, National
  Environment Management Authority, National Forestry Authority, Ministry of Gender Labour and Social
  Development; and the district and sub county administrative level as well as the communities. All applicable
  safeguards instruments will be made available at accessible places in the appropriate form, manner and language in
  Uganda as well.
                       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                       Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



                  Like the earlier process, preparation of the updated ESMF and RPF including the restructuring process has involved a
                  wide consultative process both at the OPM and the 7 additional districts and the other stakeholders in the districts.
                  Likewise, all applicable safeguards instruments will be made available at accessible places in the appropriate form,
                  manner and language in Uganda as well.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                        Date of submission for disclosure
        22-Jan-2018                                                        30-Jan-2018
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
            Uganda                                                            30-Jan-2018
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  Date of submission for disclosure
22-Jan-2018                                                                  30-Jan-2018
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
          Uganda                                                              30-Jan-2018
           Comments


PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan
         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
TBD
Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure

COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                   Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes



 PM_TABLE
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                        Yes

 Is a separate PMP required?                                                                       No

 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
 PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project                     NA
 team include a Pest Management Specialist?



 PCR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                               Yes

 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                   NA
 impacts on cultural property?



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                   Yes
 (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                   Yes
 review the plan?
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                       No

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                    TBD
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?



SD_TABLE
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                NA

Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                    NA
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                    NA
been made for public awareness and training?



PIW_TABLE
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                              Yes

If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP            NA
prepared and sent?

Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                             NA



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?
            The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the HoA (P152822)



    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                        Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                        Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                        Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                        Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Varalakshmi Vemuru
    Task Team Leader(s)                      Michael Mutemi Munavu
                                             Teklu Tesfaye Toli

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
