                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC14745
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         24-June-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                      Africa               Project ID:                P147921
 Project Name:                 OMVS - HYDROPOWER AND ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE
                               DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (P147921)
 Task Team Leader(s):          Pedro E. Sanchez,,Thierno Bah
 Estimated Board Date:         17-Nov-2016
 Managing Unit:                GEE07
 Sector(s):                    Hydropower (100%)
 Theme(s):                     Regional integration (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       150.00                    Total Bank Financing:       150.00
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                           Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                  150.00
     Total                                                                                        150.00
 Environmental Category        B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred         No
 project?

 B. Project Objectives
 The objective of the proposed project is to improve the reliability and capacity of the OMVS
 interconnected power system.

 C. Project Description
 The proposed project will finance selected investments to reinforce and extend the OMVS regional
 power infrastructure. This includes investments improve the reliability of power generation at Manantali
 through the rehabilitation and upgrade of electrical installations. The project will also strengthen the
transmission infrastructure for power evacuation by financing the rehabilitation and renewal of lines and
substations taking into account planned and future power generation and related load flows. Moreover,
the proposed project will finance technical assistance to SOGEM to strengthen its technical, operational,
and financial performance and support the preparation of tender documents for recruitment of a private
operator. Lastly, the program will finance additional technical studies (including hydropower studies
as needed).

The project’s main components are the following:

Component 1: Manantali power system rehabilitation ($35 million) will finance the (i) rehabilitation of
equipment at Manantali including equipment to help implement and operate control systems, flood
detection device and dispatching center; and (ii) the rehabilitation of high voltage transmission lines and
substations, which includes the acquisition of back-up transformers and reactors to limit the high risk of
failure and other ancillary works.

Component 2: OMVS power grid reinforcement ($105 million) will finance the upgrade of the regional
transmission infrastructure between national power systems. This component will finance the
construction of new transmission lines and substations to further develop the system capacity and
reliability by enhancing power flow between member countries in the context of new gas and hydro
power generation and also interconnect the OMVS and the OMVG sub-regional power systems.

Component 3: Technical Assistance ($US10 million) will finance technical assistance to SOGEM and to
its newly created subsidiary with a particular focus on operation and maintenance to help strengthen its
technical, operational, and financial functions and help prepare the tender documents for the recruitment
of a private operator. The component will also finance the owner's engineer's contract for the
supervision of the works. Because the urgency of rehabilitation often results in financing decisions
taking place prior to adequate investigations and designs, the proposed project will also finance
additional studies aimed at advancing the technical analysis to better integrate the ongoing rehabilitation
on the mechanical and electrical installations such as analyses to better integrate the ongoing
rehabilitation on the mechanical and electrical installations. Lastly, this component will finance
hydropower studies (including technical, environmental and social, institutional, financial and
transaction support) for future generation

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Though the right-of-way of the new transmission lines are not yet delineated, the landscapes they will
cross do not host any sensitive biophysical features or geographies which deem to be of particular
attention.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The OMVS headquarter's organigram includes an environmental and social safeguard unit, staffed with
two skillful and experienced personnel, and fairly equipped for the preparation and implementation of
safeguard instruments including those required under the Bank policies. For instance, they have
prepared and implemented, in acceptable manner, environmental and social management framework,
resettlement policy framework, environmental and social impact assessment, resettlement action plan,
pest and pesticides management plan and environmental audit of several projects funded by the Bank
(Felou Hydropower, MWRD1 and the ongoing MWRD2) and the GEF supported Senegal River Basin
Water and Environmental Management project. Therefore, the capacity of this environmental unit has
been strengthened under these operations. In contrast, the member countries environmental agencies
 that have the responsibility to oversee the implementation of the ESMPs, and the SOGEM which will
 implement the proposed project, still need capacity support to meet the due diligences. However it is
 worth mentioning that SOGEM is in the process of creating a safeguard specialist position.

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Salamata Bal (GSU01)
 Robert Robelus (GENDR)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                      Triggered ?     Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP          Yes             Lessons learned from recent transmission line
 4.01                                                    projects in similar socio-ecological contexts
                                                         (Mali, Burkina, Senegal) suggest that negative
                                                         biophysical impacts appeared less significant
                                                         than feared initially during environment
                                                         analysis. As a result, the project is proposed to
                                                         be category B because of the expected low
                                                         magnitude of the Transmission Lines (TL)
                                                         negative impacts on the social and biophysical
                                                         components of the receiving environment. Not
                                                         only the landscape is composed mainly of
                                                         scarce woody savannah, the identification of
                                                         the right-of-way will include criteria such as
                                                         the avoidance of protected areas, human
                                                         settlements, etc. On the other hand, works
                                                         under component 1 will not affect the existing
                                                         dam’s superstructure thereby suggesting no
                                                         significant impact in the site and downstream;
                                                         however, executing the said works will induce
                                                         that safety and security measures and any other
                                                         occupational precautionary measures should
                                                         be in place. Therefore, apart from the WBG
                                                         Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS)
                                                         guidelines that apply, the following
                                                         instruments will be prepared, consulted upon,
                                                         approved by OMVS (on behalf of the
                                                         Governments) then disclosed prior appraisal:
                                                         (i) an Environmental and Social Impact
                                                         Assessment (ESIA); and (ii) a Resettlement
                                                         Action Plan (RAP).
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No              This project will not finance activities that
                                                         impact on critical and/or natural habitats.
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No              The project will not finance activities that
                                                         induce forest conversion, exploitation and
                                                         clearing, or commercial harvesting of forest
                                                         products. However, the definition,
                                                         management and maintenance of the
                                            Transmission lines right-of-way may induce
                                            the pruning of some trees, which will be
                                            compensated if case arises.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No    The OP 4.09 is not triggered as the project will
                                            neither finance the procurement of fertilizers/
                                            pesticides nor create conditions which may
                                            lead to increased use of pesticides. The current
                                            practices for maintenance of the right of way of
                                            the transmission line and facilities have been
                                            reviewed for each country with respect to the
                                            use of pesticide or chemicals.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP     Yes   The project site is not located in a known
4.11                                        archeological or sacred area. But, even though
                                            there will be no important civil works that
                                            would require the exploitation of new and/or
                                            large borrow pit, the policy is triggered to
                                            prevent any loss and damage during
                                            construction. A comprehensive ‘’chance find
                                            procedure’’ will be proposed as part of the
                                            ESMP in the ESIA report, then serve as clause
                                            in the constructor contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No    Communities in the project area in the project
                                            countries, both within and along the
                                            transmission lines corridors, do not fall under
                                            the definition of indigenous people as stated
                                            under OP 4.10 (paragraph 4 in defining
                                            indigenous peoples).
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   The precise locations of the tower footings and
                                            alignment of the transmission lines are not yet
                                            determined, but it is suspected that private
                                            lands may be touched by the right-of-ways.
                                            Therefore, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                            will be prepared as required when precise
                                            details of transmission line locations
                                            (alignment, locations for pylons, substations
                                            and other structures) are identified in the
                                            course of project preparation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No    The project will only finance the rehabilitation
                                            of electromechanical equipment of the existing
                                            dam (Manantali) which already has an
                                            Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
                                            (EPRP)
Projects on International Waterways   No    The project will not finance any new activity
OP/BP 7.50                                  that directly or indirectly trigger water
                                            withdrawal, modification of river flow, etc.
                                            Further, notification had been completed
                                            during the construction of the Dam.
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No                            None of the project components will be located
                                                                     in a disputed area.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A.       Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
         June-2016
B.       Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
         The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
         The preparation of the documents will be finalized before appraisal currently scheduled in July 2016.

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader(s):                  Name: Pedro E. Sanchez,Thierno Bah
 Approved By:
 Safeguards Advisor:                   Name: Maman-Sani Issa                                   Date: 06/20/2016
 Practice Manager/Manager:             Name: Sameer Shukla (Acting)                            Date: 06/23/2016



     1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
 affected persons.
