                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 60075
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/15/2005                                     Report No.: AC1508
1. Project Statistics
Country: Africa                              Project ID: P079734
Project Name: East Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project
Task Team Leader: Jean-Francois Marteau
Appraisal Date: June 20, 2005                Estimated Board Date: December 15,2005
Managing Unit: AFTTR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Railways (50%);General public administration sector (30%);General
transportation sector (20%)
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Regional integration (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Grant Amount (US$m.): 1 5.00
Total IDA Credit Amount. (US$m.): 184.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA PRG Amount (US$m) : 45.00 (Kenya), US$15.00(Uganda)
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWERS/RECIPIENTS/OTHERS 66.85
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)       Yes [ ]    No[x]

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the Project are: (a) improving the trade environment among the
Regional Countries, through effective implementation of the EAC Customs Area; (b)
enhancing the efficiency of transport and logistic services along key transport corridors
by reducing non-tariff barriers and uncertainty of transit time; and (c) improving railway
services in the territory of the Borrower and the Republic of Kenya

3. Project Description
The proposed project is conceived as a multi-sector program to facilitate further trade
integration in the region by addressing institutional, legal, and infrastructure constraints.
Specifically, it will support EAC trade integration by (i) providing technical assistance
and equipment to implement the joint customs administration, (ii) providing technical
assistance, financial support, and equipment to improve efficiency at the main border
posts, ports, and regional road and railway corridors, with a specific focus on the
integration of railways through support to the joint concession of the Kenya and Uganda
Railways and their interconnections with the Tanzanian railway network.
The project is expected to comprise the following components:
(a) Support to EAC Customs Union Implementation: Provide training, technical
assistance and equipment to implement a modern customs interconnection system and
common data base linking the customs departments in the member states to the EAC
Customs directory in Arusha; (b) Institutional support for transport facilitation:
Strengthen the Northern Corridor Transit Transport Coordination Authority (NCTTCA),
Support to establish an appropriate management mechanism for the Central Transport
Corridor connecting Dar-es-salaam with the Great Lakes countries and Help to improve
the regional transport policy and harmonize transport regulation; (c) Investment support
for transport facilitation: Upgrade Corridor efficiency by (i)fmancing a regional
electronic cargo tracking system from the ports of Mombasa and Dar es Salaam
throughout the EAC, (ii) reviewing and updating the axle load control policy and (iii)
improving Port Security and Port Facilitation in Mombasa and Dar es Salaam; (iv)
financing the establishment of seven joint border posts at main crossborder points within
the region;(d) Support to railway concessioning: Facilitate the joint concession of the
Kenya and Uganda Railways, and improve its interface to the Tanzanian network,
complementing existing support to the process in Uganda. This would comprise, among
others, financing of severance packages and social mitigation plans in Kenya, technical
support to the proposed Kenya and Uganda railways Asset Authorities, and possibly the
provision of a Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) for both countries.
The total expected IDA funding, excluding the PRG, is about US$199 million. The PRG,
if included, would amount to about US$60 million (US$45 million for Kenya and US$15
million for Uganda).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will finance activities at several different sites in Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda
and Tanzania, including: (a) those parts of the existing railway lines in Uganda and
Kenya which are to be concessioned to a private consortium; (b) existing border posts
between Kenya and Uganda, Uganda and Rwanda, and Tanzania and Kenya, which are to
be upgraded, and (c) a number of trade-related agencies in the four countries. Because
the works to be carried out under (b) and (c) are of limited scope at existing sites, they are
not being treated as safeguards issues. Thus safeguards treatment primarily concerns
environmental conditions and social impact of actions to improve the concessioned rail
system in the yards and along the lines, knowing that the project itself does not fund any
infrastructure investment on the railway system.

5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1)
Mr Dan R. Aronson (AFTTR)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                             X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental audits of the two national rail lines have documented oil spills, poor
containment and disposal of toxic and other wastes, damage to local water supplies,
degraded or eroded slopes and other environmental hazards along various portions of the
lines. Polluted sites are mainly found around stations and works yards. While the total
number of such sites is large, the damage at each site is of limited significance and can be
reversed with proper rehabilitation measures in all the important cases. There is asbestos
pollution in Uganda as well as in Kenya. Occupational Health and Safety also needs to be
improved.

Social impact audits and resettlement reports have documented severe safety hazards at
several specific "hot spots" where encroachment along the tracks and use of the tracks for
pedestrian traffic and trading will pose dangers to the people involved as the railways
begin to raise service speeds and frequencies. Clearance of safety zones at these sites
must be done to relieve these threats. The most difficult of these sites is where the line
runs through the large Kibera slum community of Nairobi, and to a lesser extent in
neighboring Mukuru. Sites in Uganda are much smaller and less sensitive.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Proper environmental management can both rehabilitate damaged sites and ensure that
indirect or long-term adverse impacts and further damage are either avoided or
minimized. The inclusion of Social, Health and Environment clauses in the concession
arrangements to be signed between the Concessionaire and the two Governments should
guarantee the improvement of the situation compared to the current patterns of the
existing public railways. There is however still some danger that cleared safety zones
along the rail lines at "hot spots" will reoccur if measures proposed in resettlement action
plans are unsuccessful.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The sites already exist. Different technologies exist for rehabilitation of various types of
sites, and different options are open for displacement and resettlement. Action planning
is under way to ensure that such alternatives are considered and that optimal solutions are
found. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for Kenya has been received and disclosed.
An abbreviated RAP for Uganda has also been received and approved and will be directly
implemented by the Government.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrowers have undertaken extensive environmental and social audits of the rail
lines, both in Uganda and Kenya. The railroad corporations of each country have
retained and managed high level consultants to carry out this work, and to write the RAPs
and EMPs to manage the reduction of environmental and social risks. These safeguards
documents have been completed, and enjoy strong in-country ownership and interest on
the part of the interdepartmental and interagency teams overseeing the concessioning of
the railways and the reorganization of the residual assets-holding corporations in the two
countries. Each of the plans calls for concessionaires to carry out implementation
consistently with Kenyan and Ugandan environmental legislation, World Bank safeguard
policies and Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines.

The concessionaire will prepare its own documentation in compliance with World Bank
Safeguard Policies and World Bank Group applicable Environmental, Health and Safety
Guidelines (Rail Transit System, Port and Harbor Facilities, Occupational Health and
Safety, Hazardous Materials and Monitoring). Regarding Safety and occupational Health,
the Concessionaire will, every five (5) years, prepare two (2) Safety Management Plans,
one for Kenya and the other for Uganda, the first one to be submitted to the government
12 months from the concession commencement date. Regarding environment, the
concessionaire will prepare environment management plans in Kenya and Uganda within
six months from the commencement date. He will subsequently be submitted to the
annual audits of the two National Environmental Management Agencies.

In Kenya, the borrower intends to use part of the proceeds of the Credit for the
implementation of the RAP.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
On the social safeguard side: Affected people include especially those vendors and
residents occupying parts of the rights of way of the railways that need to be cleared to
ensure that minimum safety standards can be met. Their neighbors, local civil society
leaders (in churches, advocacy and service organizations), and administrative
representatives are all stakeholders in the process. At the national level, key decision
makers are in the respective railroad corporations, Ministries of Transport, Ministries of
Finance (in both privatization units and as the counterparts of the World Bank),
Ministries of Housing and other agencies. For all the key stakeholders, consultation has
taken place in project presentation meetings, discussions of the issues involved, and in
the case of the Kenyan RAP, participation in the enumeration process for recording all
those affected. Also in Kenya, the NGO PAMOJA Trust has been a key partner with the
consultant in developing the ideas and data for the RAP, and other NGOs working on
housing issues have also been consulted. Finally, affected people have been consulted in
neighborhood meetings and individually as homes and businesses to be affected directly
have been censused and interviewed to build up the data needed for RAP planning
purposes. The RAP has been disclosed in Kenya and will be made available to local
organizations and administrators for consultation by affected and interested parties. The
Kenyan and Ugandan EAP have also been disclosed.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  05/26/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              06/03/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               06/08/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06/08/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              06/03/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              06/08/2005
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA       Yes
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as           Yes
appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve       Yes
the plan / policy framework / policy process?
  BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name     W-x                 Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Jean-Francois Marteau (J/>7               11/15/2005
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Dan R. Aronson                            11/15/2005
Social Development Specialist       Mr Robert A. Robelus                         11/15/2005
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):
                                                                         I /I
Approved by:                                              *·'"'*""" "}


Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
  Comments:
                                    Mr Thomas E. Walton j(/far (--> '"   dt      06/09/2005

Ag Sector Manager:
                                                        //
                                    Ms Supee Teravaninthqrp^]                    06/09/2005
  Comments:
