                         INTEGRATED          SAFEGUARDS        DATA SHEET
                                          CONCEPT       STAGE
                                                                                    Report No.:  AC943



Date ISDS   Prepared/Updated:       September     10, 2004


I. BASIC    INFORMATION

A. Basic   ProjectData

                                                                P079734
Country: Africa                                    Project ID:
                                                                Leader: Jean-Francois   Marteau
Project Name:       East Africa     Trade and      Task Team

Transport  Facilitation  Project
                                                    Estimated  Board Date:   July 7, 2005
Estimated   Appraisal  Date: March     15, 2005
                                                    Lending   Instrument:   Specific Investment
Managing    Unit: AFTTR
                                                    Loan
                                                              Trade    facilitation   and market
Sector:     General     transportation     sector Theme:
                                                    access (P); Regional integration   (S)
(100%)
                                                                            Robert Robelus
 Safeguard  Policies Specialists  in the task  team: Kristine  Ivarsdotter,

 Loan/Credit   amount ($m.):
 IDA: 67.4                        PRG (IDA):     35
                                                                                 ($m)
 Other financing    amounts by   source:


 B. Project   Objectives
                                                                                       its Customs   Union
 The project's   development    objectives  are to: (i) assistthe EAC to   implement
                                                                  efficiency  in cross-border  operations;
 Protocol; (ii)   enhance regional    trade through   increasing
                                                                                        system through   its
 and (iii) facilitateand support   the development     ofan efficient regional railway

  concession  to the private sector.


  C. Project Description

                                                                        facilitate furthertrade integration
  The proposed    project isconceived    as a multi-sector  program to
                                                           infrastructure               Specifically,it will
  in the region  by addressing   institutional, legal, and                constraints.
                                                                  assistance and equipment   to implement
  support EAC     trade integration by (i) providing   technical
                                                                                    financial support,  and
  the joint  customs administration,       (ii) providing  technical assistance,
                                                      border posts, ports, and   regional road and railway
  equipment   to improve    efficiency  at the main
                                                  integration of railways   through support    to the joint
  corridors,  with a specific    focus on the
                                               Railways   and their interconnections   with the Tanzanian
  concession   of the Kenya    and Uganda
  railway network.

The project is expected  to comprise   the following  components:

                                                          Provide training,   technical assistance and
   (a)     EAC Customs         Union Implementation:
           equipment    to implement    a modem customs      interconnection system and   common data
                                                                                        EAC Customs
           base linking    the customs    departments    in the member    states to the

           directory in  Arusha;
                                                               Strengthen the full name NCTTCA,    and
   (b)      Institutional support for  transport facilitation:
                                                                                              Transport
            support to establish   an appropriate  management     mechanism   for the Central

            Corridor connecting    Dar-es-salaam   with the Great   Lakes countries;
                                                                                      efficiency by (i)
    (c)     Investment    support for   transport facilitation:   Upgrade Corridor
                                                                             the ports of Mombasa  and
            financing a  regional electronic   cargo tracking   system from
                                                                                       axle load control
            Dar es Salaam     throughout  the EAC, (ii)   reviewing and  updating the
                                                                                in Mombasa   and Dar es
            policy and   (iii) improving  Port Security   and Port Facilitation
                                                                          border posts   at main cross-
            Salaam; (iv)    financing the   establishment   of five joint
                                                                           others to be determined);
            border points   within the  region (Malaba,   Busia, and three
                                                                                      of the Kenya  and
    (d)     Support to   railway concessioning:     Facilitate the  joint concession
                                                                                               network,
            Uganda      Railways,     and improve       its interface   to   the Tanzanian
                                                                                               comprise,
            complementing       existing support  to the process    in Uganda.   This would
                                                                             environmental   and social
             among others,      financing  of severance     packages and
                                                                                  Kenya railways  Asset
             mitigation plans   in Kenya, ,  technical support   to the proposed
                                                                                        (PRG) for both
             Authority,  and possibly    the provision   of a Partial  Risk Guarantee

             countries.


                                                                                            The detailed
 The total expected     project cost,  excluding the   PRG, is about    US$67.4 million.
                                                                           be specified   during project
 distribution  among the      respective beneficiary    countries would
                                                          to about $35  million ($25  million for Kenya
 preparation.  The PRG,    if included,  would amount
 and $10 million   for Uganda).

 D. Project   location (if  known)

                                                            in Arusha, Tanzania.   The other components
 Component     1will be located   in the EAC   Secretariat
                                                                                      Northern Corridor
 will be located   along the main     transit corridors  in East Africa  (mostly the
                                                               the CentralCorridor from   Dar Es Salaam
 from Mombassa       in Kenya to  Kampala in   Uganda, and
 to Mwanza in    Tanzania).

 E. Borrower's      Institutional  Capacity for   Safeguard    Policies

                                                                                                agencies,
 Project implementation      will rely on  the capacity    of some of  these project-executing
                                                                                           concessioning
 namely those    in charge oftransport    in Kenya, Tanzania    and Uganda.   The railway
                                                                                 the implementation    of
 has been      identified as    requiring institutional     support regarding

 environmental    and social safeguard   policies.


  II. SAFEGUARD         POLICIES      THAT MIGHT         APPLY

Applicable?      Safeguard Policy
                 If Applicable, How     Might It Apply?

IY]              Environmental      Assessment (OP/BP       4.01)
                                                                                                          as well
                 Civil works are    likely to have an   impact on the    bio-physical environment
                                                                                                 will raise the
                 as resettlements   of populations.   The concessioning      of the Railways

                 issue of responsibility    allocation between      Government and        the Concessionaire
                 with regard to measures     for addressing environmental       issues.

[ TBD]           Natural Habitats (OP/BP        4.04)


l NJ             Pest Management        (OP 4.09)
                 The policy will    not be triggered.   Pesticides will not   be used to clear     the ROW of

                 weeds.
[Y]              Involuntary Resettlement        (OP/BP 4.12)
                 The construction      of joint border   posts may require       some resettlements        of the

                 population occupying      the sites. The encroachments      near the tracks   will need to be

                 vacated for safety     purposes as well    as service efficiency      of the future railway

                  concession.
I NJ              Indig!enous Peoples     (OD 4.20)

 ITBD I           Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

 [N I             Safetv of Dams     (OP/BP 4.37)


 [ TBDI           CulturalProperty7      (draftOP 4.11    - OPN 11.03)
                  Some cultural     sites such as old   historic railway    buildings could     be affected by

                  resettlements or   civil works. This   will be determined    during project preparation.

 I NJ             Projects in Disputed     Areas (QP/BPIGP        7.60)*

                                                                               7.50)
 [ NJ             Projects on International      Waterwavs (OP/BP/GP




 Environmental      Assessment Category:
 [A IXi B []C          []FI []TBD (to       be determined)

                                                                                                               (c)
 Environment and      social impacts     of the proposed    project will only     result from component

 (investment in transport    facilitation) and  component (d) (support      to railway concessioning):


 On component (c),      physical investments,    which will consist     of the improvement      or construction
                                                                                                              lead
 ofjoint border posts     as well as the   improvement of     railway infrastructures     at borders, may

 to some mitigation     measures. This    risk is however   limited since the    investments are     restricted to

 border areas, which     are already developed     thanks to international      trade. An environmental       and

  social impact assessment     will be carried  out and disclosed    in countries and    in the Infoshop    before



   By supportingtheproposedproject,theBankdoes notintendtoprejudicethefinaldetermination oftheparties'claimsonthe

  disputedareas

appraisal for these investment.   Depending on     the results of  the review, Resettlement    Action
                                                                             be prepared.
Plans for theareas where relocation  and/or compensation     are needed will

                                                                                                 been
The environmental    and social issues   linked to the   railway concessioning     have already
                                                                                    in Uganda, and   a
assessed in Kenya   through the work    of the transaction  advisor CANARAIL
                                                                                                of the
report produced   by COWI in     April 2003 assesses    the environmental    and social issues

concession in Kenya. These    works are under   review by ASPEN.


Two main issues   can be highlighted:  First, the concessioning  will raise the issueof responsibility

allocation between  Government and     the Concessionaire    with regard to  measures for   addressing

social, health (including HIV   Aids) and environmental     issues as well as issues of retrenchment.
                                                                                                 in the
The accountabilities  for the past,ongoing and   future deteriorations will be fully articulated
                                                                    and the selected   concessionaire.
concession agreements    to be signed between     the Government
                                                                                       negative social
The proposed   project will ensure  that mitigation  actions aimed   at lessening the
                                                                                          agreements,.
and environmental   impacts of railway   operations are  highlighted  in the concession
                                                                                         of capacity to
Project preparation  will also define  mitigation measures     including strengthening

implement environmental     and social management    plans at Government    level.

                                                                                                tracks.
 Second, there are safety issues  linked to the existence  ofencroachments    near the railway
                                                                                      the Government
 To improve   the safety of the railway operations   in the areas of  encroachment,
                                                                                                 would
 and the Concessionaire    would implement     an interim Safety   Plan, which   among others
                                                                                                     of
 include operations  at reduced speed,   frequent whistling    by the approaching    trains, display
                                                                                  and construction   of
 caution sign  boards, better   arrangements    for the collection  of rubbish,

 pathways to prevent    people from   walking on tracks.     Eventually, however,    to enable normal
                                                                                                    and
 operations to be resumed under    fully safe conditions, the encroachments    need to be vacated

 the people settled  somewhere else.    The Governments,      with assistance   from their transaction
                                                                                             the whole
 advisers, will  prepare Resettlement    Action Plans   (RAPs) wherever      applicable for
                                                                                       is already under
 railway network.   A survey will  be conducted   along the railway  line, and a RAP

 preparation for the Nairobi area, where the most   critical sections have been identified.


 The proposed    environmental   category is therefore  B. The category    will be reviewed    based on

 the actual scope of the project.

 III. SAFEGUARD        PREPARATION         PLAN

                                                                                         the PAD-stage
 A.      Target date  for the Quality  Enhancement    Review (QER),     at which time

 ISDS would    be prepared, is: January 2005.

                                                                                      for preparing  the
     B.      For simple projects   that will not   require a QER,   the target date

             PAD-stage    ISDS: N/A.

                                                            the safeguard-related  studies that may be
     C.      Time frame    for launching  and completing
             needed. The   specific studies  and their timing   should be specified   in the PAD-stage

             ISDS.

                                                                                  2005. Resettlement
On component    (c), EAs if   they are needed   will be available   by February,
                                                                                  will be prepared   for
Action Plans for the areas where relocation   and/or compensation    are obvious

the same date.

                                                                             of liabilitiesbetween the
On component    (d), the draft concession agreements    included repartition
                                                             by October 2004    to be included    in the
concessionaire  and the Governments      will be finalized
bidding documents.


                                                                                  (for safety purposes
To deal with  issues linked  to the existence  of encroachments   near the tracks
                                                                                                 2005.
as well as service efficiency), RAPs   will be prepared  for the relevant sections by Janurary


IV. APPROVALS

  Signed andsubmitted by:
                                                      Marteau                          Date:
  Task Team Leader:                    .fe'aFrancois
                                                                                       09/10/2004
                                                            //
  Approved by:                         /
                                                                                        Date:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Tom Walton
                                                                                        09/13/2004

     Comments              p     1
                                                                                        Date:
  Sector Manager:            4 1        Sanjivi Rajasingham
                                                                                        09/13/2004

     Comments

