Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1454 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/11/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P094268 
Project Name: Flood Preparedness and Early Warning in the Eastern Nile 
Task Team Leader: Barbara A. Miller 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2007 
Managing Unit: AFTNL 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (60%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(40%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring 
(P);Water resource management (S);Land administration and management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: MIN. OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS / MIN. OF DEV. COOP.
 10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Project is to reduce human suffering and damages, as well as 
to capture the benefits of excess flood waters, resulting from flooding in the Eastern Nile. As a 
first joint flood project among the EN countries, the project will primarily focus on risk 
management and non-structural approaches to reducing the impacts of riverine floods, including 
floodplain management and mitigation planning, flood forecasting and warning, and emergency 
preparedness and response at regional, national and community levels. This will contribute to the 
longer term goal of establishing a comprehensive and regional approach to flood management, 
which integrates watershed, river and floodplain management and incorporates a wide range of 
structural and non-structural flood mitigation options within a broad, multipurpose framework1.  
 
1Within the ENSAP framework, a longer-term multipurpose track is being initiated to identify 
and evaluate a range of transboundary options to improve river basin management, including, 
Page  2
inter alia, upland watershed management and multipurpose storage for drought and flood 
mitigation, sediment management, power production, irrigation, navigation, etc.]   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project is intended to address the transboundary aspects of technical, institutional, social and 
capacity-building issues related to flood preparedness in the Eastern Nile (EN).  Effective 
preparedness also necessitates nationally and community focused work on flood issues.  The 
project is expected to consist of four components, which will be refined during project 
preparation: (i) Flood mitigation planning; (ii) Flood forecasting, warning and communication; 
(iii) Emergency Preparedness and response; and (iv) Regional Component. The relative 
importance of each component varies with need and the nature of flooding in each of the EN 
countries.  
 
Flood mitigation planning involves proactive, ongoing measures to reduce the risk from and 
impact of floods, while enhancing beneficial effects. This component will likely include practical 
activities to identify the flood risk and implement community-based plans to reduce risk and 
related damages in the floodplain, while capturing social and environmental benefits.  A range of 
potential activities include: vulnerability analysis and flood mapping; floodplain and land use 
management; small scale structural approaches; relocation of flood-prone communities; 
communication of flood warning information; and improved reservoir operations. Planned 
involvement and mobilization of stakeholders (e.g. affected communities, public services, private 
sector and civil society groups), public education and awareness programs, and capacity building 
are critical elements of flood mitigation planning.  Transboundary options for reducing flood 
impacts will also be identified.  
 
Flood forecasting, warning and communication includes the collection, analysis and effective 
dissemination of flood forecast and warning information.  An important focus in this component 
would be to enhance the flood forecasting capabilities of the EN countries.  Building on existing 
capacity, forecasting capability is likely to initially be developed around distributed, mutually 
compatible national centers, with agreed mechanisms for regional coordination and information 
exchange.  Effective dissemination of flood warning information to flood-at-risk communities 
and strengthening existing institutions  and community warning mechanisms is also critical.  
 
Emergency preparedness and response involves the planning and conduct of a coordinated and 
consistent response to floods.  This component would address emergency preparedness and 
response during and following flood events.  At the country level, the component would build 
upon existing emergency preparedness and response procedures, strengthening existing 
capacities in government, civil society and the community.  At the transboundary level, the 
component could focus on developing regional emergency preparedness and response plans and 
coordinating information exchange among the Eastern Nile countries and with the international 
community during flood events.  
 
Regional Component is envisioned to maintain the transboundary focus of the project and 
enhance regional cooperation and collaboration.  Key roles of the regional component are likely 
to include the coordination and facilitation of exchange of expertise, experience and 
information/data; human and institutional capacity development; and technology transfer within 
Page  3
the Basin and internationally.  Coordination could be accomplished through the ?virtual? linking 
of national flood units or take the form of a small but effective regional unit.  It is likely that the 
scope and range of regional activities will evolve over time as confidence and regional 
cooperation grows.  
 
Expected Outputs. Expected results from the project will be refined during project preparation 
but are likely to include:  
 
*Assessment of the vulnerability and flood risk in the EN region to support flood mitigation 
and preparedness planning and ENSAP investment planning.  
 
*Improved floodplain management for major urban damage centers and flood-prone rural 
communities at the national level, and the identification of transboundary options for enhancing 
flood management at the regional level.  
 
*Operational flood forecasting systems in the EN countries with appropriate compatibility and 
agreed mechanisms for exchanging information.  
 
*Enhanced emergency preparedness and response at national and community levels, and joint 
emergency preparedness and response plans at the regional level.  
 
*Enhanced regional collaboration and cooperation during flood events.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Egypt, Ethiopia, Sudan   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Based on extensive consultations with ASPEN, FPEW has been classified a B category project, 
as some safeguards will be triggered but can be mitigated.  It was noted that there may be small-
scale community-based structures and resettlement options reviewed as part of flood mitigation. 
Environmental issues will be addressed through an environmental management framework 
(EMF), and social issues will be well integrated into the project or addressed through a 
resettlement policy framework (RPF). Detailed social analysis and resettlement guidelines will 
be fully integrated into the Project Implementation Plan.  
 
Ethiopia has significant experience implementating environment and social safeguards, though 
the quality varies between sectors. The project team believes that there is enough experience and 
basis to work with.  
 
In Sudan, the World Bank as not begun lending, thus there is little to basis to judge its 
institutional capacity. To mitigate against potential risks, the project team decided not to transfer 
the project, and is making a concerted effort to undertake social analysis (early detailed social 
analysis, requestion a Resettlement Policy Framework, etc.) upfront.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTS2) 
Page  4
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Triggered. The project team will conduct an environment analysis during preparation, and 
develop an EMF to guide the preparation, approval and implementation of project interventions 
with regard to flood mitigation and coping (Social issues will be integrated into project design; 
resettlement issues will be addressed in the Resettlement Policy Framework/RPF.).  Among 
other things, the EMF will require environmental planning, as well as environmental 
management plans, for any new resettlement sites.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
TBD - the ESMF will look into this issue in the context of the Merowe ruins   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Triggered. The Governments of Sudan, and possibly Ethiopia, expect that there will be 
relocation of communities away from flood plains.  In Sudan this process has already started.  
However, this is a voluntary movement of people, with the option for entire villages to be 
relocated.  The project will develop detailed guidelines on voluntary resettlement (in an RPF), 
almost to the standard required for involuntary resettlement.  This will be informed by detailed 
social analysis. Both the guidelines on voluntary resettlement and the detailed social analysis will 
be intergrated into the Project Implementation Plan.  
 
ASPEN advised that it would be better to trigger this policy even though we expect all 
resettlement to be voluntary - the main reason given for this was to ensure adequate attention was 
given to this issue (since the scale is potentially large).  
 
Project Team members have untertaken two missions to look at social issues, and is 
comfortable that all resettlement in Sudan in connection with flood mitigation is voluntary, 
though there are important issues related to organization, planning and triggers that this project 
aims to address.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
TBD.  The project does not involve any large structural interventions. The project will, 
however, look at potential changes in reservoir operations to mitigate floods (primarily applies to 
Egypt High Aswan Dam, but might also include Roseires and Sennar Dams in Sudan).  It is not 
clear at this time if the safeguard is triggered.  The project team will determine if the client has a 
dam safety program or if previous dam safety assessments have been determined, and evaluate 
the need for any further action.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Triggered.  The Nile is an international waterway, but requirements will be met within the 
context of the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) ongoing consultations and information sharing.  - The 
project has been identified and will be prepared jointly by the Eastern Nile Countries (Egypt, 
Sudan, and Ethiopia) within the context of t
he NBI.  The NBI is a regional initiative of nine Nile 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
riparian countries, and all projects under the NBI have (or will be) discussed by the Nile Council 
of Ministers.  Eritrea, which is an observer in the NBI, will be notified separately.  The FPEW 
project was initially agreed as a ?fast track project? by the ENCOM in the Project Identification 
Document for the Eastern Nile Subsidiary Action Program (March 2001), and further confirmed 
in by the Eastern Nile Council of Ministers (ENCOM) (ENCOM17, June 24, 2004, Sharm el 
Sheik, Egypt; and ENCOM 18, Oct 3-4, 2004, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia). The project will be 
presented and noted in minutes of the Nile-COM followed by regular updates to the Nile-COM. 
Information regarding NBI projects will be made available from the NBI Secretariat in Entebbe, 
Uganda, as well as the relevant regional office in Eastern Nile (Eastern Nile Regional Technical 
Office (ENTRO) in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia) or Nile Equatorial Lakes (NEL Coordination Unit in 
Kigali, Rwanda). regions. Based on the ongoing consultations, information sharing, and 
transparency with regards to NBI projects, as indicated in minutes of the Nile-COM and 
ENCOM, the requirements of OP7.50 are considered met.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental issues will be addressed through an Environmental Management Framework 
(EMF). Social issues will be well integrated into the project and land acquisition issues will 
be addressed through a Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP). These key safeguards 
instruments will be disclosed in participating countries and the World Bank Infoshop before 
appraisal. The target date for completion of the EMF and RFP is - September 2006.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Barbara A. Miller 
07/11/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr David R. C. Grey 
07/11/2005 
Comments:   
