Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/26/2005 
Report No.:  AC1477
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  World 
Project ID:  P075776 
Project Name:  Africa Stockpiles Programme - Project 1 
Task Team Leader:  Steven P. Maber 
GEF Focal Area: Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: September 8, 2005 
Managing Unit:  MNSRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (25%);Petrochemicals and fertilizers (25%);Health (25%);General 
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
21.74 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.99 
 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
10.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
24.27
38.26 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objective of this Project is for several African countries to eliminate 
inventoried publicly-held obsolete pesticide stockpiles and associated waste, and 
implement measures to reduce and prevent future related risks.  
 
ASP-P1 will implement various cleanup and site remediation measures to mitigate the 
impact of obsolete publicly-held pesticides stocks threatening communities, ecosystems, 
and the global environment.  In parallel, ASP-P1 will strengthen the elements of a 
regulatory regime, management practices, and public awareness to prevent a recurrence 
of pesticide accumulation in the future.  
 
The principal outputs of ASP-P1 will be twofold:  
 
(a)  Through its cleanup activities, ASP-P1 will eliminate, as far as is practicable, the 
risks from obsolete pesticides to communities, natural resources and ecological systems 
Page  2
in ASP-P1 countries.  At the same time, it will reduce the risks to the global environment 
from POPs and other persistent toxic pollutants.  
 
(b)  Through its prevention activities, ASP-P1 will reduce future risks from obsolete 
pesticides by putting in place the key elements of effective pesticide management, 
encouraging reduced reliance on pesticides through the promotion of Integrated Pest 
Managment (IPM) and Integrated Vector Management (IVM) policies.  
 
The Project's success in meeting its Development Objective, ASP-P1 will be based on 
four indicators as summarized below:  
 
(a)  Risk Reduction - based on quantitative risk assessment methodologies relating to 
both health risks and environmental degradation, the Project will measure the percentage 
of publicly-held stocks removed and quality of ASP-P1 cleanup activities aiming to 
reduce pesticide stockpiles (Component 1).  
 
(b)  Improved Pesticide Management - based on qualitative and quantitative parameters, 
the Project will measure the adequacy of government strategies, including regulations, 
laws and institutional policies in bringing the management of pesticides and their 
associated wastes up to international standards (Component 1).  
 
(c)  Pesticide Disposal - based on quantitative parameters, the Project will track the 
amount of publicly held obsolete pesticide stockpiles that ASP-P1 will safeguard or 
destroy (e.g., repackaging into safe containers, incineration, and disposal of contaminated 
containers) (Component 1).  
 
(d)  Service Delivery to ASP Countries - The Project will measure the quality, quantity 
and efficiency of support services, such as technical assistance, knowledge management, 
communications, and implementation support, that the international ASP-P1 technical 
assistance providers [initially FAO, World Wildlife Fund (WWF), Pesticide Action 
Network - Africa (PAN-Africa), and Pesticide Action Network- United Kingdom (PAN-
UK)] deliver to the ASP-P1 countries (Components 2, 3 and 4).   
 
3. Project Description 
ASP-P1 has four components: (a) country operations; (b) technical support; (c) cross-
cutting activities; and (d) project coordination.  
 
The Project components and its overall design are based on recognition that the existing 
level of information on the extent, geographic distribution and characteristics of the 
obsolete pesticide stockpiles is insufficient for implementing pesticide disposal and site 
remediation measures.  The design, therefore, reflects the need to carry out in all Project 
countries, detailed pesticide inventories, selection of disposal technologies and 
preparation of country-specific environmental and social assessments. Only following the 
adequate completion of these activities will the respective cleanup and disposal programs 
take place.  
 
Component 1: Country Operations (Total: US$51.37 million)  
 
Page  3
This is the principal component of the Project, encompassing a full range of disposal, 
cleanup and prevention activities to achieve the Project objectives in the participating 
countries.  It will include four sub-components: (a) cleanup and disposal; (b) prevention 
of pesticide accumulation; (c) capacity building; and (d) ASP-P1 management and 
monitoring.  Budget has also been allocated for the preparation of ASP-P2 countries.  
 
(a) 
Country Cleanup and Disposal Activities will be based on comprehensive and 
detailed inventories of pesticide stockpiles and related contamination, determining the 
level of risk to adjacent and wider communities or critical natural resources (such as 
water supplies).  The cleanup will include the repackaging of obsolete pesticides, 
transport and destruction of pesticides based on chemical analysis, needs assessment and 
technical capacity.  In exceptional cases, the disposal and cleanup operations will include 
heavily contaminated soils.  Where health risks from soils may be extremely high, e.g., in 
Mali, where the large spill of POPs and other pesticide is believed to be contaminating or 
threatening scarce water sources, contaminated soils will be treated using appropriate soil 
remediation technologies.  
 
(b) 
Prevention Activities encompass strengthening of pesticide management through 
improvement of pesticide registration, licensing, enforcement of import controls, stock 
management, waste management, and formulation of effective procurement strategies, as 
well as promotion of alternatives to chemical pesticides through improvement of pest 
control strategies with particular attention to IPM for agriculture and IVM for health care.  
Prevention activities will also include raising environmental and health awareness and 
training for pesticide distributors, users and farmers to encourage safe pesticide handling 
and alternative pest control.  The country's Stockholm Convention National 
Implementation Plan Coordinator will help ensure that the ASP learns from and complies 
with the country's program to reduce or eliminate POPs in an environmentally safe 
manner.  
 
(c) 
Capacity Building will be tailored according to the specific individual country 
requirements and the current installed capacity.  Environmental monitoring will also be 
supported through the provision of equipment and staff training for effective pesticide 
and other chemical management practices.  
 
(d) 
Country Project Management and Monitoring activities will include establishment 
of a PMU in each of the countries in close collaboration with the appropriate 
environmental and agricultural authorities.  It will be the PMU's responsibility to 
implement the country level activities, solicit external technical support, monitor and 
evaluate Project activities and coordinate their implementation with the GEF-funded 
National Implementation Plans (NIPs) for the Stockholm Convention and similar 
initiatives. Country level management will also include establishment of a National 
Steering Committee (NSC) representing key stakeholders, such as NGOs and the private 
sector, and overseeing the work of the respective PMUs.  
 
Component 2: Technical Support (Total: US$4.31 million)  
 
Page  4
This component will deliver to country Projects the highly technical and specialized 
expertise required for implementation, supervision and monitoring of country level 
activities outlined under Component 1 including: technical advice requested by the 
countries for the design and delivery of training; production of technical guidelines for 
cleanup and prevention operations; assistance in managing technical aspects of 
procurement and supervision of specialized contractors; advice on linking countries with 
other specialized agencies and organizations; enhancement of health and safety; 
assessment of laboratory capacities; and oversight of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).  
The technical support will include advice on alternative disposal options, targeted to 
specific country and site conditions.  FAO will be responsible for hosting a Technical 
Support Unit (TSU) to coordinate delivery of technical services envisaged under this 
component and tap into expertise of other ASP partners, e.g., United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP), World Health Organization (WHO), Basel 
Convention Regional Centers, NGOs, and the private sector.  
 
Component 3: Cross-Cutting Activities (Total US$2.45 million)  
 
This component will deliver knowledge management, awareness-raising, strategic 
studies and outreach services across the entire ASP-P1 to capture synergies and cost 
savings through a coordinated multi-country, multi-partner approach.  The key sub-
components will include outreach to promote ratification of conventions relevant to 
project objectives, building NGO capacity, knowledge management and communication, 
e.g., hosting the ASP website.  The strategic studies component will include an 
evaluation of alternative technologies for the disposal of obsolete pesticides.  In addition, 
these studies will serve to improve the understanding of environmental health risks 
associated with the specific pesticides, and contribute to the prioritization and decision-
making process within each country.  WWF and PAN-UK will host the Cross-Cutting 
Activities Management Entity (CCAME) responsible for delivery of support services 
under this component.  
 
Component 4: Project Coordination (Total: US$1.87 million)  
 
This component will coordinate the implementation and monitoring of the ASP-P1 
among the various partners.  In addition to overall coordination, key activities include: 
developing and ensuring implementation of a fund-raising strategy, acting as a Secretariat 
to the Africa Stockpiles Programme Steering Committee (ASP-SC), maintaining 
awareness at the policy level about the Project, reporting to donors, preparing the bi-
annual work plan and progress reports and financial reports, coordinating independent 
Project monitoring and coordinating the design of follow-on projects.  Initially, the Bank 
will host the ASP Project Coordination Unit (ASP-PCU).  During the implementation 
phase of ASP-P1 the ASP-PCU will be transferred to an appropriate African 
organization. NEPAD has been identified as a possible candidate.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
ASP-P1 will focus on disposal and prevention activities in seven high-priority African 
countries: Ethiopia, Mali, Morocco, Nigeria, South Africa, Tanzania, and Tunisia.  These 
countries were selected because they both have significant stockpile problems and have 
indicated a readiness to address them.  All seven countries have ratified the Stockholm 
Convention on POPs  and the Basel Convention on Transboundary Shipment of 
Hazardous Waste.  Current estimates indicate that there are about 5,000 tonnes of 
obsolete pesticides distributed through more than 1,400 sites in the seven countries.  
During implementation of ASP-P1 it is expected that follow-on projects in eight 
additional countries would be prepared from among the following priority countries: 
Benin, Botswana, Cameroon, Cote d'Ivoire,Egypt, Ghana, Liberia, Lesotho, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan and Swaziland.  
 
The geographic location of pesticide stockpiles is not known with detail necessary to 
either plan, execute or assess and manage impacts of disposal activities. Therefore, the 
project will first carry out detailed stockpile inventories - including exact geographic 
location, composition and status of the stockpiles, proximity to people and natural 
resources, biophysical characteristics of the surroundings, etc. Based on the updated 
inventories, and with technical advice from FAO, the most appropriate disposal 
technologies will be selected with regard to minimizing environmental and social impacts 
and disposal costs. At that time after exact nature and location of the stockpiles will be 
known - the specific environmental and social impacts of disposal activities will be 
assessed and corresponding mitigation measures designed.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (ESDQC) 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  6
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
ASP-P1 was rated as environment category A and triggers Operational Policies (OP) 4.01 
on Environmental Assessment (EA) and 4.09 on Pest Management.  The key safeguard 
issues are associated with potential environmental and social impacts from dealing with 
highly toxic chemicals and remediation of contaminated sites.  
 
ASP-P1 is essentially an extensive cleanup and contamination-prevention operation 
which will bring substantial environmental health benefits, both locally and globally, by 
removing obsolete pesticide stockpiles and (in exceptional cases) remediating 
contaminated sites.  ASP-P1 does, however, carry some short-term high environmental 
risks, specifically as related to the removal and transportation of obsolete pesticides and 
contaminated materials. During project implementation, Country Project-specific 
Environment and Social Assessments (CESAs) including the Environmental Managment 
Plans (EMPs) will be prepared by independent consultants as specified in the Operational 
Manual. Detailed inventories, site specific information including detailed digital photos 
and precise coordinates (GPS) of obsolete stocks and contaminated sites will need to be 
taken for CESA preparation.  The CESA will be completed when the obsolete pesticide 
stockpile inventories and site characterizations in each country have been completed.  
Disposal and cleanup activities will begin after successful completion of the CESA.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is not triggered at this stage.  Given the multi-
country nature of the Project (seven countries), it is not feasible to prepare an umbrella 
framework for Project countries, due to their dissimilar legislation and policies related to 
land acquisition and displacement.  Similarly, it is not practical and realistic to prepare a 
separate framework for each country, especially when there is no confirmed evidence that 
existing pesticide sites/storages will result in involuntary displacement or total or partial 
loss of livelihood.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04):  During project implementation, if a stock of obsolete 
pesticides, pesticide wastes or a contaminated site happen to be located in the proximity 
of a critical natural habitat(s), then such a situation would trigger OP 4. 04 and would 
require that the EA process (OP 4.01) would identify such habitats within a proposed 
project's area of influence and will take the necessary measures to avoid or minimize 
damage to natural habitats to the extent feasible.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
ASP-P1's potential adverse environmental impacts are principally related to pesticide 
storage, transportation, disposal and site remediation activities in country operations.  
 
The Project environmental and social impacts were assessed in a Framework 
Environmental Assessment and their mitigation measures were outlined in an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework.  The Environmental and Social 
Page  7
Assessment Synthesis Report was prepared based on these documents and will serve as 
guidance for the preparation of the respective CESA.  The Environmental and Social 
Assessment Synthesis Report was disclosed prior to appraisal in all Project countries by 
the individual PMUs or their host agencies and in the InfoShop by March 17, 2004.  The 
Project Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) was disclosed in July 2003. The 
Environmental and Social Assessment Summary Report was disclosed to the Board on 
October 3, 2004.  A binding covenant in the Project legal document will be made, stating 
that each country will prepare a CESA early in Project implementation.  Annex 10 
discusses more specifically how ASP-P1 will ensure compliance with the safeguard 
policies.  
 
The Environmental and Social Assessment Synthesis Report provides guidance, 
screening procedures and information to those responsible for the detailed design, 
planning and implementation of the individual country operations.  The guidance reflects 
the applicability and relevance of key international standards and agreements, as well as 
the Bank's safeguard policies, including preparation of detailed EMPs (as part of the 
CESAs).  
 
CESAs including the EMPs will be prepared during project implementation for specific 
country operations.  It spells out the mechanisms that will allow the Bank to properly 
exercise its fiduciary responsibilities regarding the implementation of its safeguards 
policies, e.g., the need for a Bank-issued 'No Objection' onthe screening and priority 
ranking process, and on TORs for of individual cleanup operations.  TORs for the 
preparation of the CESAs are provided in the generic OM.  The countries have to specify 
in their Country OM how they will implement the CESAs.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Several alternatives were considered for the design of ASP-P1:  
 
(a) 
Support Individual Initiatives by Donors in Parallel - This alternative would yield 
some short-term point-source gains for the clean-up operations, but it would not provide 
any of the economies of scale, synergies and visibility that a regional program can offer.  
Furthermore, this model does not provide adequate sustainability of any positive 
outcomes, since it lacks an integrated approach for the prevention of future pesticide 
accumulation.  
 
(b) 
Create a Regional Pesticide Management Agency - to centralize the clean-up and 
prevention operations for the entire continent. However, this alternative was rejected 
because ultimately it would not be cost-effective and does not reflect the need for country 
ownership.  Furthermore, both clients and donors are reluctant to create new regional 
bureaucracies.  
 
(c) 
Launch a 10-15 year Adaptable Program Loan - that could expand as additional 
funding becomes available and build on the lessons from previous phases.  This 
alternative was initially considered as a basis for implementing the entire ASP operation, 
but it was considered preferable to start immediately with a limited set of fully-funded 
Page  8
countries in order to build up experience, tangible results and momentum, establish a 
working model and then scale up this experience in subsequent ASP activities.  
 
Technical Options:  Several technology options are available for the disposal of 
hazardous wastes, such as obsolete pesticides. However, the number of technology 
options which are tried and tested and considered safe at all levels, including 
environmentally and economically, are relatively few.  The ASP has therefore committed 
to choosing the disposal contractors for its first project through a call for qualified firms 
based on the highest international standards for disposal of hazardous wastes.  These 
standards will encompass a varied set of factors ensuring, inter alia, experience in the 
developing country context; meeting international emissions and other environmental 
standards; and a proven track record in safe handling and transport of hazardous waste in 
compliance with international conventions.  The cost-effectiveness of the offers will also 
be considered provided they are within the parameters established by the standards for 
disposal.  A list of qualified firms will then be established and tenders will be offered 
among this pre-qualified group.  By utilizing this "standards" approach, the ASP allows 
for the broadest range of disposal options to be considered (e.g., plasma arc, high 
temperature incineration, etc.) rather than pre-judging the available market, while 
ensuring that environmental safeguards are fully met.  In addition, the ASP will fund a 
study (managed by the CCAME) in the first phase of the program to analyze the range of 
disposal options available to ensure the broadest selection of acceptable technologies are 
taken into account in subsequent phases of the program.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental and Social Assessment Synthesis Report presents a framework of 
mitigation measures. Special attention was given to the following issues:  
 
(a) 
disclosure of information in order to maximize the efficiency and the synergy of 
public and private efforts in dealing with pollution and safety hazards;  
 
(b) 
emergency preparation and response plans, especially, during hauling and 
transport of hazardous products;  
 
(c) 
the scope of the prevention activities in relation to pest management;  
 
(d) 
the handling of contaminated areas in the vicinity of dwellings or other property, 
in particular, compensation issues in cases where cleanup would be impractical;  
 
(e) 
the handling of contaminated wells and other water sources; and  
 
(f) 
the need to take into consideration the entire "chain of custody" during sampling, 
transportation and disposal operations, irrespective of their geographical location.  
 
The second stage will be the preparation of the CESAs. The principal measure that each 
of the project countries will put in place is preparation and implementation of a Country 
Environmental and Social Assessment (CESA) including the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (EMP). These documents will outline specific impacts that individual 
country operations may cause and describe a plan of measures for minimizing these 
impacts.  During project implementation, the PMUs will ensure that all individual 
cleanup operations are subject to the CESAs and that their specific adverse environmental 
Page  9
impacts are adequately addressed through preparation and implementation of 
corresponding EMPs.  The EMPs will reflect the applicable national or international 
standards, provisions of the Rotterdam, Basel and Stockholm Conventions and other 
relevant Codes of Practice and guidelines, requiring that contractors demonstrate 
experience and competence in removal and cleanup of hazardous materials and set 
requirements for quality control and technical supervision by the TSU.  This will include 
requiring that the packaging, labeling, and transport of stocks and wastes comply with the 
internationally accepted standards and procedures found in the UN 'Orange Book'.  In 
addition, the technologies selected for disposing of the stockpiles and wastes will be 
required to meet both the Stockholm Convention Best Available Techniques/Best 
Environmental Practice (BAT/BEP) guidelines and the appropriate Basel Convention and 
Stockholm Convention Technical Guidelines for Environmentally Sound Management.  
 
All individual CESAs including the EMPs will be disclosed in ASP countries and in the 
InfoShop according to the Bank's Policy on Disclosure of Information.  Their preparation 
will involve adequate public participation in following the requirements of OP 4.01. The 
Bank and TSU will monitor their implementation following the procedures outlined in 
the OM.  
 
Training on the preparation and implementation of CESA and risk assessments will be 
provided through the TSU and the Bank at start of project implementation, as described 
in the country OMs.  
 
Information necessary for preparation of country specific EAs will be available only 
after detailed obsolete pesticide inventories take place early in project implementation. 
To ensure compliance with OP4.01, a Framework EA including an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) have been prepared and its summary disclosed 
as a Synthesis Report prior to appraisal. Countries will prepare the country specific EAs 
including Environmental Management Plans (EMP) following the guidance of the 
Framework EA and ESMF as soon as the project generates the necessary data on 
pesticide location, quantity and status and before the project proceeds to pesticide 
disposal.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
ASP-P1 institutional and implementation arrangements rely on close cooperation among 
ASP partners, a participative approach involving all stakeholders, their comparative 
expertise in Africa and their historic involvement in developing ASP.  Each institutional 
entity will take responsibility for a key element of program implementation.  While it 
would be possible to house all elements under one agency, the program would lose the 
synergies and comparative advantages of each specialized agency.  
 
ASP-Steering Committee (ASP-SC) will review ASP progress once a year.  It will be a 
forum to provide feedback and recommendations on the overall direction of the Program.  
The ASP-SC will be supported by the ASP-PCU.  The ASP-SC will include 
representatives from all the participating countries and the ASP core partners, including: 
Page  10
NGOs, UN specialized entities, regional organizations, and donor representatives and 
will be open for future partners to join.  
 
PMUs will be the principal implementers of ASP-P1 through the individual country 
projects under Component 1.  They will be hosted by government agencies serving as the 
ASP-P1 implementing agencies and guided by the respective NSCs.  
 
TSU will be a provider and coordinator of technical expertise required for preparation 
and implementation of country cleanup and prevention activities.  It will be responsible 
for results of Component 2 and be hosted by FAO.  It will coordinate technical services 
of other partners, e.g., UNEP, WHO and the Basel Convention Regional Centers.  
 
CCAME will manage provision of knowledge management, communications, 
awareness-raising and outreach activities across ASP.  It will be responsible for the 
results of Component 3 and hosted by WWF and PAN-UK.  
 
ASP-PCU will serve as the overall coordinator of ASP-P1 implementation and provide a 
Secretariat function for the ASP Steering Committee (ASP-SC).  It is anticipated that 
following the successful completion of ASP-P1, or earlier, the ASP-PCU will be 
transferred to an African organization.  NEPAD has been identified as a potential host.  
The ASP-PCU will be responsible for results of Component 4.  
 
ASP Unit:  The Bank will manage the relevant trust funds and supervise the 
implementation of activities funded through grant agreements for the seven countries, 
WWF, PAN UK, and the ASP-PCU.  The Bank will monitor the achievement of the 
Project Development Objective (PDO) and ensure compliance to all fiduciary 
requirements as per grant agreements.  The Bank will also supervise the DGF agreement 
with FAO.  The Bank will not oversee the GEF grant agreement with FAO, as FAO has 
direct access to GEF resources as a GEF Executing Agency with expanded opportunities 
under OP14 on POPs.  In order to perform these functions the Bank will establish a small 
ASP Unit comprising of a full time ASP Coordinator supported by Task Team Leaders 
(TTLs) in each of the seven countries responsible for routine day-to-day supervision of 
the relevant grant agreements.  
 
All ASP-P1 Partners will follow a common set of policies and procedures pertaining to 
fiduciary management, evaluation, safeguards and communications.  These policies and 
procedures are established in the implementation arrangements for each component and 
for each country operation.  
 
Country level ownership of the Project:  The experience emphasizes, among others, the 
importance of strong country ownership, effective pesticide management, the reliance on 
technical expertise in waste management in the private sector, and engagement of 
pesticide companies, environmental and public health NGOs and other civil society 
participants.  ASP has received strong support from governmental institutions and NGOs, 
which have actively participated in project preparation and workshops.  ASP-P1 builds 
upon the existing initiatives which have taken place over the last 10 years in Africa to 
Page  11
dispose of obsolete pesticides.  In order to scale up disposal and prevention activities, 
several African countries requested and supported the development of a partnership to 
more rapidly address this issue  ASP-P1's design emphasizes country ownership not only 
through traditional co-financing requirements and public participation, but also through 
consolidating the crucial political and institutional support mobilized in the process of 
ratification of the Stockholm Convention.  In addition, ASP-P1 countries have already 
begun to implement start-up project activities, e.g., a communication campaign in South 
Africa to collect privately owned stocks of obsolete pesticide, and activities supported by 
the Pesticide Action Network.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/29/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
10/03/2004  
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
OP 4.09 requires preparation of a Pest Management Plan (PMP).  The entire Project is 
dedicated to improve pesticide and pest management issues including prevention, cleanup 
and measures toward strengthening pesticide management, prevention of pesticide 
stockpiling and promotion of IPM.  These activities are described in detail in this PAD 
and other project documents.  The Project will promote awareness and improved 
regulations and better handling of pesticides and will also promote the adoption by 
countries of IPM policies.  In addition to the EMP (prepared as part of the CESA) the 
Project documents will meet all PMP requirements. Hence, a stand alone PMP will not be 
prepared.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Page  12
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Steven P. Maber 
10/11/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud 
10/13/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
10/13/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
10/13/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
10/13/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
10/13/2005 
Comments:   
