Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2005 
Report No.:  32274
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P082375 
Project Name:  NATURAL RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  John W. Fraser Stewart 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P089061 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Flood protection (20%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Decentralization (S);Participation and 
civic engagement (S);Climate change (S);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.20 
 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA)  5.20
7.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to establish or maintain sustainable, community-
based natural resource management in about 218 communes in upland and mountainous 
erosion-prone lands. This will lead to enhanced productivity and incomes derived from 
sustainable resource management, reduced soil degradation, improved water 
management, conservation of biodiversity, and strengthened public sector management of 
these resources.  
 
The project global environmental objective is to reverse severe degradation of upland 
and mountainous erosion-prone lands, and sediment runoff to the Adriatic Sea, through 
rehabilitating and sustainably managing natural resources, including globally significant 
biodiversity.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project objectives will be achieved through implementing two components:  
 
Page  2
The project will strengthen the community-based approach to forest and pasture 
management developed for 138 communes under the Albania Forestry Project (AFP), as 
well as scale up coverage to include about 80 additional communes.  The project will 
thereby establish resource rehabilitation and sustainable management of forests and 
pastures in 218 communes i.e. most of the commune lands of upland areas of Albania 
that are experiencing resource degradation and erosion. This area includes approximately 
485,000 ha of forest lands, and 175,000 ha of pastures in upland areas of all 12 regions in 
Albania, and will reach a rural population of more than one million people.  The project 
will continue to update and prepare management plans (which were prepared for about 
450,000 ha of forest and pasture under the AFP, and will be prepared for 210,000 
additional ha under the NRDP), including the documentation of user rights, as a condition 
for the transfer of user-rights to forest and pasture resources to communes and implement 
a
series of small-scale investments in communal forests and pastures.  
 
Based on successful Bank experiences in other countries, the project will pilot 
integrated management of natural resources in three of Albania's seven watersheds, 
focusing on five regions located in the northern and eastern areas of the country.   In 30 
of the 218 communes covered by the project, the project will therefore introduce a multi-
sectoral approach to planning and management of natural resources at the level of micro-
catchments (MCs). This will include the integration of forest and pasture management 
with crop and livestock production, as well as soil and water conservation, in a mutually 
reinforcing manner. The project will apply a participatory approach to assisting 
communities living in MCs to plan and manage their resources  
 
Component A: Improved Management and Governance of Forests and Pastures  
 
A.1.   In about 115 communes already supported under the AFP, the project will update 
existing communal forest and pasture management plans (prepared under the AFP), 
including the documentation of different individual and user group rights over commune 
forest and pasture lands to better secure users' tenure rights. The project will also 
continue to support implementation of updated forest and pasture management plans 
established under the AFP.  The project will provide support to management plan 
implementation through provision of small-scale investments within a fixed budget 
ceiling of US$ 30,000 per commune, supported by in-kind community contributions 
equivalent to at least 20% of the value of the investments.  Implementing the forest and 
pasture communal management plans may entail: (i) land stabilization: construction of 
check dams, maintenance or protection of existing infrastructure, and planting of trees 
and shrubs in order to reduce flooding, landslides and sedimentation, (ii) resource 
rehabilitation: controlling grazing, and assisted natural regeneration of forests and 
pastures and (iii) sustainable resource use: pre-commercial thinning and coppicing, and 
pasture development and management.  
 
The BioCarbon Fund has expressed interest in purchasing emission reductions from 
Albania, resulting from a proposed "Assisted Natural Regeneration of Degraded Lands" 
Biocarbon Fund project, which will be included in the NRDP. The BioCarbon Fund pays 
on verification that carbon has been sequestered. To make such a sale of emission 
Page  3
reductions to the BioCarbon Fund possible, additional project resources will be allocated 
to about 30 of the communes that earlier received support under the AFP - and where 
areas of severely degraded lands still prevail - to make investments needed to sequester 
carbon through assisted natural regeneration in about 6,000 ha.  
 
A.2.   The project will document usufruct rights and prepare participatory communal 
forest and pasture management plans in about 73 communes where transfer of usufruct 
rights has not yet taken place.  The project will support implementation of the forest and 
pasture management plans through provision of small-scale investments. The investments 
will be within a fixed budget ceiling of US$ 40,000 per commune, supported by in-kind 
community contributions equivalent to at least 20% of their value.  Activities will fall 
under the same categories as listed under A.1.  
 
A.3.   The project will strengthen governance for forest and pasture management 
through training of DGFP and DFS in participatory provision of extension advice; and 
building the capacity of existing and new Forest and Pasture User Associations (FPUAs) 
as well as the growing network of non-governmental FPUAs, with focus on technical 
effectiveness, financial and social sustainability. It will also implement priority actions in 
the National Strategy for the Development of Forests and Pasture. This will entail: (i) 
clarifying roles and responsibilities within DGFP and DFS in the framework of the on-
going institutional and regulatory development, (ii) introducing performance-related 
budgeting within DGFP and DFS, (iii) building awareness of the strategy within DGFP 
and DFS, (iv) strengthening and improving the legal and regulatory framework for forest 
and pasture management, (v) developing the forest Cadastre, (vi) further developing the 
action plan to address illegal logging in project areas and (vii) enhancing forest fire 
management at local levels.  
 
Component B: Improved Management and Governance of Watershed  
 
B.1. 
The project will pilot integrated resource management in 30 micro-catchments 
selected in a participatory and transparent manner.  The MCs will encompass an 
approximate area of 190,000 ha, with a population of about 125,000 people. The project 
will prepare 30 integrated MCs plans through a participatory process. The project will 
also prepare or update forest and pasture management plans for these 30 communes. MC 
plans will build on forest and pasture management plans and refer to the key actions that 
they identify. The project will then provide small-scale investments and/or technical 
support for activities identified in the planning process. The range of supported activities 
will involve (i) investments in communal forest and pasture management (as described 
under A.1.), (ii) investments in rehabilitation of state forests and (iii) investments in 
agricultural developments, selected from a menu of activities.  Investments in agricultural 
development would entail: (i) rehabilitation of agricultural land: protection and 
improvement of poor, degraded bare agricultural land; fallow reduction; appropriate use 
of marginal lands and (ii) sustainable use of agricultural land and livestock production so 
as to reduce the need to cultivate or graze on marginal and erosion prone areas:  
establishment of shelterbelts around fields; wild tree grafting; demonstration of improved 
practices; improving rain-fed agriculture and irrigated agriculture; irrigated fodder crop 
Page  4
production; development of vegetable production. The project will support 
implementation of the MC management plans up to a budget ceiling of US$ 95,000. 
Interventions will be supported by in-kind community contributions equivalent to at least 
20% of their value.  
 
B.2. 
The Project will train Regional Agricultural Directorates, Drainage Boards, DFS 
and commune staff, at district, regional and national levels in the provision of extension 
advice in the context of MC management. The Land Administration and Protection 
Offices (LAPs) within the Ministry of Local Governance play an important role in land 
information, administration, planning and protection and in administering land 
transactions (except for forest lands). In areas addressed by the MC planning approach, 
the project will specifically enhance the capacity of these offices.  Last, the project will 
draw on its experience in forest and pasture management, and on its experience in MC 
management, in order to inform ongoing legal developments regarding land 
administration and tenure.  
 
Component C: Management and Monitoring  
 
Implementation would be undertaken by local communities supported by staff from the 
branch offices of the DGFP together with Regional staff from the Ministry of 
Agriculture. The project would support (i) at the central level a small project management 
team with overall responsibility for procurement and financial management, (ii) regional 
coordinators where component B will be implemented. Services would also be contracted 
to assist with enhanced public awareness of the benefits of sustainable natural resource 
management, project monitoring and evaluation, implementation of the environmental 
management framework and carbon sequestration verification and monitoring.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project location  
 
The first component will strengthen the community-based approach to forest and 
pasture management developed for 138 communes under the Albania Forestry Project 
(AFP), as well as scale up coverage to include about 80 additional communes.  This 
component will thereby establish resource rehabilitation and sustainable management of 
forests and pastures in most of the commune lands of upland areas of Albania that are 
experiencing resource degradation and erosion. This area includes approximately 485,000 
ha of forest lands, and 175,000 ha of pastures in upland areas of all 12 regions in Albania, 
and will reach a rural population of more than one million people.  
 
The second component will pilot integrated management of natural resources in three of 
Albania's seven watersheds, focusing on five regions located the northern areas of the 
country. The project will pilot this multi-sectoral approach at the level of micro-
catchments in 30 of the communes where the first project component will be supporting 
sustainable management of forest and pasture resources.  
 
Page  5
Salient physical characteristics  
 
Albania is a small and very mountainous country with a total surface area of 28,748 
km2, of which about 60% is above 600 m elevation.  Albania's total land area is divided 
into three main ecological zones: (i) the coastal plain, (ii) the hilly transition sub-
mountainous zone; and (iii) the mountainous zone.  
 
Water resources: The annual precipitation varies considerably from about 800 mm/year 
in the hills and the coastal plains to over 2,000 mm/year in the mountain ranges.  There is 
a
dry period in the summer in the Mediterranean part of the country, and in many areas, 
climatic and soil conditions are favorable for forest and pasture growth.  The country is 
divided into seven principal river basins (watersheds), with an average annual run-off of 
25.7 billion m3.  
 
Soil and agricultural resources in the upland areas:  Fertile soils provide an important 
basis for subsistence and agricultural production in the upland regions.  More than 60% 
of Albania's rural households own less than 0.8 ha of land.  Of this number, three quarters 
of the households living in mountainous areas have less than 0.5 ha at hand.  The land 
used for agriculture is often sloping, with only about 44% of the agricultural land having 
a
slope of less than 5%.  
 
Forest and pasture resources: The Forest and Pastures Inventory (ANFI) has shown that 
the total "forest" area is about 1.5 million ha, of which less than 30% is high forest 
(449,000 ha) and about 40% is coppice forest (624,000 ha). The remainder is shrub area 
(430,000 ha).  The pasture area was estimated by the ANFI at 480,800 ha. Sixty percent 
of that area is classified as "winter pastures" covering lowland areas up to 1,500 m 
altitude; the remainder is "summer pasture" at higher altitudes (up to over 2,500 m) 
including alpine vegetation.  
 
Salient social characteristics  
 
Nearly two million people (58% of the total population) live in Albania's upland region, 
encompassing the hilly transition sub-mountainous and mountainous zones. This region 
accounts for about 70% of the poor.  37% of the upland population belongs to the poorest 
consumption quintile and over 50% of households belong to the first two quintiles. In the 
northern region, over one-half of families own very small farms (0-0.5 ha) of poor quality 
land.  
 
Poverty: Two-thirds of farm families do not produce enough food for subsistence.  Fuel 
wood is essential for heating and cooking in rural areas, and poor families in particular 
depend on fuel wood for survival.  Although farm revenues are a stable source of income 
for most farm families, they were just one-third of household income on average in the 
communities surveyed in the project's social assessment.  Forestry products constitute 
17% of cash income.  The primary source of income among rural families, particularly 
those living in villages with large out-migration, is remittances, which comprise on 
Page  6
average 53% of household income. On average, one-fourth of surveyed families receive 
social assistance.  Farm families whose main source of income is farm revenue are the 
main recipients of social assistance.  These findings suggest that the majority of rural 
families lead a precarious existence, relying on forestry products, remittances and social 
assistance to meet family needs.  
 
Exclusion: The landless usually comprise the poor and newcomers to the village.  
Newcomers who come from the same socio-economic and ethnic background as the 
villagers in the recipient area are more likely to be integrated into village activities and be 
given or allowed to buy parcels.  Newcomers with characteristics distinct from those of 
the other villagers are not encouraged to stay in the village or granted access rights to the 
communal areas only.  Women, given their secondary status in traditional rural society, 
generally have little say in most decisions and have virtually no representation in 
management in public institutions. Although women are major contributors to farming 
operations and the household, they have almost no legal right to land or property and this 
contribution is not recognized formally in terms of payment and technical and financial 
support.  Another group at risk of exclusion is disaffected youth.  The majority wants to 
work in off-farm activities outside the village.  Low farm income and hidden 
unemployment are the most important factors motivating emigration to the cities. 
Absentee landlords - city dwellers with private land holdings in the rural areas - represent 
a
growing share of private farmland owners.  
 
Tenure insecurity: Thirty percent of agricultural land and 85-90% of pastures and forests 
are subject to some form of tenure insecurity.  Regions most vulnerable to tenure 
insecurity are the north and northeast.  The majority of farmers want ownership to land 
they perceive to be their own, which in many cases is legal recognition of traditional 
family usufruct rights.  Tenure insecurity creates an atmosphere of tension and distrust in 
villages, occasionally erupting into open hostilities and violence over boundaries. 
Community relations are undermined by tenure insecurity.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart (ECSSD) 
Ms Carine Clert (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  7
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not result in potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative 
impacts. The project would have positive impacts on the environment and natural 
resources of upland areas of Albania, as well as downstream resources in the watersheds 
where the project will operate.  It would support rehabilitation of natural resources, 
thereby helping to reverse land degradation in upland areas; reducing risks to downstream 
lands and infrastructure; controlling floods and landslides; improving sustainability of 
dams, reservoirs and production of hydroelectricity; increasing agricultural productivity 
in low-lying areas; and protecting wetland and coastal resources.  Additionally, the 
project will have positive climate change benefits through carbon sequestration and 
prevention of resource degradation leading to decreased carbon losses.  Key constraints 
to establishing more appropriate institutional and land tenure arrangements to promote 
environmental sustainability will be overcome, and a broader range of livelihood options 
for the rural poor will be promoted, thereby reducing pressure to over-exploit natural 
resources and providing stronger incentives for communities to manage their forest, 
pastoral and agricultural resources in a sustainable manner.  
 
Overall the project will empower residents, village leaders and communes to take 
concerted action on priority community-based initiatives for the use of natural resources; 
and demonstrate the income-generating potential of sustainable land, forestry, and 
agricultural practices.  Specific benefits and positive impacts include:  (i) reduced 
dependency on the forests and pasturelands; (ii) increased natural resources productivity 
leading to increased food security and reduced poverty; and (iii) increased participation 
and empowerment of women and vulnerable and marginalized groups - due to a greater 
sensitivity to the participation constraints of these social groups - (as compared to the 
previous Forestry project).  
 
OP 4.01 has been triggered and the project has been rated Category B. An 
Environmental Assessment (EA) has been prepared between November 2004 and January 
2005.  Since the precise details of the small-scale investments - in terms of exact location, 
materials used, etc. - will not be known at the outset of the project, the Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) consists in an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) 
which will mainstream environmental considerations within the participatory process for 
identifying, planning, implementing and monitoring activities or sub-projects. The 
potential localized and/or cumulative negative impacts arising from the project will be 
addressed through implementation of the EMF. The EMF will be integrated into the 
Project Implementation Manual.  
 
OP 4.09 is not triggered because the project will not finance the purchase of pesticides, 
and will not lead to substantially increased pesticide use and subsequent environmental 
problems. Support for agricultural intensification through provision of seed and fruit trees 
will be limited to 5-10 ha (or less) in each of the 30 micro-catchments, distributed in 
three of Albania's major watersheds, that are supported in component B.  In the event that 
Page  8
MC planning will be scaled up by Government, approaches to Integrated Pest 
Management would be promoted by Government extension services as necessary.  
 
The project is consistent with OP 4.36. Specifically, it assists Albania to harness the 
potential of forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable manner, integrate forests effectively 
into sustainable economic development, and protect the vital local and global 
environmental services and values of forests, by supporting community based approaches 
to forest, pasture and watershed management. Potential forest related environmental 
impacts such as reforestation of critical non-forest habitats and alterations to hydrological 
regimes, are unlikely, and would be preempted through implementation of the EMF.  
 
Project design will avoid the possible restriction of access to resources that could result 
in economic displacement.  Issues of dependency on forests and rangelands, and 
arrangements for securing more equitable access to planning and to project benefits are 
addressed in the planning process and in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).  The 
Social Assessment (SA) determined that O.P. 4.12 on involuntary resettlement is not 
triggered. Indeed, O.P. 4.12 on involuntary resettlement is triggered when restrictions are 
imposed by authorities and communities have little or no discretionary power to make 
land use decisions.  The SA confirmed that while according to Albanian law land owners 
and users can not make changes to their land without governmental permission, in 
practice villages exercise full autonomy in land use decisions on communal areas.  More 
importantly, in the case of this proposed project, both project design and implementation 
arrangements as specified in the PIM ensure that decisions about rights of access to land 
and livelihood affected by the project will be made at the level of the community in 
villages and up to commune levels, rather than by governmental officials.  As stated 
above, transparent and effective mechanisms to ensure broad consultation and 
participation into the decision-making process are built into the project's PIM.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The "without project" alternative would have the effect of negating the environmental 
benefits that the project is designed to deliver. In summary:  
 
-
without the NRDP livelihoods and environment in upland  areas will continue to 
decline as a result of land degradation;  
 
-
without the NRDP land degradation will continue to pose risks downstream including 
risks to hydroelectricity dam operation, fisheries, agricultural productivity, and wetland 
and coastal resources.  
 
An alternative to community-based planning and management, is for the forest 
administration to directly control the planning of forest rehabilitation and direct all tree 
planting and erosion control measures.  However, very few stakeholders in the 
Government of Albania or Albanian civil society are in favor of this approach, owing to 
Page  9
the successful demonstration of community-based action during the AFP and associated 
decentralization measures in Albania. In summary, the community-based approach 
adopted under the NRDP will enable:  
 
-
the NRDP to continue to build on the positive experience of community-based 
rehabilitation of forests during the AFP;  
 
-
key policy constraints to be tackled, providing a more appropriate policy and tenure 
context for upland areas;  
 
-
a
broader range of livelihood options for people in rural upland communities, which 
will enable them to manage their forest and pastoral resources with longer time horizons.  
 
A
component to develop and implement management plans for Albania's protected areas 
was considered during project design. Protected areas in Albania have suffered a high 
degree of degradation in the past, and given rural poverty levels and dependence on 
natural resources, it is not clear that protected area management would be effective or 
have local support.  Protection of upland ecosystems is more likely to be achieved over 
the coming years through community-based natural resource management projects such 
as the design proposed for this operation, where biodiversity conservation is integrated 
into land use management in the production landscape.  The project, by focusing on 
vegetation recovery and erosion control in upland areas, will also help restore natural 
ecosystems in lower watersheds.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The regional project staff (Regional Manager, Regional Coordinator, Regional Watershed 
Support Teams) will have overall responsibility for working with the beneficiaries to 
mainstream environmental considerations into the small-scale investments (sub-project) 
design and implementation process, and for screening all sub-projects accordingly. The 
Project Management Team (PMT) at the central level will be responsible for approval of 
the sub-projects, based upon the advice of the Regional Coordinators, and final 
determination of the Technical Specialist within the PMT.  This stage of the process will 
include consideration and screening of cumulative impacts of the sub-projects.  
 
On an annual basis, an environmental performance audit will be conducted in all regions 
by a team of independent experts and will comprise an analysis of the screening process 
and a visual inspection of a sample of project sites to (i) assess compliance with EMF 
procedures, learn lessons, and improve future EMF performance; and (ii) assess the 
occurrence of, and potential for, cumulative impacts due to project-funded activities. The 
audit report will then be submitted to the Project Technical Committee (PTC), and in 
parallel the Ministry of Environment.  On reviewing the report, the PTC (and the MoE 
should it decide) will provide guidance to the project staff in how the project should 
address report recommendations in going forwards.  The project staff will then work with 
the project beneficiaries to integrate any required measures into the sub-project 
development, screening and/or implementation processes.  
 
The environmental sustainability of the NRDP in the long term is highly dependent on 
the capacity of communities and local and national authorities to carry out the associated 
Page  10
design, planning, approval and implementation of the sub-projects.  In order to ensure 
proper implementation of environmental screening and mitigation measures, as well as 
effective natural resource management, the NRDP will undertake a program of 
environmental training and capacity building. This will build on previous efforts made 
during the Albanian Forestry Project. Training and sensitization will be required for 
Regional Coordinators, Regional Watershed Support Teams, Regional Environmental 
Agencies and Communities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The consultation process has included both formal and informal consultation with a wide 
range of key informants and government and civil society stakeholders at the national, 
regional and local level.  
 
Scoping of the environmental impacts of the proposed project took place in November 
2004, and included individual consultations and focus group discussions with a sample of 
key informants and government and civil society stakeholders nationally, and in three 
districts of upland Albania (Tropoje, Hasi and Kukes districts in north-east Albania).  
Further detailed research and consultation continued throughout the preparation of the 
EA and EMF.  
 
Project preparation was initiated with a workshop that included the participation of 
government and NGO stakeholders at a national level. A workshop with a similar 
participation was then held to review project objectives and activities. Detailed 
discussions were undertaken with key staff at national level as well as regional 
consultations involving government and NGO stakeholders in four regions.  
 
A
detailed Social Assessment (SA) was carried out in six communes and 17 villages 
from December 24, 2004 -January 12, 2005. Consultations were conducted in the form of 
(i) 180 face-to-face, semi-structured interviews with officials, experts and farmers, (ii) a 
community questionnaire and (iii) six focus group interviews.  A total of 215 people were 
interviewed.  
 
Since the underlying objective of the project is to address land degradation  - an 
environmental priority for Albania - those consulted viewed the project in very positive 
terms from an environmental perspective.  Few, if any, negative opinions were addressed 
in relation to environmental issues surrounding the project.  
 
The final EA/EMF has been disclosed in Albania and in Infoshop prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/25/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2005 
 
Page  11
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not Applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart 
02/25/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart 
02/25/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Carine Clert 
02/28/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr John W. Fraser Stewart 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
02/25/2005 
Comments:   
