Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1928 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/02/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Albania 
Project ID: P096263 
Project Name: Land Management & Urban Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Wael Zakout 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 31, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);Sub-national government 
administration (40%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall goal of the proposed project is to promote sustainable economic growth through the 
development of efficient land and property markets, strengthening the capacity and resource 
basis of municipalities, and improvement of urban infrastructure and services.  The specific 
objectives of the the project are the following:  (i) improve tenure security in urban (including 
informal settlements), rural, and coastal zone areas and improve service delivery and promote 
transparency of land registration institution; and (ii) build sustainable capacity of selected local 
governments in urban management including the provision of municipal services and critical 
infrastructure.  These objectives would be achieved through: (i) completing registration of rights 
in rural and urban areas, including the registration of rights in informal settlements and coastal 
areas; (ii) improving service delivery of the Immovable Property Registration System (IPRS) 
Agency through re-engineering of office functions, introducing computerization, and 
establishment and monitoring of service standards; (iii) building capacity of the selected 
municipalities, who are committed to reform, in urban management, including development of 
urban land use plans, adoption of transparent administrative procedures and introduction of 
property tax; and (iv) supporting development of key public infrastructure to be identified by the 
participating municipalities.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component I: Security of Tenure and Registration of Property Rights  
 
The objective of Component I is to complete the systematic registration of property rights and 
improve the efficiency and transparency of the property registration system so that citizens can 
receive adequate services in an efficient manner, and the property market can operate without 
inhibitions. The component will cover the whole country, but initially, will concentrate on those 
areas that have the highest value properties and are most economically active. The component 
will include two sub-components:   
 
Sub-Component I: Completion of Registration of Rights. The sub-component would support the 
completion of first registration of the remaining 300,000 rural properties and 600,000 urban 
properties.  The project will also support the regularization and registration of informal 
settlements.  The sub-component will finance aerial photography and orthophoto production, 
ground surveying and mapping, and legal search and adjudication.  
 
Sub-Component II: Improvement in Service Delivery of IPRS. The sub-component will support 
the improvement of service delivery of IPRS in registering land and property transactions 
through re-engineering of office functions, introducing of information technology, and 
developing, dissemination and monitoring of service standards. Furthermore, the component will 
finance regular customer surveys to measure the extent of compliance with service standards. 
The component will also support development of a hotline to report corruption in IPRS, which 
would be operated by an independent operator.  
 
Sub-component III: Land Policy Development. The sub-component will provide support to the 
development of critical land policies through participatory processes and public hearings. There 
are several critical land policies which need to be addressed in order to complete the registration 
process and to enhance land and property markets. These policies would include: security of 
registered parcels, resolution of multiple claims, particularly in coastal zone areas. During 
project preparation, critical policies will be identified, and the process of their development will 
be defined and agreed.  
 
Component II:  Urban Management and Infrastructure  
 
The main objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of selected municipalities in 
urban management, and to improve delivery of essential urban services.  This component would 
support selected secondary cities whose population is more than 20,000, and are committed to 
engaging themselves in the process of reform and improved municipal management. The first 
phase of the program will support 3-5 municipalities who have shown a strong commitment to 
reform. The component will include two sub-components:  
 
Sub-component I: Municipal Capacity Building.  The sub-component would assist in 
development of capacities of selected municipalities in urban management.  In particular, the 
project would finance technical assistance, equipment, and office renovation to help participating 
municipalities to develop the following key documentations essential to urban management: (i) 
Page  3
inventory collection (land use, occupants and business registration, infrastructure, vulnerable 
groups, human and fiscal resources, and environment, etc.); (ii) city development visions and 
strategies; (iii) registration of residents and introduction of property tax; (iv) municipal 
management plan covering land use, infrastructure management, and resource management; (v) 
city investment plan.  These documents would be prepared with extensive public consultations.  
Through the process, the municipalities would gain adequate knowledge and expertise in urban 
management.  
 
Sub-component II: Municipal Infrastructure. The sub-component will help the participating 
municipalities implement the city investment plan and carry out improvement works to 
municipal infrastructure.  The financing would be provided for urban and social infrastructure on 
a
cost-sharing basis. The eligible list of infrastructure will be determined and agreed during 
project preparation, and so will be  the percentage of cost-sharing..  
 
Component III. Project Management. Project management will be streamlined within the 
existing structure of the implementing agencies. The component will finance the incremental 
operating costs of managing the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The key implementing agency for the project and issues relevant to the safeguard policies will be 
the Ministry of Public Works, Transport and Communication (MPWTC).  The Ministry is 
familiar with Bank policies, as it has been responsible for implementation of several Bank-
financed projects.  More thorough analysis of the Borrower's capacities will be carried out during 
LMUD project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The environmental impact is expected mostly from the investments to be carried out under 
Component II, which will support, among others, urban and social infrastructure in the selected 
municipalities. Since the specific investments will not be known by project appraisal, and may 
not be financed until the second year of the implementation, the project is tentatively categorized 
as FI.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Due to the fact that the project will support under Component II the infrastructure 
investments, the possibility of the impact on the physical cultural reso
urces cannot be excluded 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
and will be later determined. The operational manual will describe the screening procedures and 
will specify measures to be taken, also in case of chance finds.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The potential displacements are relevant to municipal investments under Component II and 
the registration and property rights registration.  The Resettlement Policy Framework will 
describe the procedures and measures to be taken in case of land acquisition and will specify the 
circumstances when the titling cannot be supported by the project (e.g., land with multiple 
claims; when the government intends to retain title to occupied land).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
Application of the policy will be determined during project preparation based on the types of 
investments the selected municipalities are likely to implement under the project.  The categories 
of works will be reviewed to confirm whether new wastewater collections systems will be 
requested, in which case the policy will be triggered.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
During project preparation, the following documents will be prepared: infrastructure needs 
assessment for the selected municipalities; institutional capacity assessment; resettlement 
policy framework; environmental policy framework; operational manual.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
11/14/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/15/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
11/16/2005 
Comments:  approved 
