Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC789 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: June 17, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Angola 
Project ID: P083333 
Project Name: Angola - Emergency. 
Multisector Recovery Project 
Task Team Leader: Abdelmoula M. Ghzala 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 28, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: October 14, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Credit 
Sector: General transportation sector 
(100%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-
conflict reconstruction (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Amadou Konare and Yvette Djachechi 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 205 
IDA:  
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The overall purpose of the proposed project is to help to build the foundation for long-term 
reconstruction, economic rehabilitation, and the reestablishment of state administration 
throughout the country.  The specific objectives of the project are to assist the government to (a) 
improve rural incomes and enhance food security in the provinces most affected by the conflict, 
(b) improve access to essential education and health services in the provinces most affected by 
the conflict, (c) reconstruct and rehabilitate critical infrastructure, and (d) strengthen capacity of 
government at all levels to formulate, prepare, implement, and manage medium and long-term 
development programs.  These objectives are consistent with those of the PRSP.  They are also 
consistent with those of the priority phase of the 
government’s multisector rehabilitation and 
reconstruction program (PPMRRP).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The proposed project comprises four components: (a) rural development and delivery of social 
services (subproject A); (b) rehabilitation and reconstruction of critical infrastructure (the 
railways, roads and bridges, electricity, water supply, and urban infrastructure) (subproject B); 
(c) capacity building, institutional strengthening and development of sector strategies; and (d) 
management and monitoring of the project and the PPMRRP, and preparation of the next phase.  
The project has been designed based on free-standing subprojects that fit within the project but 
Page  2
that are not integrally linked to other activities and that facilitate parallel financing arrangements.  
IDA
’s contribution to each of these four components constitutes the IDA financed project.   
 
Component A: Rural development and delivery of social services (subproject A) 
(US$89 
million, of which IDA will contribute US$66 million).
 
This component will finance support for 
rural development and for delivery of health and education services in the most war-affected 
provinces, where delivery of services has been extremely poor.  Activities are designed to ensure 
that interventions in rural development, health services, education, and water and sanitation are 
integrated for maximum impact.   
 
The rural development subcomponent will finance
 
activities designed to (a) help small farmers to 
restart their agricultural production by supporting the production of basic and prebasic seeds and 
the distribution of seeds and planting materials; (b) facilitate marketing by rehabilitating some 
800 kilometers of rural roads; (c) improve the knowledge base of rural livelihood systems by 
undertaking strategic studies, including the development of a strategy for involving producer 
organizations with rural road maintenance; and (d) build capacity.  Activities will be focused on 
two provinces, Malanje and Bié, because these provinces are major producers of cassava and 
maize, basic staples for Angolans.   
 
The health services subcomponent will assist the government to (a) increase access to and use of 
maternal and child health services and increase access to treatment and prevention of common 
illnesses by rehabilitating health posts and health centers; (b) improve the quality of services 
through training of health providers and through provision of essential medicines and supplies; 
(c) complement and strengthen programs (such as the proposed HIV/AIDS, Malaria and TB 
project) to prevent and treat HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases; and (d) strengthen the 
government agencies involved with health services by strengthening the capacity of municipal 
and provincial health teams and by supporting the review of health services policy.  Participating 
provinces include Malanje, Moxico, Bié
 
and Kuanza Norte, underserved provinces with large 
numbers of war-affected people.  Studies, training, and provision of essential drugs will take 
place throughout the country.   
 
The education subcomponent will support the government to (a) increase access to basic 
education by constructing and furnishing about 1,165 new classrooms (accommodating 93,000 
students); (b) improve the quality of education by providing textbooks and other school supplies 
and equipment and training and retraining courses for new and experienced teachers; and (c) 
strengthen institutional capacity by building capacity of administration and management at all 
levels and improving data collection, analysis, evaluation, and planning.  Participating provinces 
include Malanje, Moxico, Uige, Bié,
 
and Kuanza Norte.   
 
Component B: Rehabilitation and reconstruction of critical infrastructure (subproject B) 
(US$209 million, of which IDA will contribute US$124 million)
.
This component comprises 
five subcomponents: transportation, roads, electricity, water supply, and urban services and 
infrastructure.  The transportation subcomponent will finance the rehabilitation of select rail 
links between Kuito and Luena (408 kilometers).  The roads subcomponent will finance the 
rehabilitation of about 280 kilometer of high-traffic roads and bridges linking Caxito with Uige 
(150 kilometers), and Lucala with Malange (129 kilometers).  Activities under both the 
Page  3
transportation and roads subcomponents support th
e
government’s strategy for transportation, 
which is to link the two main ports (Luanda and Lobito) to the interior rail and road inner 
“strategic loop” connecting Luanda, Uige, Malange, Saurimo, Luena, Kuito, Huambo, Benguela, 
and Lobito, covering the provinces of Luanda, Kwanza Norte, Uige, Malange, Moxito and Bié.  
The electricity subcomponent will finance rehabilitation of the mini hydroelectric plants of Cunje 
1, and rehabilitation of medium and low voltage distribution systems in major cities 
(N’dalantando, Uige, Malanje, Luena, Kuito and Luanda).  It will also finance studies aimed at 
improving the institutional framework of the sector.  The water supply subcomponent will 
support rehabilitation of water works in Luanda, in other urban areas in Bié, Malange, Kwanza 
Norte, and in rural areas of Moxico.  The urban services and infrastructure subcomponent will 
finance institutional strengthening for solid waste management in Luanda and in provincial 
capitals most affected by the war, emergency repairs to the sewage system of Luanda, and 
studies and equipment to control erosion in selected provincial capitals at risk of natural disaster.   
 
Component C: Sector development strategies and strengthening of human and institutional 
capacities 
(US$15 million, of which IDA will contribute US$10 million).
 
This component will 
finance technical assistance for sector ministries and agencies; training programs; and 
preparation of the strategies for the key sectors: agriculture, education, electricity, health, all 
modes of transportation, and water and sanitation.  It will also finance measures to strengthen 
local capacity in preparation for decentralization (pilot trials are proposed under project 
financing to test approaches to decentralization and to strengthen capacity of local institutions).  
Finally, this component will finance the principal studies and preparatory activities for future 
investment programs. 
 
Component D: Management, monitoring and evaluation of project implementation 
(US$11 
million, of which IDA will contribute US$5 million).  This component will finance project 
management, and monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the project.  It will finance 
technical assistance, expertise, consultant services, operating costs, logistical support, and 
equipment.  The component will also finance the expertise and support needed to update the 
national demining strategy and action plan.  It will also finance specific demining actions that 
will allow the project-supported rural development and infrastructure investments to move 
forward.  The demining actions will be monitored as part of a social and environmental 
management plan (also financed under this component).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will support operations primarily in six of Angola’s most war-affected provinces, as 
agreed between the Bank and the government.  These are Bié, Moxico, Kuanza Norte, Luanda, 
Uige and Malange.  In addition to being among those most affected by the war, these provinces 
have also received much less public resources than others.  They are home to about 58 percent of 
Angola’s population and are expected to receive some 30 percent of the internally displaced 
people returning home.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
Page  4
Capacity in Angola for environmental and social management is currently weak.  Therefore, it is 
anticipated that an environmental consulting firm will be engaged for a period of three years to 
manage and oversee the environmental and social management process, while providing 
institutional strengthening and on-the-job training services throughout the project period.  This 
firm will work closely with the Ministry of Planning and its PMIU, the ministries and agencies 
concerned, and the Bank to develop procedures that will improve quality and sustainability of 
activities through compliance with World Bank Safeguard Policies. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01)  The Bank requires environmental 
assessment of all projects proposed for Bank financing. 
[TBD] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04).  
Whether the project operate in or near natural 
habitats has yet to be determined.
 
[X] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
).  
The project includes procurement of pesticides 
under the rural development subcomponent.
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
 The project may include land 
acquisition or require people to move to make way for improved infrastructure.
 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[TBD] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
 Whether the project operate in or near forest areas has yet 
to be determined.
 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.  No QER is planned. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS.  Not applicable. 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
As an emergency recovery operation, the proposed Emergency Multi-sectoral Recovery Project 
(EMRP) is processed under World Bank Operation Policy (OP) 8.50.  As such, it is not required 
to have project safeguard instruments approved and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop 
prior to appraisal.  Due to the multisector nature of the project, and because all the environmental 
and social impact characteristics of subprojects are not yet known in sufficient detail, a 
programmatic process or a strategic approach for environmental and social assessment (including 
screening and categorization, preparation, public consultation, disclosure, review, approval and 
monitoring) will be put into place and implemented over the three year life of the project.  In 
addition, a resettlement policy framework will be prepared, addressing the policy, principles, 
institutional arrangements and procedures that the Borrower will follow in each subproject 
involving resettlement
 
or
loss of economic activities, and disclosed separately.  Because the 
project intends to provide pesticides, a pest and pesticides management plan will be prepared, 
outlining pest management approaches, pesticide use and management; policy and regulatory 
framework, institutional capacity, and plans for monitoring and evaluation.
 
Given uncertainties 
regarding the location of some of the activities, particularly of the education subcomponent, and 
the complexity of Angola’s environmental and social situation, this approach is designed to 
ensure that the selection, design and implementation of all activities comply with World Bank 
safeguard policies.  All individual environmental and social impact assessments, environmental 
management plans, pest management plans, and resettlement action plans for the various 
subprojects are expected to be completed within one year of project effectiveness. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Abdelmoula M. Ghzala 
 
Date 
June 17, 2004 
Project Safeguard Specialist 1:     
 
Project Safeguard Specialist 2:      
 
Approved by: 
Amadou Konare 
 
Yvette Djachechi 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
 
Date 
June 17, 2004
 
Sector Manager: 
C.Sanjivi Rajasingham 
 
Date 
June 17, 2004
 
Comments 
 
