The World Bank                                                                             Appraisal ISDS
Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance (P165411)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                     Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 5-Nov-2018| Report No: ISDSA24000




                      Regional Vice President:    Ferid Belhaj
                             Country Director:    Marie Francoise Marie-Nelly
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Guangzhe Chen
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Olivier P. Le Ber
                           Task Team Leader:      Nabil Samir
              The World Bank                                                                            Appraisal ISDS
              Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance (P165411)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                               Project Name
    P165411                                                  Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance
    Task Team Leader(s)                                      Country
    Nabil Samir                                              Morocco
    Approval Date                                            Environmental Category
    20-Jun-2019                                              B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                            Is this a Repeater project?
    GTR05                                                    No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                          2.85
    Total Financing                                                                                             2.85
    Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                               2.85
         Japan Social Development Fund                                                                          2.85


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide livelihood improvement opportunities to disadvantaged
. rural inhabitants and maintain accessibility and usability of targeted rural roads in the Project Area.
           The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
           Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance (P165411)




    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project will be located in non-disputed lagging areas. The exact location (i.e. the rural roads to be
    maintained by the project) will be determined during implementation. The project will mostly consist in
    routine maintenance of rural roads without any anticipated significant environmental and social negative
    impacts. Maintenance works will be carried out on the roads' right-of-way, meaning there will no land
    acquisition. As these maintenance works will be handled by cooperatives and social microenterprises
    employing rural citizens, a significant risk on occupational health and safety is detected to be managed
    correctly by all counterparts.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Markus Friedrich Vorpahl, Social Specialist
    Mohamed Adnene Bezzaouia, Environmental Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation

                                                                      The project is categorized as B. Sub-component 1.1
                                                                      of the project, “Rural roads maintenance
                                                                      subprojects?, has the propensity to generate during
                                                                      works minimal and site-specific environmental
                                                                      impacts related essentially to the management of
                                                                      wastes, noise, air emissions, wastewater and
     Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes                   disposal of some hazardous materials. All these
                                                                      impacts are easily remediable and will be easily
                                                                      mitigated. Aside from sub-component 1.3
                                                                      "Complementary Subprojects" that is likely not to
                                                                      have a significant adverse impact on the
                                                                      environment or the affected people, all the other
                                                                      components of the project are primarily
      The World Bank                                                                               Appraisal ISDS
      Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance (P165411)



                                                          institutional development, technical assistance and
                                                          capacity building. An Environmental and Social
                                                          Management Framework (that includes a Guide as
                                                          annex) has been prepared. This document includes
                                                          a negative-list of subprojects excluded from
                                                          support: high risk subprojects with potential,
                                                          Category A-type impacts, subprojects impacting
                                                          critical habitats or protected areas, impacting
                                                          forests areas and forest resources, or posing risks
                                                          of damaging on the existing community cultural
                                                          property, subprojects requiring land acquisition,
                                                          and finally subprojects involving the use of
                                                          sophisticated civil works equipment or machinery.
                                                          As the project will employ community labor, there
                                                          are other risks related to occupational health and
                                                          safety, child labor, and forced labor which will be
                                                          mitigated through measures specified in the ESMF
                                                          (particularly in the annexed Guide). The ESMF
                                                          describes how these risks related to occupational
                                                          health and safety, child labor, and forced labor will
                                                          be managed, and developed an Environmental and
                                                          Social monitoring sheet. The ESMF has been
                                                          consulted upon with beneficiaries and other
                                                          stakeholders in December, 12th 2018. The ESMF
                                                          has been reviewed, approved, disclosed in-country
                                                          (on January, 9th 2019) and at the external website
                                                          (on January, 18th 2019).
                                                          The project will not finance subprojects impacting
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No
                                                          critical habitats or protected areas.
                                                          The project will not finance subprojects impacting
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No
                                                          forests areas and forest resources.
                                                          The project will not support the use or involve
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
                                                          investments in pesticides or other related products.
                                                          The proposed operation is not expected to pose
                                                          risks of damaging on the existing community
                                                          cultural property. If these properties will be
                                                          discovered during project implementation, cultural
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No               property and chance find procedures will be
                                                          applied and appropriate mitigation measures for
                                                          both the identification and protection (from theft,
                                                          mistreatment of discovered artifacts) of cultural
                                                          property.
                                                          No groups qualifying as Indigenous Peoples under
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No               OP/BP 4.10 will be among the project affected
                                                          people or project beneficiaries.
                                                          The project will maintain existing roads that have
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No
                                                          already been upgraded under a series of projects,
           The World Bank                                                                                      Appraisal ISDS
           Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance (P165411)



                                                                       lastly Morocco Second Rural Roads Project - AF2
                                                                       (P148003). No enlargement of existing roads will be
                                                                       necessary under the project, so no acquisition of
                                                                       land, involuntary or other, will be necessary. The
                                                                       screening mechanisms under the ESMF will include
                                                                       measures to exclude road sections should the
                                                                       project encounter non-titles users, e.g. vendors on
                                                                       road shoulders.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No                     The project will not construct or rely on dams.
 Projects on International Waterways
                                                No                     The project will not affect international waterways.
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No                     The project is not located in a disputed area.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Given the nature of works, the project has the propensity to generate minimal and site specific environmental impacts
      related essentially to the management of wastes, noise, air emissions, wastewater and disposal of some hazardous
      materials. All these impacts are easily remediable and will be easily mitigated. the project will employ community
      labor, therefore other risks related to occupational health and safety, child labor, and forced labor which will be
      mitigated or eliminated through measures detailed in the Environmental and Social Management Guide. Impacts
      related to land acquisition are being eliminated not including any sub-projects with potential impacts related to land
      acquisition or restriction of access to land. Complementary subprojects (sub-component 1.3) consisting of income-
      generating activities are not likely to have a significant adverse impact on the environment or affected people.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

      NA


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

      NA


 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      The Borrower has satisfactorily complied with the World Bank's safeguards policies during the implementation of a
      recent more complex road project (Second Rural Roads Project - P094007), demonstrating its ability to properly
      manage the impact of the proposed project. Capacity building for local community labor force to acquire necessary
      skills on occupational health and safety is necessary.
            The World Bank                                                                                      Appraisal ISDS
            Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance (P165411)




     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       Aside from the project sponsors (the Ministry of Equipment, Transport, Logistics, and Water and its Regional
       Directorate in the Souss-Massa region, and the regional government of Souss-Massa), the key stakeholders are the
       communities engaged in the road maintenance, including through cooperatives and microenterprises (or other forms
       of community engagement), involved in implementing the sub-projects, and civil society organizations. Given the
       limited subproject sizes and their nature, potential negative safeguards impact of the project affecting people should
       be minor and mitigated through project measures. Target road sections for the first component of the project have
       been pre-identified during preparation and will be confirmed in a participatory manner following consultations held
       with community members (including potential direct and indirect beneficiaries) and civil society. Local communities
       will be involved in the project and engaged in the maintenance of the roads serving the communities throughout the
       project lifetime.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure
09-Jan-2019                                                      18-Jan-2019
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
 Morocco                                                            09-Jan-2019
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                      No



 PDI_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
            Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance (P165411)



    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Nabil Samir


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Olivier Le Ber                            29-Apr-2019

.
