0
COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSA14933
Date Prepared/Updated:     20-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mozambique                  Project ID:  P156559
Parent
Project ID
(if any):
Project Name: MZ - Emergency Resilient Recovery Project for the Northern and Central
(P156559)
Region:         AFRICA
Estimated       07-Aug-2015                 Estimated    29-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Practice Area   Social, Urban, Rural and    Lending      Investment Project Financing
(Lead):         Resilience Global Practice  Instrument:
Sector(s):      Primary education (30%), Water supply (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%),
Flood protection (30%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (40%), Water resource management (20%),
Education for all (15%), Rural services and infrastructure (15%) , Climate
change (10%)
Borrower(s):    Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF)
Implementing    Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources (MOPHRH), Ministry
Agency:         of Education and Human Development (MINEDH), Water and Sanitation
Infrastructure Administration (AIAS), National Institute for Irrigation (INIR)
o        Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  40.00
Total Project Cost                                                           40.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Appraisal       The review did authorize to proceed with Negotiations, in principle
Review
Decision (from
Decision Note):
Page 1 of 14


﻿0
Other Decision:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Mozambique is located on the east coast of Africa, bordering six countries. With an area of
800,000 square kilometers, the country is richly endowed with natural resources, including arable
land, forests, fisheries, water and mineral resources. Mozambique's economy has grown rapidly
since the end of the civil war in 1992. Annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth averaged
7.4 percent over the past two decades. Robust growth was made possible by sound
macroeconomic management, a number of large-scale foreign-investment projects, political
stability and significant donor support. In recent years, strong growth has more specifically been
supported by foreign direct investment inflows in extractive industries. Major discoveries of coal
and gas have the potential to transform Mozambique into a significant player in global markets.
Despite this wealth and rapid development, Mozambique remains one of the poorest countries in
the world, with approximately 70 percent of its 22.9 million people living and working in extreme
poverty (less than US$2 a day). In 2007, 38 percent of the population was undernourished and
only 42 percent had access to an improved water source. The country ranks 178 out of 187 in
United Nations Development Programme's (UNDP) Human Development Index (2013), the
lowest in southern Africa. Over 70 percent of the population live in rural areas and are still
dependent on subsistence agriculture. The geographical distribution of poverty also remains
largely unchanged since the last 2009 poverty assessment, with poverty concentrated in rural
areas and in the Central and Northern regions. The Southern region experienced moderate
reduction in poverty in the mid- and late-2000s, reflecting spillover effects from the rapid growth
O
U           of urban centers in the region.
Mozambique experiences some of southern Africa's most variable hydrological and
meteorological conditions. Tropical to sub-tropical climates prevail in the Northern and Central
regions, whereas the South is predominantly arid. The oscillations of the Inter-Tropical
Convergence Zone (referred to as El Niilo/La Niila phenomena) influence the timing and
magnitude of rainy (October to March) and dry seasons (April to September). The country is
particularly exposed to tropical cyclones and is also the third country most at risk from water and
weather-related hazards in Africa . About 58 percent of the population and more than 37 percent
of GDP are exposed to two or more natural hazards, which translates into 1.1 percent annual
average loss in GDP. Floods in particular cause annual average losses in the order of US$17.5
million in damage to household housing, US$0.7 million in damage to roads and bridges, and US
$42.5 million of loss in maize.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Dikes & Flood Protection: The Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources
(MOPHRH) through the National Directorate of Water (DNA) is responsible for the strategic
management of water resources in Mozambique. DNA combines the responsibility for policy
making, implementation, planning and management of water resources, as well as provision of
water supply and sanitation services in rural areas. The strategic activities undertaken by DNA are
Page 2 of 14


﻿0            operationalized by the five Regional Water Authorities (ARAs). In Mozambique, dikes protecting
irrigation schemes and urban areas are institutionally under the responsibility of ARAs, while
dikes lying within irrigated schemes are under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture
and Food Security (MASA).
Flood protection works are not abundant in the affected area. Affected dikes are located in the left
bank of the lower Licungo River (Nante) and in the left bank of the lower Zambezi river (Luabo).
These are very flat, productive and densely populated areas where thousands of people live and
work under the protection of the dikes. These dikes are old infrastructures built in the 1960s to
1980s. They have been subject to recurrent flooding every one or two years and subsequent
erosions with lack of maintenance. They have at times suffered important breaches, which went
several years with no repair, aggravating exponentially the vulnerability of areas, as was the case
with the Nante dike that was dramatically damaged in the January and February 2015 flooding.
Their top surfaces are used as local roads, and thus lowered when considered obstacles to
crossing, especially with cattle. In addition, water pumping from the river towards the irrigated
fields leads to excavations of the embankments. Aggravations of flood intensities over the last
years indicate that design features are in critical need of review.
Agriculture & Irrigation: Agriculture is a significant potential contributor to rural poverty
reduction. Agricultural improvements offer scope to narrow persistent income disparities between
rural and urban areas and to reduce poverty in regions that benefitted little from the economic
gains of recent years. However, with increased unpredictability and severity, floods and droughts
frequently disrupt agricultural production and livelihoods in Mozambique. With regards to the
latest flooding event, more than 104,430 hectares of crops were lost between January and
February 2015, impacting 102,000 farmer households. Moreover, the irrigation infrastructure in
Mozambique is less developed than in other average Sub-Saharan African countries. As of 2007,
2.7 percent of the country's cultivated area was equipped for irrigation, below the region's
average of 3.5 percent. The equipped irrigation area contributes merely 4.8 percent to the total
agriculture output. Mozambique thus stands as the country with the largest potential area increase
for small-scale projects. To this end, and with the adoption of the National Strategy for
Irrigationin December 2010, the National Institute for Irrigation (INIR) was recently established
under the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA) to adequately cover policy,
strategic and operational issues related to irrigation. It is being equipped with the tools and
capacity to facilitate a revival of the Mozambican irrigation. The Government of Mozambique
(GoM) also adopted regulations governing water user rights, implemented through a network of
regional water resource management centers that issue water user rights and collect water user
fees from producers.
The GoM has identified several priorities to improve the performance of the irrigation subsector
and transform it into an engine of growth for agriculture: (i) enhance the management of irrigation
assets, focusing particularly on cost recovery to finance operation and maintenance; (ii) improve
the legal and regulatory framework on water for agriculture and the efficiency of enforcing the
Land Law to clarify land use rights and enhance land use security to enhance access to irrigation
as well as private investment in the subsector; and (iii) establish linkages and working
relationships between public entities responsible for irrigation (at the central and provincial
levels) and beneficiaries (such as smallholder farmer associations, irrigation associations,
individual farmers, and private enterprises) through Public-Private Partnerships for irrigation
development.
Page 3 of 14


﻿0
*           Drinking Water Supply: The Water and Sanitation Infrastructure Administration (AIAS) is
responsible for water, sanitation and waste water treatment in all secondary towns in
Mozambique. In 2012, about 47 percent of the Mozambican population had access to an
improved water source, and only 17 percent to adequate sanitation. Estimated access to an
improved source of water supply were at 77 percent in urban areas and 29 percent in rural areas as
of 2010. The coverage of drinking water supply in the three affected provinces is relatively lower
when compared to country averages. In addition to their limited availability, drinking water
systems are also highly vulnerable. The main factors contributing to their vulnerability are: (i)
lack of compliance with the protection areas in the surroundings of capture sites; (ii) flood
protection infrastructure below standards; and (iii) the proximity of infrastructures to areas prone
to high runoff or landslides. The water supply systems in urban areas in the affected provinces are
particularly vulnerable to the direct impact of floodwaters as they are usually lying in or near the
riverbeds. The intakes of Mocuba, Molocue and Ile and conduits in Cuamba and Nacala are good
examples as the systems proved indirectly vulnerable to energy outages.
Education: It is estimated that 72 percent of schools in Mozambique are located in high-risk areas
of one or more hazard (cyclone, floods, etc.). Due to inadequate design, poor construction
quality, as well as inappropriate location and orientation, school buildings are highly vulnerable to
the combined effects of flooding and wind hazards. In addition, more than 40 percent of
classrooms are built directly by the communities, using substandard construction techniques and
local materials (such as straw-bale, haystack, timber poles, and raw mud as walls finishing). Half
of these "non-conventional" schools are located in the provinces of Nampula and Zambezia. This
combination of high exposure and vulnerability to natural hazards results in frequent damages and
destruction of schools. In recent years, the number of classrooms destroyed in a single disaster
event has overpassed the number of classrooms built annually by the Ministry of Education and
Human Development (MINEDH). As an example, the 2013 and 2015 floods destroyed or
damaged respectively 695 and 433 conventional classrooms while during those same years the
MINEDH built on average 600 classrooms annually. Under this scenario, the GoM will hardly
manage to cover the deficit of classrooms estimated to be around 40,000.
O
Disaster Risk Management: In light of the recurring disasters affecting the country, the GoM is
currently updating its legal and institutional DRM framework. The new Disaster Management
Law 15/2014 was passed on June 20, 2014 by the Parliament but its full implementation requires
additional regulations by the GoM. In the meantime, the Master Plan for Natural Disaster
Prevention and Mitigation (2006-2014) remains the main operational reference document. It
clearly links disaster prevention, mitigation and recovery with poverty and vulnerability reduction
in an agriculture-based economy. While critical progress has been made in the past decade in
building the disaster preparedness and response capacity of the INGC, supported by a large
decentralized network of DRM committees, the 2015 floods highlighted the need to improve the
dissemination of early warnings to vulnerable communities (last-mile connectivity), to
systematize the mainstreaming of DRM in the recovery phase and to strengthen the coordination,
monitoring and evaluation of recovery and reconstruction interventions.
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to restore the functionality of critical infrastructure in a
Page 4 of 14


﻿0
resilient manner in the disaster-affected provinces; and to improve the Government of
Mozambique's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.
Key Results
(a)    Direct project beneficiaries, including female beneficiaries;
(b)    Number of people protected by rehabilitated dike infrastructure;
(c)    Number of children with access to improved education infrastructure;
(d)    Number of people with access to improved irrigation infrastructure;
(e)    Number of people in urban areas provided with access to improved water sources under
the project; and
(f)    Number of people supported by early warning and response systems.
D. Project Description
The Project addresses a combination of early, medium and long-term reconstruction needs based
on priority sectors as identified in the GoM-World Bank-UN-EU Joint Damage Assessment
report conducted in March 2015. The rehabilitation activities focus on specific high-risk zones to
ensure that the mobilized resources target the rehabilitation of areas with the greatest potential
rewards for the affected populations in a resilient manner. It will thus focus on: (i) the urgent
rehabilitation of dikes in the short-term ahead of the upcoming rainy season in November; (ii) the
rehabilitation of irrigation, drinking water, and education infrastructure in the medium-term to
restore connectivity and preserve previous investments that are currently endangered; and (iii)
technical assistance and analytical support in the areas of safer schools, early warning systems,
recovery framework, and watershed management to build longer-term resilience.
Component Name
Component A - Resilient Infrastructure Rehabilitation
Comments (optional)
The activities to be financed under this component are the resilient rehabilitation or reconstruction
of key: (i) dikes, (ii) irrigation, and (iii) drinking water supply infrastructure in Mozambique's
Licungo River and (iv) education infrastructure, as recommended in the GoM-World Bank-UN-
EU Joint Damage Assessment.
Component Name
Component B - Technical Assistance for Resilient Recovery and Vulnerability Reduction
Comments (optional)
This component would focus on enhancing the capacity to manage risks associated with natural
hazards, and will be complemented by resources from GFDRR in support of Safer Schools, DRM
Legal Framework, Recovery Framework, amongst others. Community engagement and outreach
will also play a significant role under this component, with regards to the rehabilitation of schools
and early warning systems.
Component Name
Component C - Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)
This component will finance Project implementation, monitoring and evaluation costs for
MOPHRH (for DNA), INIR, AIAS and MINEDH.
Page 5 of 14


﻿0
Component Name
Component D - Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC)
Comments (optional)
This component would finance emergency works in case of another disaster event by including a
"zero-dollar" Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). This would help reduce
damage to infrastructure, ensure business continuity, and enable early rehabilitation.
E. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will be implemented in selected flood-affected areas across the three provinces of
Zambezia, Niassa and Nampula. The selection of priority geographic areas of intervention will be
finalized upon project implementation given the emergency nature of the Project. Nonetheless,
current available data indicate that some of the foreseen sub-projects activities will likely be
rehabilitation of basic infrastructure and viable such as dike, irrigation, drinking water supply and
education infrastructure. All water-related rehabilitation works, including dikes, irrigated
schemes, and drinking water supply, will be conducted in the Licungo Watershed. This is part of
the Licungo River, which originates in Mozambique and is not a tributary of an international
waterway. The rehabilitation and reconstruction of classrooms, however, will focus on the
Northern and Central regions across the Zambezia, Niassa and Nampula provinces.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Eden Gabriel Vieira Dava (GSUO 1)
Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GENDR)
II. Implementation
Q        Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Use of Existing Institutional Structures: Implementation arrangements for the proposed Project will
be based on well-tested, existing institutional structures. The Project will be implemented by the
following in line with their respective mandates: (i) MOPHRH through DNA for dikes rehabilitation
and flood risk management; (ii) INIR for irrigation; (iii) AIAS for drinking water supply; and (iv)
MINEDH for safer schools. All these institutions are currently implementing other Bank-financed
projects and specific implementation arrangements will be derived from those in place under the
following projects: (i) WRD Water Resources Development (MOPHRH); (ii) Transforming
Hydrological and Meteorological Services (MOPHRH); (iii) PROIRRI Sustainable Irrigation
Development Project (INIR); (iv) CCCP Cities and Climate Change Project (AIAS); and (v) ESSP
Education Sector Support Program (MINEDH). Project teams in place would be strengthened with
the recruitment of additional technical, financial management and procurement consultants, as
appropriate. DNA has a longstanding technical ability to handle projects with very complex Bank
Safeguards requirements. DNA will therefore take a leading role and coordinate the preparation of
the ESMF, including the consolidation of progress reports. Hence, DNA would strengthen its
technical staff to ensure adequate coordination towards the consolidation of the safeguards
instruments.
Project Steering Committee (PSC): A Project Steering Committee will be established under the
Page 6 of 14


﻿0
leadership of the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) and INGC, with INGC acting as the PSC
Secretariat. It will report to the Technical Committee for Disaster Management (CTGC) to ensure
overall coordination, monitor recovery efforts and provide Project implementation oversight. The
PSC will also oversee the consolidation of implementation progress reports from DNA, INIR, AIAS
and MINEDH every six months. A Project Coordinator will be specifically recruited for this Project
under the PSC in order to manage coordination and the consolidation of reports amongst DNA, INIR,
AIAS and MINEDH.
III. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Emergency Resilient Recovery Project will
OP/BP 4.01                              trigger this policy due to the involvement of civil
works (rehabilitations, construction works) of public
infrastructure in flood-affected areas. Civil works
will possibly generate negative externalities such as:
soil erosion and siltation, loss of trees, pollution to
surface and ground water resources, soil erosion,
dust emissions, solid and wastes.
Components under the Project that would trigger this
safeguard policy are Resilient Infrastructure
Rehabilitation, which involve the rehabilitation and
strengthening of dikes; the rehabilitation of damaged
conventional classrooms and building of "mixed"
classrooms to replace those non-conventional
classrooms destroyed during the event; the
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure; and fixing
the intake of the Mocuba drinking water supply
)                                                  system.
The scope of specific Project activities will need to
be more detailed. An ESMF will be prepared which
will provide the criteria and procedures for screening
Project activities and guide the preparation of site-
specific Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments (ESIAs) and Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESMF will also
assess the institutional capacity of DNA, INIR,
AIAS, and MINEDH, including the already created
implementation arrangements, and provide measures
for capacity building along with an estimate of the
budget needed for the implementation of the ESMF.
The ESMF will also provide a list of activities that
could be financed by the Project and screen out
activities that correspond to Category A projects.
Furthermore, the terms of reference for component
B3 (Licungo Watershed Management study) will
Page 7 of 14


﻿also pay attention to environmental and social
considerations.
The justification for classification of category B is
that most of the Project will focus on medium size
rehabilitation and re-construction projects for dikes,
irrigation schemes, and fixing an intake drinking
water supply system. The anticipated scale of
potential adverse environmental or social impacts on
human populations is site-specific, few if any of
them are irreversible and in most cases, mitigation
measures could be designed to address the impacts.
An ESMP for sub-projects can be used to address the
impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The Project will trigger this policy due to the
sensitivity of riverbanks and the fact that floods
strongly eroded riverbanks, given high speed and
water flow rates, causing loss of vegetation and
dragged eroded soil. The forest gallery that grows
along streams was severely affected, is very
fragmented and is also increasingly anthropic.
The rehabilitating of irrigation infrastructures and
drinking water supply in Mocuba, specially activities
related to the fixing the intake of the water supply
system, which is currently located in the Lugela
River, may affect some already degraded and
sensitive habitats along the riverbanks. The ESMF
(and subsequent ESIAs and ESMPs) will include
provisions for mitigating any possible impacts on
natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            The Project will not interfere with natural forest.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           The Project will support the rehabilitation of
irrigation schemes. This involves investments in the
agriculture sector that will restore production and
will likely resume the use of pesticides. However, the
Project will not finance the procurement of
pesticides. In cases where pesticides are used within
existing production systems, the Project will promote
the use of integrated pest management and the safe
use, storage, and disposal of agro-chemicals. INIR is
already applying an IPMP under PROIRRI Project
that could be reutilized for this Project. The IPMP
was duly prepared, consulted upon and disclosed to
provide guidance on the use of proper use of
pesticides and will be adjusted for the Project and re-
disclosed.
Page 8 of 14


﻿0
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         The policy is triggered due to civil works that are
OP/BP 4.11                               expected to be supported by the Project. The Project
is not expected to affect known cultural resources.
Nevertheless, to ensure due diligence, Chance Finds
approaches will be included in the ESMF (and
subsequent ESMPs) to provide the useful guidance
during project implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the Project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The nature of Project activities may involve
BP 4.12                                  temporary displacement and therefore OP 4.12 is
triggered. Such activities involve low to medium
civil works (i.e. rehabilitation of dikes, resilient
schools, and irrigation schemes, etc.) that may
require land for temporary or permanent usage. The
land acquired for this purpose may lead to loss of
asset, sources of income or means of livelihoods for
some poor households. To ensure proper mitigation
measures are set forth, the Borrower will prepare a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the
preparation of site specific Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) once such details are known. RPF will
provide a framework for management of all potential
negative social impacts, but also streamlining the
positive impacts, as well as mainstreaming any
potential resettlement considerations during the
project implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           The Project does not involve dams.
Projects on International   No           The Project does not involve International
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     Waterways. All water-related rehabilitation is located
in the Licungo River Basin, which originates in
Mozambique.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        The Project is not being implemented in disputed
BP 7.60                                  areas.
IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is considered Category "B", and OP 4.01 is triggered. All works will focus on
rehabilitation and reconstruction of infrastructure damaged during the flooding and storm events,
which are expected to be small and medium scale, generating only minor and localized
environmental impacts that can be easily identified, mitigated and managed. No large-scale,
significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected. Overall, the expected environmental impacts
are mostly associated with the construction phase of the rehabilitation works. Some of the key
environmental impacts that may arise due to the proposed Project could be: i) rehabilitation or
Page 9 of 14


﻿reconstruction activities of dikes, schools, irrigation schemes, and drinking water supply
infrastructure; ii) loss of trees due to an increase in migrant workers using fuel wood, leading to
potential growth in soil erosion; and iii) increase in water logging and salinization around
rehabilitated irrigation schemes. These potential impacts have been fully summarized in the
safeguards section above, hence the triggering of key safeguards policies.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are not likely to be any long-term negative impacts from the proposed activities. Most of the
rehabilitation and reconstruction works will focus on existing facilities. The proposed environment
and social assessment process in the required safeguards instruments built using the existing
safeguards instruments from (i) WRD Water Resources Development (MOPHRH); (ii)
Transforming Hydrological and Meteorological Services (MOPHRH); (iii) PROIRRI Sustainable
Irrigation Development Project (INIR); (iv) CCCP Cities and Climate Change Project (AIAS); and
(v) ESSP Education Sector Support Program (MINEDH), namely, the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Integrated Pest
Management Plan (IPMP) for the Project will ensure that these impacts are identified early enough
in the project planning stage and suitably addressed through suitable mitigation measures as
prescribed in these instruments.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Project support investments in the rehabilitation or reconstruction of existing infrastructure,
thus minimizing potential negative social and environmental impacts and increasing the efficiency
of the investments. In addition, during the design and preparation of specific sub-components,
alternatives to minimize adverse impacts will be further explored. These could include minimum
adjustments in the existing alignments, and/or use of alternative materials to enhance the
sustainability of infrastructure created.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
O
Due to the envisaged potential negative impacts related to construction and/or rehabilitation
works, an Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF), Integrated Pest
Management Plan (IPMP) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared, consulted
upon and disclosed both in-country and in the Bank's Infoshop. The ESMF and the RPF will
provide a framework for management of all potential negative environmental and social impacts,
but also streamlining the positive impacts during as well as mainstreaming any potential
resettlement considerations during the implementation of the Project. The IPMP that was prepared
for the PROIRRI Project will be adjusted as needed and re-disclosed. Furthermore, the terms of
reference for sub-component B3 (Licungo Watershed Management study) will include attention to
environmental and social considerations.
Moreover, in light of possible retroactive financing required for sub-component A. 1, an
environmental and social audit will be required for any works already completed and an/or an
ESIA and ESMP (and RAP when needed) for works yet to begin.
DNA, INIR, AIAS and MINEDH have had many years of experience with Bank projects and are
familiar with Bank safeguards policies, as well as implementation and supervision processes for
emergency projects.
Page 10 of 14


﻿DNA, INIR, AIAS and MINEDH will prepare four separate versions of each safeguards
instrument - namely the ESMF, RPF, and IPMP - and DNA will be in charge of consolidating the
four versions into one document for review, consultation and public disclosure.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders of the Project include the national government, local governments, and citizens
living in the disaster affected/prone provinces. However, given the high profile of the Project and
the number of stakeholder groups, there are certain groups that could potentially feel negatively
affected. All stakeholders have a strong interest in the rehabilitation or reconstruction of
infrastructure that will lead to increased opportunities. Technical reviews will be undertaken to
ensure that critical works and activities related to flood management and rehabilitation or
reconstruction of basic public services do not have a negative impact on local residents. Prior to/
Once the implementation begins, environmental and social safeguards experts will disseminate
relevant information to local communities living in flood prone areas to further increase awareness
of the project.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                30-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             05-Nov-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                //
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?            No
Date of receipt by the Bank                                ///
Date of submission to InfoShop                             ///
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 11 of 14


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
O
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
o        OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[  ] No[X]  NA[    ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 12 of 14


﻿0
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Michel Matera
Title:   Sr Urban Spec.
Contact: Jean Baptiste Migraine
Title:   Disaster Risk Management Speci
Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name:    Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF)
Contact: Adriano Ubisse
Title:   Director of Investment Cooperation
Email:   aubisse@gmail.com
0
Implementing Agencies
Name:    Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Water Resources (MOPHRH)
Contact: Suzana Saranga Laforte
Title:   National Director of Waters
Email:   ssaranga@dnaguas.gov.mz
Name:    Ministry of Education and Human Development (MINEDH)
Contact: Eugenio Maposse
Title:   National Director of Edifications
Email:   eugenio.maposse@mined.gov.mz
Name:    Water and Sanitation Infrastructure Administration (AIAS)
Contact: Olinda de Sousa
Title:   Executive Director
Email:   occsousa@hotmail.com
Name:    National Institute for Irrigation (INIR)
Contact: Paiva Munguambe
Title:   General Director
Email:   kensydoge@yahoo.com
Page 13 of 14


﻿0
VI. For more information contact:
The InfoShop
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 458-4500
Fax: (202) 522-1500
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop
VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michel Matera,Jean Baptiste Migraine
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:  Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)          Date: 20-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/    Name: Sameh Naguib Wahba (PMGR)         Date: 20-Aug-2015
Manager:
Country Director:    Name: Mark R. Lundell (CD)               Date: 31-Aug-2015
P
Page 14 of 14


