The World Bank                                                                            Appraisal ISDS
INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
(P167216)




                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Appraisal Stage


       Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2018| Report No: ISDSA24885




                     Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                            Country Director:    Rodrigo A. Chaves
              Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                 Practice Manager/Manager:       Nina Bhatt
                          Task Team Leader:      Dewi Susanti
              The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
              INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
              (P167216)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND
    P167216
                                                                ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Dewi Susanti                                                Indonesia
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    25-Feb-2019                                                 B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU21                                                       No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              1.35
    Total Financing                                                                                                 1.35
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                   1.35
         Indonesia - Program for Community Empowerment                                                              1.35


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve teacher presence and teacher service performance in pilot
. schools.
       The World Bank                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
       INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
       (P167216)




Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

    A key principle to the intervention design of KIAT Guru Phase 2 (KGP2) is the scalability of the
    mechanism for government-led nation-wide policy implementation. KIAT Guru Phase 1 (KGP1)
    Impact Evaluation (IE), qualitative research, and process monitoring attributed the success of the
    interventions to four key elements: (a) actively engaging external stakeholders in monitoring and
    evaluating teacher performance; (b) increasing parental involvement in learning; (c) keeping
    teacher performance evaluation to a few simple and objective indicators; and (d) paying teacher
    allowance based on objective performance indicator (Gaduh et al, forthcoming). This finding is in
    line with international evidence, including in Indonesia, which show that making teachers
    accountable to different groups of education stakeholders, as opposed to solely being accountable
    to higher level supervisors within the education system, can be effective in improving education
    service delivery (Pradhan et al, 2014; Brinkerhoff & Wetterberg, 2013; Joshi, 2013; Barr et al, 2012;
    Ringold et al, 2012; WB, 2004). In addition, KGP1 is also in line with key recommendations from the
    World Development Report (WDR) 2018, which identifies the use of both pecuniary and
    nonpecuniary incentives to improve teachers’ motivations and align teaching with learning to
    improve student learning outcomes. These findings were also shared in “Growing Smarter,? the
    World Bank EAP Education Flagship Report (WB, 2018).

    While GoI is encouraged by KGP1 results in improving learning outcomes, it seeks to test several
    improvements for government-led scalability through KGP2. These improvements include
    refinements to improve the simplicity, sustainability, and scalability of the KGP1 design. KGP1 was
    implemented by an NGO and involved a long process of Community Empowerment Mechanism
    (CEM) led by NGO facilitators. In addition, the Pay for Performance Mechanism (PPM) created an
    administrative burden for government officials. The section below will present first the proposed
    support for GoI to sustain implementation in KGP1 schools and convert them to Group 2
    intervention, and second the rationale and intervention design for the KGP2.

    The first part of the project will convert all 203 intervention schools to Group 2. Through the KGP1,
    which will end in March 2019, Yayasan BaKTI as the Grant Recipient provides TA for the GoI to revise
    the Ministerial and Head of District regulations, decrees, and technical guidelines so that the
    payment of TKG can be tied with teacher presence. The Grant Recipient also prepares capacity
    development training modules for the schools’ stakeholders, which will be disseminated through
    government-funded socialization events at the district and village levels. Key stakeholders from 68
    KGP1 Group 2 schools will be selected to provide peer-to-peer mentoring and supports for
    neighboring 135 KGP1 Group 1 and Group 3 schools in the process of converting the interventions.
    Key stakeholders from all KGP1 schools will be selected to provide further peer-to-peer mentoring
    and supports for the expansion to 183 new schools.
          The World Bank                                                                                            Appraisal ISDS
          INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
          (P167216)




      International evidence shows that interventions found to be successful at a smaller scale and
      implemented by NGO pilots could not be sustained when later adopted by the government (Bold et
      al, 2018; Banerjee et al, 2017; Banerjee, Glennester & Duflo, 2008; Banerjee & Duflo, 2006; Duflo et
      al, 2012). Two reasons are often put forward. First, government workers face a different set of
      incentives and operational budgets compared to those working for NGO’s. This led to weaker
      implementation arrangements. Second, over a longer period of time, the stakeholders’ behavior
      may change, and they may learn how to work the system, the initial effectiveness of the
      interventions became muted. In the case of KIAT Guru, parents and community members may lose
      interest in the monthly teacher-evaluation meetings or reduce their efforts to support learning at
      home. Teachers could realize, perhaps, that they could use a portion of their allowance to
      incentivize parents and community members to provide good scores. In other words, the
      stakeholders will likely adjust their behaviors over time.

      While little evidence exists on how to scale up successful education pilots, a few related literatures
      offers important lessons. As a pilot expands its scope, it is very important to continue evaluating the
      key mechanism behind the successful intervention and identify and implement more cost-effective
      variations that can be applied by the government staff who will scale the intervention. Initial support
      by external actors will likely be needed, but by design, this should be reduced over time, while
      continuing to monitor for administrative, institutional, and political challenges (Kerwin & Thornton,
      2018; Banerjee et al, 2017; Muralidharan, 2017). KGP1 IE provided proof of concept for the efficacy
      of the intervention. GoI support for the implementation expansion in five districts provides a rare
      opportunity to identify more cost-effective implementation strategies.

      The KGP1 CEM consisted of three phases. The initial phase consisted of eight meetings to produce a
      bottom-up Service Agreement (SA) between teachers and User Committee1 (UC) and a Community
      Score Card (CSC), with five to eight service indicators for teachers to deliver, including teacher
      presence. In the implementation phase, the stakeholders reviewed the implementation of SA and
      the UC evaluated each teacher’s CSC monthly. During evaluation phase, at the end of every
      semester, a village-wide meeting was held to evaluate the SA, CSC, and the membership of the UC. A
      few stakeholders at the village level were trained to administer an adaptive Diagnostic Student
      Learning Assessment (Diagnostic SLA). Results of the Diagnostic SLA were shared during the
      evaluation meeting, to better informed the stakeholders on learning outcomes. For more details on
      the KGP1 CEM, see Annex 2 of Integrated PCN and Project Paper.

      The initial set up phase of KGP1 was led by NGO facilitators, each covered between five to six
      villages. In each village the NGO facilitators trained and provided a Village Cadre with on-the-job
      mentoring. Over time, during implementation phase, the Village Cadres took over the role of the
      NGO facilitators, and by end 2017, the NGO facilitators were discharged. There was clearly a lot of

1
  The UC consists of a minimum of 9 elected members, 3 community or religious leaders, and 6 parents from each grade level. At
least half of the UC members should be female
   The World Bank                                                                               Appraisal ISDS
   INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
   (P167216)



hand-holding in KGP1 that would be difficult to scale up through a government-led expansion.

Therefore, the second part of the KGP2 proposes to test two mechanisms for government-led
implementation expansion to new schools: with and without project facilitators. As KGP2 will focus
the PPM on teacher presence (in line with Group 2 of KGP1), various aspects of KGP1
implementation can be streamlined. The development of SA can be simplified by providing the
stakeholders with a consolidated list of KGP1 indicators that have been analyzed as the most
effective in improving learning outcomes. For each stakeholder, only three indicators will be agreed
upon. To optimize government-led expansion, we propose two CEM mechanisms for KGP2 (Group A
and Group B).

The first mechanism, KGP2 Group A, will initially be implemented by NGO facilitator, and later
handed over to village stakeholders. The NGO facilitator will identify in each village three village
cadres who will be trained along with representatives from village government, school, parents, and
community members. However, the NGO facilitator’s visits to the village will be limited to a
maximum of four visits (instead of an average of 14 visits during the KGP1), with each covering seven
villages (instead of five villages during the KGP1). The NGO facilitators will set up the UC,
membership to which will now include the School Committee to formally link the UC with school
governance. Three Village Cadres (instead of one during KGP1) will be trained to reduce the risk of
personnel turnover and improve sustainability of capacity building and peer-to-peer supports. Like in
KGP1, the UC will be established by a Village Head decree and its institutional arrangement will be
under the village government (instead of with the school governance), who will provide supports
and funding. KGP2 Group A aims at maintaining the key elements of KGP1, particularly on engaging
external stakeholders in monitoring and evaluating teacher performance and increasing parental
involvement in learning. In this mechanism, the Diagnostic SLA that was implemented as part of the
KGP1 will be digitized into the upgraded KIAT App. Similar to KGP1, the Village Cadres will be trained
to administer the Diagnostic SLA and share results with the stakeholders, this time at the beginning
of the meeting where they will select the SA indicators, and also prior to the semi-annual evaluation
meeting.

Meanwhile, KGP2 Group B will not be implemented by an NGO facilitator. Rather, the government
will identify which of the consolidated list of KGP1 SA indicators should be adopted by the school’s
stakeholders. The district government will conduct socialization meetings, inviting school principals
and village heads. The latter will lead socialization at the school level and revitalize the School
Committee (SC), in line with the MoEC Ministerial Regulation 75/ 2016. The selection criteria for the
SC was influenced by KGP1 UC. The role and responsibilities of the KGP2 Revitalized SC will be
expanded to include the roles of the KGP1 UC. Unlike in the KGP1, the KGP2 Revitalized SC will be
established by the School Principal Decree and its institutional arrangement will be under the school
governance. KGP2 Group B therefore represents a more classical top-down government decision
making and implementation approach that can be implemented strictly under the education system.
This intervention group will be the easiest for a national scale-up since it involves an implementation
mechanism that is highly standardized. To enforce engagement of external stakeholders, the results
   The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
   INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
   (P167216)



of monthly evaluation and teacher presence verification will still need to be signed off by the Village
Head and the School Committee Chair, before TKG based on teacher presence can be disbursed.
Unlike KGP1 and KGP2 Group A, the KGP2 Group B will not include the Diagnostic SLA nor the semi-
annual evaluation meeting.

The two proposed KGP2 mechanisms may bring some valid concerns on the scalability of Group A,
and on the effectiveness of Group B. The use of NGO facilitator for KGP2 Group A may bring up a
question of scalability through government-led intervention. Lessons learned from implementation
of Village Law in Indonesia indicates various challenges for government-managed community
development facilitators. To address this issue, some community-driven and participatory
development projects test mechanisms to engage with the private sector and NGOs. A recent
Presidential Regulation 16/ 2018 enables the procurement of NGOs to conduct services for
government works. Should KGP2 Group A find stronger impacts, this regulation allows government-
led expansion with the support of NGO.

On the other hand, the top-down mechanism of Group B may not be effective enough to engage
external stakeholders in improving learning. Group B mirrors a typical pay-for-performance scheme
that have been implemented in other developing countries and found to improve student learning
outcomes (Barrera-Osoria & Raju, 2017; Duflo et al, 2012; Muralidharan, 2012; Muralidharan &
Sundararaman, 2011; Glewwe et al, 2010). However, a purely top-down version may not be as
effective as participatory decision making (Barr et al, 2012; Brinkerhoff & Wetterberg, 2013; Joshi,
2013; WB, 2004). Together, these studies raise an important question on how government-led
education service delivery improvement can be made more participatory and effective. To this end,
and different from previous studies, KGP2 Group B design inserts a required social accountability
mechanism, where Village Head and School Committee Chair sign off on teacher presence records
which became the basis of payment for the teacher’s TKG.

Table. Comparison of CEM for KGP1, KGP2 Group A and KGP2 Group B

                  KGP1 CEM                     KGP2 Group A                KGP2 Group B
                  with Facilitator             CEM with Facilitator in     CEM without
                                               key meetings (*)            Facilitator
 Implemented      NGO facilitators (14         NGO facilitators            School principal
 by               meetings), hand over to      (maximum of 3 meetings),
                  Village Cadre                hand over to 3 Village
                                               Cadres
 Initial Phase    Village socialization        Village socialization*      School socialization
 Meetings
                  Three meetings (children,    -                           -
                  parents, teachers)
   The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
   INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
   (P167216)



                  KGP1 CEM                     KGP2 Group A                KGP2 Group B
                  with Facilitator             CEM with Facilitator in     CEM without
                                               key meetings (*)            Facilitator
                  Service Agreement (bottom    Service Agreement*          Service Agreement
                  up indicators)               (selection of a             (top down)
                                               consolidated list,
                                               informed by Diagnostic
                                               SLA)
                  Setting up of User           Setting up of User          Revitalizing School
                  Committee                    Committee*                  Committee
                  Community score card         -                           -
                  evaluation matrix
 Implementation Monthly meeting to discuss     Monthly meeting to          Monthly meeting to
                SA and evaluate CSC            discuss SA and evaluate     discuss SA and
                                               CSC (with facilitator one   evaluate CSC
                                               time only*)
 Evaluation       Semi-annual meeting          Semi-annual meeting         -
                  (informed by Diagnostic      (informed by Diagnostic
                  SLA)                         SLA)


It should be noted that while all teachers in KGP2 Group A and Group B schools will be affected by
the interventions, the TKG based on presence will only affect TKG-receiving teachers. Technical
workshops will be conducted with MoEC to determine whether the formula for TKG based on
presence need to be changed. During KGP1, the formula was developed based on government
regulation for civil servants (Perka BKN 12/ 2016). Evaluation is based on a full day presence (no
allowance cut), partial presence (cut by up to 1.5% daily), excused leaves (cut by 2%), and unexcused
absences (cut by 5%). Teachers whose presence fall below 85% in a month do not receive their TKG
at all.

The project will support government-led implementation of the two intervention groups in 183
primary schools. In addition, the RETF will upgrade the KIAT App and MIS, with implementation
support from the Bank’s Task Team. The upgrade aims to digitize the m onthly administration of
teachers’ CSC scores and verify teacher presence, with all school-level clearance by principal and
village-level approvals by the Village Head and UC/ SC to be completed through the KIAT App. The
App will include a digitized version of the Diagnostic SLA for the Village Cadres and UCs in Group A to
administer to randomly selected students. The upgraded MIS will compile village-level inputs from
KIAT App and aggregate them at the district level, with web-based and phone-based dashboards for
schools and district and national level governments to monitor progress, process TKG payment
based on verified teacher presence, and analyze trends over time. The App will also provide a
prognosis to inform TKG-recipient teachers of the amount of TKG due to them every month, based
            The World Bank                                                                                   Appraisal ISDS
            INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
            (P167216)



        on their verified attendance. Both the KIAT App and MIS will also integrate the complaint handling
        and redress mechanism, whereby school- and village-level stakeholders can register their complaints
        through the KIAT App and monitor the progress directly, while the MIS system will compile and
        manage the handling of the complaints, with automatic notifications to a higher-level government
        staff if the complaints are not resolved according to agreed procedure.

    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project covers up to the existing 203 primary schools under KGP1 and additional 183 schools as part of
    project expansion. The project will be implemented in the same five districts where KGP1 is currently being
    implemented, i.e. Sintang, Ketapang and Landak in West Kalimantan Province and Manggarai Barat and
    Manggarai Timur in Nusa Tenggara Timur. This project is part of a Technical Assistance (TA) provided to the
    MoEC and five districts. The project will not finance any physical investments, population displacement or
    land acquisition. All TA activities, recommendations and advice provided through the support from this
    project are not expected to generate environmental and social implications.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Vivianti Rambe, Environmental Specialist
    Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana, Environmental Specialist
    Fajar Argo Djati, Social Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

     Safeguard Policies                          Triggered            Explanation

                                                                      The project is categorized as Category B and
                                                                      triggers OP 4.01 due to the triggering of the World
                                                                      Bank OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples.

                                                                      The project will not finance any civil works and
                                                                      instead focuses on providing Technical Assistance
     Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01         Yes
                                                                      (TA) for MoEC on the project scope expansion,
                                                                      training modules and capacity enhancement
                                                                      programs for school stakeholders as well as KIAT
                                                                      app and Management Information System (MIS)
                                                                      upgrades. The TA made available by the project is
                                                                      designed to provide the GoI with evidence-based
      The World Bank                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
      INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
      (P167216)



                                                   inputs on intervention designs, along with the tools
                                                   to assess teacher performance and the
                                                   mechanisms to do so within the school and
                                                   government existing systems.

                                                   Based on the World Bank Interim Guidelines on the
                                                   Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical
                                                   Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects
                                                   and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank January
                                                   2014, this is grouped as Type 1 (Building/
                                                   Strengthening Client Capacity).

                                                   No standalone safeguard assessments nor
                                                   development of safeguards instruments will be
                                                   required under the project. However, some efforts
                                                   to ensure meaningful engagement with parents
                                                   and community representatives, accessible
                                                   information for all including IPs, improvement in
                                                   complaint handling and consultation will be
                                                   undertaken through TORs review and regular
                                                   project reports prior to and during implementation.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No
                                                   The project covers up to the existing 203 primary
                                                   schools under KGP1 and additional 183 schools as
                                                   part of project expansion. The project will be
                                                   implemented in the same five districts where KGP1
                                                   is currently being implemented. Since the target
                                                   schools are often located in very remote areas,
                                                   there is anticipated presence of communities with
                                                   Indigenous Peoples’ criteria as per-OP 4.10. No
                                                   adverse impacts on these communities are
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes
                                                   envisaged since the project is designed to enable
                                                   community involvement in improving student
                                                   learning and fostering teacher accountability. OP
                                                   4.10 is triggered due to understanding that the
                                                   project will be implemented in areas where there is
                                                   presence of Indigenous Peoples.

                                                   The TA team/ project staff at Yayasan BaKTI will
                                                   advocate to the national and district governments
           The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
           INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
           (P167216)



                                                                         such that regulations issued for the project will
                                                                         institute free, prior and informed consultations
                                                                         with stakeholders in project locations. In addition,
                                                                         Yayasan BaKTI will provide technical support and
                                                                         capacity development for district government
                                                                         officials so they can provide oversight to the target
                                                                         schools so meaningful engagement based on free,
                                                                         prior and informed consultations with parents and
                                                                         community representatives can be incorporated
                                                                         prior to and during project implementation.

                                                                         The project’s communication and engagement
                                                                         strategy will develop measures to ensure that
                                                                         information about the project is accessible for all,
                                                                         including Indigenous Peoples who may present
                                                                         different needs with regards to access to
                                                                         information and engagement approaches. The
                                                                         project’s Complaint Handling System (CHS) will also
                                                                         be enhanced to ensure accessibility of the system
                                                                         to these communities.

                                                                         Project progress reports submitted to the WB will
                                                                         provide explanation of how such engagement has
                                                                         been implemented, including constraints and
                                                                         remedial measures that will need to be addressed
                                                                         during project implementation by the target
                                                                         schools with support from the Grant Recipient.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             No
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
 Projects on International Waterways
                                                 No
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      In conjunction with the advice provided by RSA/ ESSA on April 19th, 2018, and reconfirmed on January 23rd, 2019,
      the project scope is assessed as a Category B due to the triggering of OP 4.10. The project will not finance any physical
      investments, nor cause physical displacement and livelihood impacts due to land acquisition and/ or access
       The World Bank                                                                                          Appraisal ISDS
       INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
       (P167216)


  restrictions. All TA activities, recommendations and advice provided through the support from KIAT Guru Phase 2
  (KGP2) are not envisaged to generate environmentally and socially adverse impacts.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Taking stock of the lessons-learnt from KIAT Guru Phase 1 (KGP1), potential social risks are anticipated to be
  associated with: (a) complaints around teacher allowance payments (and deduction due to lack of attendance), (b)
  lack of stakeholders’ buy-in and understanding of the project’s objectives, (c) human resource constraints to ensure
  oversight, and (d) communication gaps between parents (through user committees or school committees) and
  teachers and principals (service providers) in deciding performance scores, which occasionally resulted in disputes.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The KGP2 will simplify information provided on the project's objectives during socialization meetings to be attended
  by representatives of the project's stakeholders, and made the information available in hard copies and through web-
  based knowledge hub for reference. In addition, KGP2 will improve its Management Information System (MIS) along
  with mobile-phone application (App) to provide teachers with prognosis of teacher allowance amount on a monthly
  basis, embed the Complaint Handling System (CHS) and enable two-way communications through the MIS and App.
  During KGP1, disputes on the teacher performance scores provided were caused by indicators that were not clearly
  defined, and as such, resulting in subjective interpretations. During KGP2, the indicators will be defined by the project,
  to ensure that they are measurable, and the stakeholders will be provided with guidelines on how the indicators
  should be evaluated, with the hope of reducing multiple interpretations.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The World Bank’s Safeguards Specialists will review the Project Operation Manuals (POM) and Terms of References
  (TORs) to ensure that proposed procedures and institutional capacities are adequate to address potential
  environmental and social safeguards risks and adhere to the World Bank’s safeguards policies. Prior to project
  implementation, Yayasan BaKTI will provide training to project staff and facilitators on relevant procedures to
  implement applicable World Bank’s safeguards, including free, prior and informed consultations, child protection,
  and Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS) where applicable.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The project will be implemented in the same five districts where KGP1 is currently being implemented, covering the
  existing 203 primary schools under KGP1 and additional 183 schools as part of project expansion. Key stakeholders
  include village governments, principals, teachers, parents, students, and community members surrounding these
  schools. Since the target schools are often located in very remote areas, there is an anticipated presence of
  communities with Indigenous Peoples’ criteria as per-OP 4.10. No adverse impacts on these communities are
  envisaged since the project is designed to enable community involvement in improving student learning and fostering
  teacher accountability. OP 4.10 is triggered due to understanding that the project will be implemented in areas where
  there is presence of Indigenous Peoples.
                            The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
                            INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
                            (P167216)


                      The TA team/ project staff at Yayasan BaKTI will advocate to the national and district governments such that
                      regulations issued for the project will institute free, prior and informed consultations with stakeholders in project
                      locations. In addition, Yayasan BaKTI will provide technical support and capacity development for district government
                      officials so they can provide oversight to the target schools so meaningful engagement based on free, prior and
                      informed consultations with parents and community representatives can be incorporated prior to and during project
                      implementation. The project’s Complaint Handling System (CHS) will also be enhanced to ensure accessibility of the
                      system to these communities.

                      Project progress reports submitted to the WB will provide explanation of how such engagement has been
                      implemented, including constraints and remedial measures that will need to be addressed during project
                      implementation by the target schools with support from the Grant Recipient.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure


         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure


       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                    NA



           IP_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
            INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
            (P167216)



    OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
    Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                     NA
    been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     NA
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   NA
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     NA
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     NA
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     NA
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     NA
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Dewi Susanti
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Javier Luque

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Nina Bhatt                                11-Feb-2019

.
       The World Bank                                                              Appraisal ISDS
       INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY (KIAT Guru) Phase 2
       (P167216)



Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
