          The World Bank
          Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
                   Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Jan-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26489




Dec 03, 2018                                                                                         Page 1 of 12
          The World Bank
          Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)



   I.      BASIC INFORMATION

OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
 A. Basic Program Data

 Country                            Project ID                   Additional Project ID (if any)   Program Name
 Mozambique                         P166437                                                       Mozambique Disaster
                                                                                                  Risk Management and
                                                                                                  Resilience Program
 Region                             Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date             Task Team Leader
 AFRICA                             14-Jan-2019                  19-Mar-2019                      Michel Matera
                                                                                                  Barry Patrick Maher
                                                                                                  Bontje Marie
                                                                                                  Zaengerling
 Financing Instrument               Managing Unit                 Sector                          Theme
 Program-for-Results Financing      GSU13 (9348)                  Other Public
                                                                  Administration(%), Social
                                                                  Protection(%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crisis and Emergencies)?




 COST & FINANCING

 SUMMARY (USD Millions)

 Government program Cost                                                                                       122.27
 Total Operation Cost                                                                                          122.27
        Total Program Cost                                                                                     115.27
        IPF Component                                                                                             7.00
 Total Financing                                                                                               122.27
 Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00



 FINANCING (USD Millions)


Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                80.00

   World Bank Lending                                                                                           80.00




Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                    Page 2 of 12
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)




Total Government Contribution                                                                                         36.27

Total Non-World Bank Group and Non-Client Government Financing                                                          6.00

      Trust Funds                                                                                                       6.00


 Environmental Assessment Category (IPF Component)
 B-Partial Assessment




 B. Program Development Objective(s)

Program Development Objective(s)

The Program Development Objective is to strengthen the Government of Mozambique's program to finance and
prepare for disaster response and to increase the climate resilience of vulnerable education infrastructure in risk-prone
areas.


 C. Program Description

 The proposed operation will support the implementation of key areas of Mozambique’s disaster risk
 management (DRM) program as constituted by its National Disaster Risk Reduction Master Plan 2017-2030. The
 government’s program aims to reduce disaster risk, the loss of human life and critical infrastructures, as well as
 avoid the emergence of new disaster risks by increasing the resilience of people and infrastructure to climate,
 other natural and man-made hazards. To this end, it has five strategic results areas: (i) Improving the
 understanding of risk at all levels; (ii) Strengthening DRM governance and public and private participation in
 disaster risk reduction; (iii) Mainstreaming DRM in public investment and territorial planning, and consolidating
 financial protection against disaster; (iv) Strengthening disaster preparedness, response and recovery; and (v)
 Building partnerships and international cooperation.

 The overall operation will be financed through the Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument complemented by a
 small Investment Project Financing (IPF) component to provide technical assistance needed to achieve the
 desired outcomes under the government’s DRM program. This ISDS only covers the potential safeguards
 implications of the capacity building and technical assistance activities financed under the IPF component. As
 part of the preparation, the World Bank conducted a system assessment of the proposed PforR Program against
 OP/BP 9.00 core principles, including the formulation of measures for inclusion in the overall Program Action
 Plan to enhance environmental and social management and outcomes. The assessment and action plan are
 consolidated in the Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA), which is available on the Bank’s

Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                          Page 3 of 12
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


 website. The ESSA also identified the key areas for capacity and regulatory improvements to be supported under
 the technical assisstance component.

 The boundaries of the proposed PforR Program (US$ 73 million equivalent from the International Development
 Association and US$ 6 million from the Global Risk Financing Facility) are defined in terms of: (i) the Program
 duration/timeframe; and (ii) the results and activities supported. In terms of timeframe, the PforR Program will
 be implemented over a period of five years (2019-2024), supporting the initial phases of the overall government
 program (13 years). In terms of results and activities, the PforR Program will support a subset of results identified
 under strategic objectives two, three, and four of the government program. These have been prioritized with the
 Government of Mozambique based on the most urgent challenges for which they requested support, considering
 readiness for implementation, building on previous World Bank support to DRM and results from recent
 analytical work, and aiming to complement other donor-financed projects in Mozambique. Specifically, the PforR
 instrument will support the government program along the following three results areas:

 •    Results Area 1: Improving Financial Protection against Disasters. This results area will focus on improving
      financial preparedness for disasters, i.e. increasing the availability, predictability, and efficiency of ex-ante
      resources for disaster preparedness and response. This will be achieved through: (i) the operationalization
      of the DMF; (ii) the recurrent capitalization of the DMF and implementation of audit recommendations; and
      (iii) developing the capacity of GoM to enable the placement of sovereign parametric catastrophe insurance
      coverage for cyclones and/or drought with capital or insurance markets. The operationalization of the DMF
      requires, first, the adoption of comprehensive regulations that will govern the operations of the DMF, and
      which the GoM has been developing with technical assistance from the World Bank. Per the regulations of
      the DMF, the Fund can only support immediate disaster preparedness and response activities1. The
      regulations cover financial management and resource access procedures, rules for the execution and
      accounting of funds, external audits, and provision for replenishment of the fund. The Results Area will also
      include the preparation and adoption of a National Disaster Risk Finance Strategy (NDRFS), detailing the
      strategic priorities of the MEF for financing disaster response, and the subsequent placement of sovereign
      parametric catastrophe insurance product by the GoM in accordance with the NDRFS.

 •    Results Area 2: Strengthening Capacity for Disaster Preparedness and Response. This results area will support
      the GoM, particularly the National Institute for Disaster Management (INGC), to improve capacity, systems,
      standards, and procedures for emergency management at the national and local levels, focusing on making
      local DRM committees and early warning systems for flood and cyclone functional in risk-prone communities.
      Results expected to be achieved relate to the number of functioning local DRM committees in hazard-prone
      areas and the strengthening of flood and cyclone early warning systems (especially last mile connectivity).

 •    Results Area 3: Building Climate Resilience of Vulnerable Education Infrastructure. This results area will
      support the Ministry of Education and Human Development (MINEDH) to increase resilience of the school
      infrastructure in cyclone and windstorm-prone areas in Mozambique, which are often damaged, destroyed,
      or rendered temporally inoperable due to adverse hydro-meteorological events. The education sector has
      been prioritized as it is the social sector most affected by disasters in Mozambique and has already piloted
      the use of new climate-resilient approaches to retrofit and rehabilitate vulnerable classrooms.




          1   For the Fund to support other activites in the future, complementary regulations would need to be adopted by the GoM.

Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                                          Page 4 of 12
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


 The Technical Assistance (TA) IPF component (US$ 7 million equivalent IDA) will complement the PforR Program
 by financing specialized technical assistance and targeted capacity building required to support the achievement
 of anticipated results under the PforR Program and support institutional strengthening of the implementing
 agencies and other government institutions that may contribute to disaster risk management.

 Specifically, it will finance highly specialized consulting services to support the following: (i) technical assistance
 to advise MINEDH in the preparation and implementation of their new resilient classroom retrofitting program,
 including on technical aspects, safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation, and to provide training to engineers
 and contractors; (ii) technical assistance to advise INGC in the development and improvement of methodologies,
 regulations/practices, and tools for disaster preparedness and response, including the consideration of
 differentiated needs of vulnerable subgroups such as the elderly, women, single parent households, and people
 with disabilities, and monitoring and evaluation aspects; (iii) technical assistance to advise INGC, the National
 Meteorology Institute (INAM), and the National Directorate of Water Resources Management (DNGRH) on the
 development and implementation of integrated early warning systems; (iv) technical assistance to advise INGC
 on development and use of geospatial tools for disaster preparedness and response; and (v) technical assistance
 to advise INGC and MINEDH on social and environmental management issues and procedures, including
 mainstreaming considerations related to gender-based violence (GBV)/ sexual abuse and exploitation (SAE) in
 emergency response situations (such as temporary evacuation camps), persons with special needs and other
 vulnerable groups, and monitoring and evaluation aspects.

 In addition, the IPF Component will finance: (i) the independent verification agents for results area 2 and 3; (ii)
 key consultants for the Program Management Secretariat, including a Coordinator, a Financial Management
 Specialist, a Procurement Specialist, and an Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialist, who will be
 responsible for the implementation of the IPF TA Component and for providing technical advice and training in
 their respective areas of expertise to INGC and MINEDH staff involved in Program implementation; (iii) the
 preparation of a Scoping Paper to assess the potential social and environmental downstream impacts of the TA
 activities financed under the IPF Component; (iv) the preparation of a Project Implementation Manual (PIM) for
 the IPF Component and a Program Operations Manual (POM) for the whole Program; and (v) domestic and
 international training and experience exchange around risk financing, early warning systems, and school
 retrofitting.


 D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)


 In addition to institutional capacity building, the TA IPF will support the preparation and/or revision of regulations,
 guidelines, strategies, plans, or methodologies that would guide disaster response (e.g. emergency evacuation,
 temporary shelter), disaster preparedness (e.g. community simulation exercises, early warning systems,
 preventive evacuation), and disaster prevention and mitigation (e.g. building regulations) applicable to the whole
 country. Consequently, it is necessary to consider the main physical characteristics of the entire Mozambican
 territory, comprising almost 800,000 square kilometers. Mozambique is divided into two topographical regions:
 To the north of the Zambezi river, a narrow coastline and bordering plateau slope upward into hills and a series of
 rugged highlands punctuated by scattered mountains. South of the Zambezi River, the lowlands are much wider
 with scattered hills and mountains along its borders with South Africa, Swaziland and Zambia. The country is
 drained by several significant rivers, with the Zambezi being the largest and most important.


Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                               Page 5 of 12
          The World Bank
          Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


    Mozambique is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change and ranks third among African countries
    in exposure to risks resulting from climate variability. Major natural disasters have struck the country at least every
    five years. Flooding, tropical cyclones, and droughts are the most frequent cause of disasters in Mozambique, but
    it also faces seismic risk. The frequency and intensity of climate-related shocks have intensified over the past four
    decades and multiple studies predict that climate change will have important implications for the country.

    Most parts of the country are in the subequatorial zone with a rainy tropical climate and dry winter. There are two
    typical seasons: hot and rainy from November to April; and cool and dry from May to October. The annual
    precipitation reaches 1,500mm, with a maximum in January and a minimum in September. Over half of the
    country’s population is vulnerable to climate-related shocks. The Government estimates that 122,000 people are
    affected by flooding every year; the costs of the 2000 floods were estimated at almost US$ 450 million and in 2013
    the sum exceeded US$ 517 million. In the last years, Mozambique has also been facing severe droughts in its
    Southern and Central regions, affecting approximately 1.5 million people and resulting in average annual losses in
    the range of US$ 20 million, compromising agricultural production. Due to the seriousness of the situation, the
    Government activated the institutional red alert in diverse provinces, including Tete, Sofala, Gaza, Inhambane, and
    Maputo.

    With over 2000 km of maritime coast and many coastal cities, sea level rise due to climate change has significant
    implications for Mozambique’s low-lying coastal areas and beyond, including its major direct impacts - inundation
    of low-lying areas, loss of coastal wetlands, increased rates of shoreline erosion, saltwater intrusion, higher water
    tables, and higher extreme water levels, which lead to coastal flooding.

    Extreme flooding events (floods capable of inundating vast areas) are also recurrent in major river deltas, such as
    the Zambezi and the Limpopo river deltas, causing tremendous hardship for floodplain communities —displacing
    people from their homes, destroying food supplies, drowning livestock— but also depositing nutrient-rich
    sediments, flushing accumulated salts, and recharging groundwater supplies that maintain agricultural systems in
    the long-run. Additionally, heavy rains and flooding in rural areas can result in the destruction of the transport
    infrastructure, limiting the access of low-income communities to water, markets, schools, and health centers.

    Around two-thirds of Mozambique’s population live in rural areas, but urbanization has increased in the last years.
    The urban population is expected to more than double in the next 25 years, adding more than 11 million people
    to Mozambique’s cities. The rural population is affected by both droughts and flooding, especially river flooding as
    many settle in floodplains given its higher agricultural potential. Most river flooding events require the temporary
    relocation (evacuation) of these floodplain communities, until the floodwaters receed and basic infrastructure has
    been restored. Seventy percent of the Mozambique population has access to water, but the coverage in some
    provinces, districts, and municipalities are much lower. For example, coverage of water supply in the province of
    Zambezia is only around 42% on average, and only 29% in Lichinga. While the urban population has not been as
    affected by droughts, they also suffer the consequences of recurrent flooding events, especially in coastal cities.
    Most of the urban population resides in informal neighborhoods and peri-urban areas, lacking proper
    infrastructure, sanitation, drainage, and basic services. Flooding events in urban areas can demand temporary
    evacuation of affected people and may result in severe limitations to public services.




.


Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                              Page 6 of 12
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)




 E. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

 Augusto Ferreira Mendonca,Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe,Maria Do Socorro Alves Da Cunha,Mario
 Rizzolio,Erminio Inacio Jocitala




  II.      SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

 SAFEGUARDS

 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?            Explanation (Optional)
                                                                  None of the activities of the TA component are
 Projects on International Waterways
                                            No                    expected to have any impacts on international
 OP/BP 7.50
                                                                  waterways.
                                                                  Activities of the TA component will not be
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No
                                                                  implemented in disputed areas.
                                                                  Some activities supported by the technical
                                                                  assistance (TA), such as advice on strategies,
                                                                  guidelines, and/or regulations, and capacity building
                                                                  to support institutions in carrying out DRM related
                                                                  activities, may have induced impacts over a longer
                                                                  term. A Scoping Paper will be prepared by the client
                                                                  at the beginning of project implementation to fully
                                                                  assess the potential social and environmental
                                                                  downstream impacts of specific TA activities and
                                                                  ensure that adequate considerations will be included
                                                                  in the TORs for the TA activities. The draft TOR for
                                                                  this Scoping Paper was prepared for Appraisal.
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes
                                                                  Technical assistance to MINEDH will include the
                                                                  process and timing of preparing relevant safeguard
                                                                  instruments for school rehabilitation works during
                                                                  program implementation, specifying the
                                                                  requirements for consultation and disclosure of
                                                                  these instruments, and setting forth the institutional
                                                                  arrangements.
                                                                  Proposed EA Category – Based on the assessment of
                                                                  potential impacts (including restrictions to exclude
                                                                  support for activities with significant environmental
                                                                  and social impacts), Category B is proposed for the
                                                                  Project.
 Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                            No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03



Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                      Page 7 of 12
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


                                                             Activities supported under the TA component would
                                                             not involve conversion or degradation of critical or
                                                             other natural habitats. Thus, this policy is not
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               No                triggered. However, the TA Scoping Paper will assess
                                                             potential indirect effects to ensure that any relevant
                                                             aspects of this policy are included in the TOR for the
                                                             TA activities where pertinent.
                                                             This policy is not triggered because the TA
                                                             component is not expected to have negative impacts
                                                             on forest resources. However, the TA Scoping Paper
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                        No
                                                             will contain provisions to incorporate any
                                                             appropriate considerations related to this policy in
                                                             the TOR for the TA activities where pertinent.
                                                             This policy is not triggered because the TA
                                                             component will not support the purchase or
                                                             increased use of pesticides and other agrochemicals
                                                             as defined under the policy. The Project will not
                                                             include any support for forest plantation or other
                                                             agricultural land use that would promote pest
 Pest Management OP 4.09                   No                management. However, the TA Scoping Paper will
                                                             identify any requirements of this policy that need to
                                                             be included in the TOR for the TA activities that
                                                             would provide support to the development of
                                                             regulations, guidelines, etc. for disaster response,
                                                             preparedness, and prevention/mitigation, including
                                                             methods for control of disease vectors.
                                                             This policy is not triggered because the TA
                                                             component will not have negative impacts on
                                                             physical cultural resources. However, the TA Scoping
                                                             Paper will contain provisions to incorporate
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11    No                appropriate considerations related to potential
                                                             downstream interference with physical cultural
                                                             resources in the TOR for TA activities that will advise
                                                             on regulations, guidelines, etc., for disaster
                                                             response, preparedness, and prevention/mitigation.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             No
                                                             The formulation of regulations, guidelines, etc.
                                                             relates to disaster response activities that may
                                                             demand temporary (evacuation) or permanent
                                                             resettlement activities. The advisory support
                                                             provided by the TA Component related to the
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12       Yes
                                                             displacement and relocation aspects of disaster
                                                             response activities will incorporate the principles of
                                                             OP4.12. The TA component will also support the
                                                             preparation of any instruments related to school
                                                             retrofitting or management of evacuation sites


Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                  Page 8 of 12
            The World Bank
            Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


                                                                    prepared during project implementation to ensure
                                                                    that they apply any relevant principles and
                                                                    requirements of OP4.12.
                                                                    The TA component will not support the construction
                                                                    or rehabilitation of dams, nor will it support other
                                                                    investments related to the services of existing dams.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                                                                    However, if any related issues are identified in the
                                                                    TA Scoping Paper, the TOR for the TA activities will
                                                                    include the relevant aspects of this policy.
.


     III.       KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

        1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any
           potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

 The IPF Component of this operation will focus on straight forward institutional capacity building activities, including
 among others: (i) advice to INGC and MINEDH on the implementation of their environmental and social management
 systems, so they are better prepared to identify and manage environmental and social issues, and (ii) support for the
 preparation of instruments for mitigating the main environmental and social risks of the PforR program identified by
 the ESSA. The IPF Component will not finance activities such as the preparation of feasibility studies, technical,
 engineering design studies, and bid documents that may result in the construction of physical infrastructure2. Therefore,
 no potential large scale, significant and/or direct impact is associated with the TA Component of this operation.
 Advice provided under the TA Component on policies, strategies, methodologies, and/or regulations, as well as capacity
 building activities associated with the PforR Program are not expected to cause adverse direct environmental or social
 impacts. The potential impacts are expected to be induced over the long term, demanding the consideration of the
 Environmental Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01) and the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12) in the advice
 provided. In the preparation of the respective TOR, the activities to be supported by the TA will be assessed to identify
 the related environmental and social issues and to include the necessary safeguards considerations, including
 stakeholder engagement, in the TOR of each activity as applicable.
 Moreover, the environmental and social impacts associated to the overall PforR Program to be supported by the IPF TA
 Component are low and/or moderate. The risk of activities to be developed by the client under the PforR Program was
 considered as moderate, mainly due to the resilience building activities (school rehabilitation) and the lack of previous
 experience of INGC with the principles of socio-environmental management of the World Bank. Preparedness and
 response activities are mostly low risk (usually location-specific and temporary impacts), requiring specific measures for
 environmental and social impact management, which can be effective in minimizing and mitigating potential impacts.
 Some recovery and reconstruction actions (not covered by the PforR Program but within the overall scope of action of
 the implementing agencies and the systems being supported) may require larger works, which may cause more
 significant environmental damage. As a precautionary measure, the capacity of the implementing agencies to manage
 these impacts was assessed and an action plan is included in the ESSA and will be implemented as part of the PforR

            2
                Which may or may not be financed by the Bank.



Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                         Page 9 of 12
          The World Bank
          Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


 Program.
 Based on these consierations, Category B is proposed for the Project (TA component).

 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:

    The IPF Component will not finance activities such as feasibility studies, technical, engineering design studies and the
    preparation of bid documents that may result in the construction of physical infrastructure. Consequently, no potential
    indirect and long-term impact due to anticipated future activities is expected. However, advice on the drafting of
    strategies, methodologies, and/ or regulations, as well as capacity building activities associated to the PforR Program,
    may have down-stream impacts, such as induced resettlements and restriction for accessing natural resources. OP 4.01
    and OP 4.12 were triggered to ensure that any studies or advisory services supported by the TA are conducted in
    accordance with the Bank Safeguard Policies.

 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
 Not applicable.

 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 The Government of Mozambique has experience in implementing Bank-financed projects and although most national
 agencies have prior experience with the Bank’s Safeguards Policies, INGC does not and both INGC and MINEDH have
 weak environemental and social management systems. Government agencies, including INGC and MINEDH, are
 commonly under-staffed and lack funds to adequatly handle more complex environmental and social issues. The
 Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) conducted for the PforR found that both implementing agencies,
 INGC and MINEDH, will require support to improve their environmental and social management systems to achieve
 environmental and social objectives against the range of environmental and social impacts that may be associated with
 the overall PforR Program. The ESSA includes a detailed action plan for improving the capacity of both agencies,
 including adjustments in the institutional arrangements, policies, as well as staff training.


 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
 with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The main stakeholders are the governmental agencies related to disaster risk management and building resilience in
Mozambique, including INGC, MINEDH, MITADER and the agencies subordinated to the Ministry of Public Works and
Water Resources. The communities and local branches of the government in the provinces are also relevant stakeholders.
The consultation process on the ESSA was conducted in two provinces prone to natural disasters (Gaza, Zambezia) and in
Maputo to receive the feedback of the local communities and representatives of the local branches of the government.
TA activities will aim to be participatory and include stakeholder engagement in the respective TOR wherever relevant.

.




Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                         Page 10 of 12
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


 B. Disclosure Requirements

 OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   18-Jan-2019
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               29-Jan-2019
   Date of Disclosure by the Bank                                                29-Jan-2019
   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of
   the EA to the Executive Directors
 OPS_RA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   18-Jan-2019
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               29-Jan-2019
   Date of Disclosure by the Bank                                                29-Jan-2019



 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project
 decision meeting)
 OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [✔ ]
OPS_IR_COMP_TABLE_FINAL
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process
                                                                                       Yes [ ]      No [ ]    N/A [✔ ]
 framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                       Yes [ ]      No [ ]    N/A [✔ ]
 Manager review the plan?
 OPS_PDI_COMP_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
   Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank
                                                                                      Yes [✔ ]     No [ ]      N/A [ ]
   for disclosure?
   Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
   form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-               Yes [✔ ]     No [ ]      N/A [ ]
   affected groups and local NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
   Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
   been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard              Yes [✔ ]     No [ ]      N/A [ ]
   policies?
   Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the
                                                                                      Yes [✔ ]     No [ ]      N/A [ ]
   project cost?



Dec 03, 2018                                                                                                    Page 11 of 12
         The World Bank
         Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)



   Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
   monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard        Yes [✔ ]     No [ ]   N/A [ ]
   policies?
   Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
   borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal     Yes [✔ ]     No [ ]   N/A [ ]
   documents?


 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



 APPROVAL


 Signed and Submitted by

                                       Name                                Date
                                       Michel Matera
 Task Team Leader(s):                  Barry Patrick Maher
                                       Bontje Marie Zaengerling
 Environmental Specialist:             Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe

 Social Development Specialist         Maria Do Socorro Alves Da Cunha
                                       Augusto Ferreira Mendonca
 Additional Environmental and/or
                                       Erminio Inacio Jocitala
 Social Development Specialist(s)
                                       Mario Rizzolio


 Approved by

 Safeguards Advisor:                    Nathalie S. Munzberg               29-Jan-2019

 Practice Manager/Manager:              Meskerem Brhane                    29-Jan-2019




Dec 03, 2018                                                                                       Page 12 of 12
