The World Bank                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jun-2018| Report No: ISDSA25093




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Ellen A. Goldstein
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Julia M. Fraser
                            Task Team Leader:      Sunil Kumar Khosla
              The World Bank                                                                          Appraisal ISDS
              Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
    P166413                                                       Myanmar RBF for Off-grid Solar
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Sunil Kumar Khosla                                            Myanmar
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    10-Aug-2018                                                   B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GEE02                                                         No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                       3.45
    Total Financing                                                                                          3.45
    Financing Gap                                                                                            0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                            3.45
         Energy Sector Management Assistance Program                                                         0.45
         Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                              3.00


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
. The objective of the RBF for Off-grid Solar is to help increase access to electricity in Myanmar.
           The World Bank                                                                                                          Appraisal ISDS
           Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)




 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

Component 1: Results-based subsidies to eligible companies/NGOs in order to support sales of solar products ranging
from 1.5 watt peak (Wp) solar lamps up to 50 Wp SHS. There are about 150 Lighting Global certified products in this range.
These products cater for basic needs such as lighting and phone charging (Sustainable Energy for All - SE4All Tier1 access1)
up to the operation of direct current (DC) appliances such as televisions and fans (SE4All Tier 2 access). The activity will
promote more sustainable, private sector driven off-grid solar market development. It will address high initial market
development costs faced by the private sector in Myanmar, contributing to supply chain development and provision of
quality sales and services. As RBF/output-based aid (OBA) solar energy programs have demonstrated, potential customers
would benefit from increasing market competition, which is expected to result in a larger offer of quality products at
competitive price.

Product quality assurance: The RBF grant will promote Lighting Global certified products that are delivered with 1-3 year
warranty requirements depending on the product and after sales service. The Lighting Global testing procedure for small
solar systems up to 10 Wp has become an international standard IEC-TS 62257-9-5, while the testing procedure for SHS
kits up to 350 Wp is planned to be formalized as IEC standard in 20182. Companies can either select one of currently
certified products or submit their untested products for certification. IFC Lighting Myanmar supports local companies that
seek Lighting Global certification for their products.

RBF Subsidy payment. The RBF subsidy will be 100% reimbursed to solar companies/NGOs based on the verification of
sales by an independent verification agent on a sample basis. The verification process will combine review of import
documentation submitted by the supplier to DRD with calls and field visits of customers. In addition to the verification of
sales, information on the beneficiary household (size, gender, ethnicity), consumer satisfaction (product and service
received), after sales service (spare parts and warranty implementation), and use (appliances) will be collected. The
information will inform the output monitoring as well as the annual review of the RBF incentive mechanism.

Funding Structure and Subsidy Levels. Companies entering the rural solar market in Myanmar with quality products and
services are facing the challenge of high market risks and market entry costs. Risks include uncertainty of market uptake
caused by low household willingness to pay due to the competition of cheap low-quality products that have largely
penetrated the market and expansion of various rural electrification programs. Market entry costs include marketing,
employment and training of staff, rent for office and warehouse space, import and transport logistics, and facilitation of
consumer financing and post-sale service. Company’s income consists of sales revenues which are usually low and difficult
to predict in the pilot phase. High initial investment is required until increased sales eventually pay off. Depending on
confidence in the market potential, equity investors will accept higher risks to quickly scale-up the market or require a
slower approach, expecting first results before decisions on further market expansion are taken. The RBF incentive aims
to accelerate market uptake by partially compensating companies for risk taking and high marginal retail costs incurred
by entering new markets.

Competition and economies of scale are expected to result in more affordable price for end users. Products that are
eligible for RBF incentives cover a wide range of service and cost level. Larger systems (within the supported range under
the RBF pilot) are offered with consumer financing - either in cooperation with MFIs or as a credit extended by solar
companies themselves, as PAYG, making these systems and better service affordable to more customers. Lowest-income


1 ESMAP Multi-tier Framework for Measuring Energy Access. https://www.esmap.org/node/55526
2 Product testing can be conducted in one of the six registered laboratories in US, China, India, Hong Kong, Kenya, and Germany and requires about
3-5 month time at cost of USD 5,000 to 7,000.
         The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
         Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)



households will have the choice of entry level quality solar products starting at US$25 up to larger systems paid on monthly
rates of US$3 to US$13.33 over one to two years.

The RBF incentive is designed as cash payment to reward risk taking and reduce market entry costs for first mover
companies. The subsidy calculation is based on lumen-hours per day provided by the system. Similar subsidy calculation
methodology was adopted by GiZ Energizing Development/EnDev in other countries. The methodology has several
benefits:

                (a) It provides good proxy for the amount of energy service provided by the system (even considering
                    that some energy will go to non-lighting services like mobile phone charging).
                (b) It provides a transparent metric that can be easily compared across systems of different sizes.
                (c) It is readily available on the Lighting Global testing specification sheet for tested products, and
                    therefore would not require any additional system testing. All Lighting Global products have published
                    specification sheets, meaning that any new product that gets tested can be easily added to the RBF
                    incentive list.

The subsidy calculation methodology will be presented in the Operational Manual and will be subject to annual review.
The annual review of the RBF subsidy level will be conducted by DRD considering market uptake in Myanmar, newly
Lighting Global certified products, and changes in FOB prices. The Lighting Global products are clustered in three service
level categories based on their key performance characteristics: (i) one light point with phone charging, (ii) multiple light
points with phone charging, and (iii) 4 and more light points with phone charging and optional operation of a TV.

Component 2: Implementation support to DRD. Key activities include overall management and promotion of the RBF Off-
grid Solar, compliance with RBF procedures, monitoring and verification of results, fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the
grant.

Customer awareness campaign is supported by IFC as part of Lighting Myanmar initiative. IFC procured a marketing firm
that promotes the benefits of quality-verified solar products and in particular Lighting Global certified products available
in Myanmar. The marketing firm will also disseminate information on the RBF pilot.
.

 4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
    KNOWN)
 Based on the nature of the technology, the Lighting Global certified products supported under the proposed
 grant have very small footprint and are widely dispersed. The proposed RBF proposed grant will initially
 support the ongoing IFC-led Lighting Myanmar activities in central Myanmar as envisaged at NEP project
 design. In the longer term, the scope of the project remains national, demand driven, where households are
 willing to buy Lighting Global certified solar products. The proposed RBF will be implemented alongside and
 by the same implementation agency as the ongoing National Electrification Project (NEP), which has an ESMF
 approved by the Bank. However, NEP has revised its ESMF to ensure that it is more relevant and tailored to
 NEP broadly as well as to the RBF grant activities. The revised ESMF will be applicable to the RBF grant
 activities. The revised ESMF includes RBF activities in the typology of sub-projects covered, with
 corresponding brief ESMPs/ECOPs added (e.g. encouraging appropriate disposal). An Action Plan to address
 NEP safeguards policies issues has been articulated as a part of the NEP mid-term review. The key elements
 include (i) revision of ESMF by the client with support provided by GIZ, (ii) upstream E&S support by GIZ, (iii)
        The World Bank                                                                                  Appraisal ISDS
        Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)



recruitment of the minimum number of local safeguards consultants with a view to add additional
consultants as capacity deficit becomes clearer; (iv) continued training of implementing agencies staff.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Martin Fodor, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler, Social Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered          Explanation

                                                               The RBF grant supports the supply of small solar
                                                               products of up to 50Wp capacity, with minimal
                                                               environmental impact. Considering this activity as
                                                               part of NEP broader suite of interventions and the
                                                               country-specific social risks associated with social
                                                               inclusion, the proposed project is treated as EA
                                                               category B as overall NEP project. The NEP's revised
                                                               Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                               (ESMF) will be applied. The revised ESMF has been
                                                               revised by the client with support provided by GiZ
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes                and disclosed on July 17, 2018. The document is
                                                               subject to ongoing public consultations.

                                                               As a part of the revised ESMF, the proposed RBF
                                                               grant for Off-grid Solar is included in the typology
                                                               of sub-projects with its own brief ECOPs added.
                                                               Battery based products, disposal / recycling will be
                                                               considered as a part of NEP’s solar program
                                                               sustainability
                                                               plan agreed during the Mid-term Review (April 24-
                                                               May 25, 2018).
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                No                 Impacts on natural habitats are not expected.
                                                               The grant will not affect any forestry activities nor
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No
                                                               require triggering of OP4.36.
                                                               The pest management policy is not triggered under
 Pest Management OP 4.09                    No
                                                               the proposed RBF off-grid solar grant.
                                                               Given the scope of the proposed grant, OP/BP 4.11
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11     No
                                                               is not triggered.
                                                               The project triggers OP 4.10 because ethnic
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              Yes                minorities that fit the criteria of indigenous people
                                                               are present in project areas. As part
       The World Bank                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
       Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)



                                                   of the ESMF, the Indigenous People Planning
                                                   Framework is also revised to ensure that the
                                                   project obtains and documents broad community
                                                   support in areas with ethnic minorities, following
                                                   free,
                                                   prior and informed consultation. To date,
                                                   systematic application and documentation of the
                                                   policy has been weak, but the revised ESMF and
                                                   increased safeguards staffing should improve
                                                   application.

                                                   The RBF will not specifically target areas with ethnic
                                                   minorities. Originally, NEP was designed to serve
                                                   more peripheral and ethnic areas in Myanmar with
                                                   high-subsidy solar systems, while the RBF grant
                                                   would provide lower-subsidy solar systems in
                                                   central Myanmar to jump-start the private market
                                                   in these more accessible areas. During NEP
                                                   implementation so far however, DRD has also
                                                   included the central Myanmar areas for solar home
                                                   systems, with higher subsidy support than planned.
                                                   However, the next round of high subsidy support
                                                   for solar home systems will be concentrated in
                                                   ethnic areas. As higher-subsidy support shifts to
                                                   peripheral ethnic areas, the lower subsidy RBF
                                                   support will target central Myanmar to stimulate
                                                   the private sector in these areas.
                                                   The grant does not trigger OP 4.12 on Involuntary
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     No        Resettlement since it supports small solar systems
                                                   of up to 50 Wp that will not have physical footprint.
                                                   The project intervention is not expected to require
                                                   the construction of dams or impoundment
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No        structures, nor is it expected that it could cause
                                                   impacts to existing structures as governed by this
                                                   policy.
                                                   The project intervention is in nature and scale not
                                                   expected to cause any drainage or discharges to
 Projects on International Waterways               surface waters, nor entail any
                                         No
 OP/BP 7.50                                        significant usage of surface water for cooling or
                                                   other purposes, that would affect international
                                                   waterways.
                                                   The project intervention is not in disputed areas
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No
                                                   and will be wholly within the borders of Myanmar.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
          The World Bank                                                                                           Appraisal ISDS
          Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)




A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     The RBF grant supports the supply of small solar products of up to 50Wp capacity, with minimal environmental
     impact. Considering this activity as part of NEP broader suite of interventions and the country-specific social risks
     associated with social inclusion, the proposed project is treated as EA category B as overall NEP project.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

     No long term or indirect impacts are foreseen.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
     Site selection in the project is flexible and ESMF provides guidance on choosing alternative sites if the initial siting is
     in an environmentally sensitive area or requires land acquisition.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
     capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     Department for Rural Development (DRD) is responsible for monitoring the safeguards’ compliance for the proposed
     grant, alongside the NEP safeguards implementation. DRD hired one national environmental and social safeguards
     specialist in March 2018. In terms of staff, four DRD staff work part time on safeguards as well as the technical reviews
     for mini-grids, and two staff work on communications and grievance redress. Moreover, GiZ has engaged an
     international consultant to support the client with the ESMF's revision. DRD has consultants with environmental and
     social safeguards experience in place for the first time, and the Bank thinks that environmental and social safeguards
     performance can improve to a satisfactory level once the revised ESMF is implemented, and recently prepared
     safeguards workplan starts to be implemented in the next six months.

     The World Bank has provided training and capacity building activities to DRD, including: in-mission training sessions
     to assigned staff on screening using the ESMF screening form (May 2017), two day training on environmental and
     social safeguards to NEP staff (June 2017), two day training on grievance redress and village electrification guidelines
     to NEP Union level staff (September 2017), two day training on grievance redress and village electrification guidelines
     to NEP township engineers (November 2017), two day training on environmental and social safeguards to NEP staff
     (April 2018).


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
     an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     The revised NEP ESMF was disclosed and the document is subject to ongoing consultations for a month. For RBF grant,
     the stakeholders include households that are willing to purchase Lighting Global Certified products and local
     companies and NGOs that provide such products.Since the RBF grant activities will complement IFC-led Lighting
     Myanmar activities, IFC's stakeholder engagement mechanisms will also be used throughout project implementation.
                            The World Bank                                                                                  Appraisal ISDS
                            Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)



                      A customer awareness campaign is supported by IFC as part of Lighting Myanmar initiative. A firm has been hired by
                      IFC to promote the benefits of quality-verified solar products and in particular Lighting Global certified products
                      available in Myanmar. The marketing firm will also disseminate information on the RBF activities.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Date of submission for disclosure
       02-Jul-2018                                                            17-Jul-2018
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
            Myanmar                                                              17-Jul-2018
            Comments




INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     Date of submission for disclosure
02-Jul-2018                                                                     17-Jul-2018
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
            Myanmar                                                              17-Jul-2018
            Comments




       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL
         The World Bank                                                                     Appraisal ISDS
         Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)



EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                      Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   NA



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                      Yes
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                      Yes
 review the plan?

 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                      NA
 approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                      No
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups       No
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                      Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                      Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                      Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                      Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
           The World Bank                                                            Appraisal ISDS
           Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar (P166413)




III. APPROVALS


                                         Sunil Kumar Khosla
    Task Team Leader(s)                  Raluca Georgiana Golumbeanu
                                         William Onahan Gallery

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager             Julia M. Fraser               06-Aug-2018

.
