The World Bank                                                                             Appraisal ISDS
Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS (P166648)




                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                     Appraisal Stage


        Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jun-2018| Report No: ISDSA25001




                      Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                             Country Director:    Elisabeth Huybens
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst
                           Task Team Leader:      Prashant Singh
              The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
              Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS (P166648)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                 Project Name
    P166648                                                    Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS
    Task Team Leader(s)                                        Country
    Prashant Singh                                             Central Africa
    Approval Date                                              Environmental Category
    29-Jun-2018                                                B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                              Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU13                                                      No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              1.27
    Total Financing                                                                                                 1.27
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                   1.27
         Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                                        1.27


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The development objective is to strengthen DRM coordination, planning and policy advisory, and technical capacity of the
  ECCAS and its member states. This would be achieved through regional collaboration, knowledge dissemination and
. capacity development of ECCAS and its member states.
         The World Bank                                                                                      Appraisal ISDS
         Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS (P166648)



 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

1. 1. Within the Result Area 2, the ECCAS project will be implemented through Bank executed and Recipient executed
   implementation. It will be implemented in two phases, the first phase is from the effectiveness of this Grant till
   December 31, 2019 and the second phase will be from 1st January 2019 to 31 December 2019. This Recipient-Executed
   grant complements an existing Bank-Executed project (P154341). The Bank-Executed project has the same
   components as the Recipient-Executed but implements different complementary activities under the same program.
   The total budget available for ECCAS activities is US$ 5 million among which US$ 2,205,000 has been identified for
   Recipient Execution at this stage. The current grant is proposed as the Phase I of the recipient-executed activities,
   totaling $1.265 million. This Project Paper presents the comprehensive program outlook of proposed components
   comprising both Bank and Recipient execution for the sake of maintaining the overall design and objectives of the
   project which is implementing through concomitant operation of Bank and Recipient executed funds. However, the
   results framework focuses on the specific results that will be monitored and measured as part of the performance of
   this specific grant.
2. The following describes the five proposed components of the project with corresponding budget and the respective
   implementation as Recipient (including phase 1 for the present project) and Bank executed activities.
3. Component 1 - Regional Hazards/vulnerability identification and Risk mapping (RE US$200,000 with no allocation in
   phase 1; BE US$620,000). This component will first provide ECCAS with a regional hazards/vulnerability identification
   and risks mapping with a focus on major trans-boundary hazards. A geoportal “Water and Disaster risks? combining
   the ECCAS Water Information System and the regional risk information database will be developed as well as a regional
   Atlas. A pilot project will be further developed to address trans-boundary flood risks, including EWS and a Contingency
   Planning simulation.
   a. Within the specific project phase 1 described in this project paper, no activities are foreseen under this
        component.
   b. Intermediate Result Indicators under component 1 are:
        - A Database is developed and uploaded, and geo portal is operational, and atlas published
        - ECCAS Expert is trained on Geoportal and GIS

4. Component 2 - Capacity Building for Disaster Risk Reduction/Climate Change Adaptation (DRR/CCA) (RE US$580,000
   including phase 1: US$430,000; BE US$960,000): this component will mainly provide support to ECCAS in (i) reinforcing
   member states capacity building and institutional strengthening ensuring that member states capacity on DRM/CCA
   is enhanced and awareness is raised to improving DRM measures implementation, (ii) building regional practice
   research and capacity building collaboration with Academic/Technical centers of excellence, including internships for
   students, (iii) creating a DRM/CCA website page to strengthen communication on DRR on the ECCAS, develop
   communication tools, and (iv) supporting Gender mainstreaming of ECCAS Gender Action Plan in the DRR/CCA plan of
   Action.
        a. Activities under phase 1 of this RE grant will focus on (1) reinforcing and building capacities on DRM/CCA in
            ECCAS member states by providing internships in ECCAS Secretariat for students at master level; (2)
            supporting Member states in capacity building and institutional strengthening; (3) supporting mainstreaming
            of Gender and other non-state consideration (vulnerable groups, youth, disabled and elderly) in DRR
        b. Intermediate Result Indicators under component 2 are:
            - At least 3 students have done internships within ECCAS HQ
            - At least 8 countries have received support on office equipment and human capacity improvement and
                training for users
            - Training modules on DRM and CCA are developed and conducted for ECCAS Sct and MS
            - Communication tools and developed and disseminated, Social media communication campaigns are
          The World Bank                                                                                     Appraisal ISDS
          Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS (P166648)



                 developed
             -   A web site page for DRM/CCA is developed

5. Component 3 - Strengthening of Policy Dialogue and legislation on DRM (RE US$425,000 including phase
   1:US$265,000; BE US$650,000): this component will include the review of national and regional policies and
   legislations on disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation to promote regional harmonization and
   coordination at regional level. Workshops and seminars on sensitization of ECCAS Parliamentary Network for Disaster
   Resilience (REPARC) will be organized to promote DRR in National legislations; an ECCAS Hydromet Forum will be
   organized; and Central Africa DRR Platform events will also be organized under this component.
            a. Activities under phase 1 of this RE grant will focus on (1) supporting ECCAS DRM Unit participation to
                UNFCCC CoP-24 and 25, including presenting their DRM/CCA strategy and liaising with their member
                states; (2) providing support to the organization of the 7th and 8th Central Africa DRR Platform; (3)
                recruiting a Consultant firm to develop and align national strategies and plan of actions to Sendai
                Framework for DRR and review of national/regional policies and legislations on DRR/CCA; and (4)
                strengthening the ECCAS Parliamentary Network for Disaster Resilience (REPARC) and organizing a
                sensitization seminar/workshop on DRR/CCA International and regional frameworks and stakes.
            b. Intermediate Result Indicators under component 3 are:
            - An action plan for modernization of hydromet services at regional and national levels is developed
            - At least 4 countries have their strategies drafted or aligned to SF
            - REPARC is reinforced and DRM advocacy is made in MS national parliaments

6. Component 4 - Enhance Regional Capacity for Preparedness, Response & Post Disaster Assessment and
   Recovery/Reconstruction Planning (RE US$200,000 including phase 1: US$100,000; BE US$563,000): this component
   will consist of enhancing ECCAS coordination capacities thru training national sectoral experts on assessment, planning
   and coordination of post-disaster needs and recovery framework, develop national contingency plans and undertake
   a study on ECCAS Regional and Member States' hydromet and flood/drought Early warning systems and services.
        a. Activities under phase 1 of this RE grant will focus on training of national sectoral experts on post-disaster
            assessment, planning and coordination of needs and recovery framework.
        b. Intermediate Result Indicators under component 4 are:
            - At least 4 PDNA/DRF trainings have been undertaken
            - A detailed Regional Technical Report is produced on HydroMet EWS institutions and capacities and a clear
                 set of recommendations for strengthening is provided


7. Component 5 - Implementation technical and coordination capacity at the ECCAS Secretariat is strengthened (RE
   US$802,000 including phase 1: US$470,000): this component will include the general administrative costs of the
   Project Implementation Unit, staffing and equipment, including a Senior DRM Specialist, an Administrative and
   Financial Specialist, a Procurement Specialist, an Accountant, a DRM Junior expert and a Monitoring and Evaluation
   Specialist.
       a. This component will be entirely implemented under the RE grant for the PIU as describe above and will include
            training activities in particular for administrative, financial and a procurement Specialists.
       b. Intermediate Result Indicators under component 5 are:
            - The PIU is set up and operational

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
        The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
        Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS (P166648)



   KNOWN)
The project will be implemented at and through the secretariat of the ECCAS based in Libreville, Gabon.
However, the eleven ECCAS member states are beneficiaries, covering a population of around 181 million
inhabitants. ECCAS covers an area of 6,667,421 sq. km (around 22% of Africa) and the dominant land cover is
tropical rainforest. The key regional environmental challenges are land degradation, drought, climate change
integration into sectoral policies, desertification and high-water demand pressure for multiple uses. Key
regional social challenges relate to inclusion of the forest dependent communities in decision-making who
live near, occupy or rely these forests for their material, social and physical well-being.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Alexandra C. Bezeredi, Social Safeguards Specialist
Cyrille Valence Ngouana Kengne, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered             Explanation

                                                                 The project will not include any civil works. In
                                                                 addition, the pilot project that will be developed to
                                                                 transboundary flood risks, including EWS and a
                                                                 Contingency Planning simulation will no entail civil
                                                                 works. Studies on ECCAS Regional and Member
                                                                 States' hydromet and flood/drought Early warning
                                                                 systems and services, will not be used for
                                                                 implementing any physical works. The TA lead to
                                                                 the completion of technical or engineering designs
                                                                 or other outputs in preparation for the construction
                                                                 of physical infrastructure. However, the TA will
                                                                 undertake a review of national policies, strategies
                                                                 and plan of actions and legislations on DRR/CCA to
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01       Yes
                                                                 align with Sendai Framework. This will be an
                                                                 opportunity to incorporate environmental and
                                                                 social considerations into the proposed review of
                                                                 national policies, strategies and plan of actions and
                                                                 legislations on DRR/CCA to align them with Sendai
                                                                 Framework. Because of the above explanation.
                                                                 Reviewed policies, strategies and legislations are
                                                                 likely to have environmental and social impacts
                                                                 when implemented through future DRR/CCA
                                                                 programs or projects. The OP/BP 4.01 is then
                                                                 triggered. The Project is classified as Category is B.
                                                                 However, the project will follow the “Interim
                                                                 Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies
       The World Bank                                                                          Appraisal ISDS
       Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS (P166648)



                                                       to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-
                                                       Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by
                                                       the Bank, dated January 2014. Particularly on Bank
                                                       financed activities that may fall under the Interim
                                                       Guidelines' Type 1 (Strengthening client capacity)
                                                       and Type 2 (Assisting in formulation of policies,
                                                       programs, plans, strategies or legal frameworks
                                                       etc.), respectively. on May 15, 2018, the Bank and
                                                       the Borrower reached an agreement/agreed ToR
                                                       on the need and process to incorporate
                                                       environmental and social considerations into the
                                                       review of national policies, strategies and plan of
                                                       actions and legislations on DRR/CCA to align them
                                                       with Sendai Framework.
                                                       Review of national policies, strategies and plan of
                                                       actions and legislations on DRR/CCA to align with
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No
                                                       Sendai Framework, will not lead to any detrimental
                                                       effects on protected areas.
                                                       Review of national policies, strategies and plan of
                                                       actions and legislations on DRR/CCA to align with
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No           Sendai Framework, will not be used to promote
                                                       commercial forest management activities and
                                                       reforestation activities
 Pest Management OP 4.09                  No           Not applicable.
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No           Not applicable.
                                                       The project will not include any activities in areas
                                                       where Indigenous Peoples are present, per the
                                                       requirements of OP 4.10. The Review of national
                                                       policies, strategies and plan of actions and
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No
                                                       legislations on DRR/CCA to align with Sendai
                                                       Framework, will not lead to any adverse impacts on
                                                       Indigenous Peoples and traditional local
                                                       communities.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No           Not applicable
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No           Not applicable
                                                       Although the project will contribute to address
 Projects on International Waterways                   regional DRM challenges, it will not involve any
                                          No
 OP/BP 7.50                                            works or studies, which impact international
                                                       waterways in the sense of OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No           Not applicable
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
               The World Bank                                                                                      Appraisal ISDS
               Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS (P166648)




     A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


     1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
          potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
          The project will not include any civil works. However, the TA will undertake a review of national policies, strategies
          and plan of actions and legislations on DRR/CCA to align with Sendai Framework. Reviewed policies, strategies and
          plan of actions are likely to have environmental and social impacts when implemented through future interventions.



     2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
          TA will have more diffuse and induced potential positive indirect impacts, often playing out over a longer term if the
          TA effectively incorporates environmental and social considerations into the proposed review of national policies,
          strategies and plan of actions and legislations on DRR/CCA to align them with Sendai Framework.


     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
          The OP/BP 4.01 was triggered. The Project is classified as Category is B. The project follows the “Interim Guidelines
          on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust
          Funds Administered by the Bank, dated January 2014. To mitigate the above mentioned potential impacts, the
          Borrower and the Bank reached on May 15, 2018 an agreement (agreed ToR) on the need and process to incorporate
          environmental and social considerations into the review of national policies, strategies and plan of actions and
          legislations on DRR/CCA to align them with Sendai Framework.


     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
          capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
          ECCAS adopted in 2017 a General Policy on environment and natural resources management. The fight against
          desertification, drought, land degradation, and climate change are imbedded in this Policy. In 2009, three experts
          were hired: (i) Environmental economics and value of biodiversity expert; (ii) Forest Economic and sustainable
          management of forests expert; (iii) fisheries resources and marine ecosystems expert.The environmental expert is no
          longer in service.The Environmental economics and Biodiversity experts will oversee monitoring and managing
          environmental issues, including safeguards compliance. ECCAS has implemented a Bank financed project but the DRM
          Unit has no experience of Bank financed projects. ECCAS’s capacity to address and manage environmental and social
          safeguard related issues remains limited. To bridge this gap, the Project will establish a Project Implementation Unit
          (PIU) to support implementation of the Project, and will strengthen the capacity of ECCAS environmental economic
          and natural management experts to take care of safeguards and ecosystem services during project implementation.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
          an emphasis on potentially affected people.



DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
         The World Bank                                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
         Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS (P166648)



ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure
15-May-2018                                                   15-May-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                   NA



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     No
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                      No
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
           The World Bank                                                           Appraisal ISDS
           Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS (P166648)




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                   Prashant Singh


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager              Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst   18-Jun-2018

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
