          COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED
                     SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)
                                             Appraisal Stage
.




                                                                            Report No.: PIDISDSA23767
Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Sep-2018
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                        Chile                    Project ID:               P160277
                                                             Parent Project ID (if
                                                             any):
    Project Name:                   Chile REDD+ Emissions Reductions Program (P160277)
    Region:                         LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
    Estimated Appraisal Date:       30-May-2018              Estimated Board Date: 15-Jan-2020
    Practice Area (Lead):           Environment &            Financing Instrument:
                                    Natural Resources
    Borrower(s)                     Agencia Chilena de Cooperacion Internacional para el Desarrollo
                                    (AGCID)
    Implementing Agency             Corporacion Nacional Forestal (CONAF)
    Financing (in USD Million)
      Financing Source                                                                            Amount
    Carbon Fund                                                                                      26.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                     0.00
    Total Project Cost                                                                               26.00
    Environmental Category:         B-Partial Assessment
    Appraisal Review Decision
    (from Decision Note):
    Other Decision:
    Is this a Repeater project?     No
.




.




B. Introduction and Context
    Country Context
    Chile is a high-income country with one of the most politically stable systems in Latin America, strong
    institutions and a solid record of economic growth during the last two and a half decades. The first
    South American country to join the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
    (OECD), Chile is one to the fastest growing Latin American economies.
Chile relies heavily on extracting its natural resource base for employment and exports. The country
has a wide range of ecological zones; including expansive arid desert, remote Pacific islands, a
Mediterranean ecosystem, high-altitude grasslands and wetlands, and temperate rainforests in the
south, among others. This diverse landscape contributes to Chile?s rich biodiversity, natural beauty
and highly favorable environmental conditions for its successful resource-based industries, including
mining, forestry, fisheries, and agriculture.

Despite considerable economic progress, inequality is still a challenge in Chile, with high levels of
poverty still present in the country?s rural areas where subsistence livelihoods depend highly on
natural resources. In Chile, at 22.1 percent, the rural poverty rate is significantly higher than the urban
poverty rate (10.2 percent), making forested areas even more central to the poverty agenda. In
addition, the incidence of poverty is especially high among Indigenous Peoples, women, and youth.
One out of four indigenous individuals live in rural areas and these Indigenous Peoples show
substantially higher poverty rates (extreme poverty rates are two times greater among Indigenous
Peoples than among the general population: 6.6 percent vs 3.2 percent).

Managing water resources, natural capital and social sustainability are the key challenges facing the
government in the effort to sustain the gains in poverty reduction and to accelerate shared prosperity
especially into rural areas and among vulnerable communities. Rapid economic growth has resulted in
pressures on natural resources, particularly in relation to water resources management, degradation of
soil and native vegetation resources, fish stock depletion, biodiversity conservation and air pollution.
These environmental challenges disproportionally affect the poor and vulnerable, as they tend to
depend more on natural resources and are especially affected by pollution, soil erosion, and other
negative externalities arising from extractive activities (i.e. mining and commercial logging) driving
economic growth.

Chile?s characteristics place it among the countries that are at highest risk of being affected by climate
change as weather patterns are expected to negatively affect the country?s water resources and alter
export-oriented agribusiness and silvopastoral systems. The 2017 forest fires were partly a result of
poor preparation for climate change. Addressing climate change adaptation and increasing the overall
resilience of the Chilean economy to adverse weather events and the changing availability of water
will have to play a key role in any future environmental and economic agenda in Chile.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
The Government of Chile (GoCL) has committed to protecting the environment to ensure the long-
term sustainability of its economic growth, as well as to respond to Chile's status as a member of the
OECD and to meet its international commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC). Through its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) as part of the
Paris Agreement, the GoCL has clearly signaled its commitment to contribute to global efforts to
mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, including through expansion of renewable energy,
reduction in energy consumption and increased forest carbon sequestration and management. Chile?s
NDC includes an unconditional commitment to reduce the carbon intensity of its Gross Domestic
Product by 30% below 2007 levels and by up to 45%, conditional to receiving international financial
support.

With regards to the forestry sector, in its NDCChile has committed to restore and sustainably manage
100,000 hectares and to reforest another 100,000 hectares of mainly native forests, subject to the
amendment and extension of key legislation underpinning the relevant national forest programs. Chile
is also part of the Bonn Challenge and has committed to restoring a total of 500,000 hectares by 2020.
The forestry sector also has the potential to contribute to Chile?s clean energy ambition as established
in its Energy Policy 2050, since much of the energy used for heating purposes in the country comes
from biomass (29 percent of the primary energy use) and therefore has impacts in terms of climate
change (GHG emissions) and health (pollution).

Chile has around 17.34 million hectares of forests, of which around 81.8% are natural forests
(14,181,752 ha) while 17.1% (2,958,115 ha) are comprised of mostly exotic timber plantations, with
the rest being mixed forests. Chile?s overall forest cover is expanding. According to the Food and
Agriculture Organization gross deforestation is very low, estimated at around 27,000 ha annually
(0.16%), with (mostly exotic) plantations expanding by about 64,000 ha each year. This said, forest
degradation remains a serious problem for the country?s native forests, with almost 4 million ha of
forests affected in total.

Most degradation occurs in the native temperate forests of the south, where unsustainable and
unmanaged fuelwood extraction isa major contributor to the problem. This was illustrated in the
subnational Forest Reference Level (FRL) developed by the country for its southern regions and
registered with the UNFCCC in 2016, where forest degradation resulted in much higher GHG
emissions than those produced from deforestation. These emissions neutralize the absorptive capacity
of the native forest sector hindering its capacity to act as a net carbon sink. In addition, degradation
changes the structure of native forests in terms of their size and species composition, altering their
capacity to provide ecosystem services such as hydrological functions and biodiversity conservation,
and to provide development dividends.

The direct causes of these emissions have been widely documented and are well known in Chile,
including forest fires; unsustainable use of forest resources for timber, firewood production and
livestock grazing; expansion of agricultural and livestock activities in forest lands; encroachment of
monoculture tree plantations and urban expansion; the effects of climate change, desertification, land
degradation and drought; and pests and diseases. These causes are driven by underlying actors that
have been identified through extensive analytical and participatory work, which include: deficiencies
in the public policies regulating, promoting and controlling the management of vegetation resources;
low level of knowledge and cultural valuation of vegetation resources among the general public;
informality of firewood market; rural poverty with the consequent lack of alternative economic
opportunities for small forest owners; low profitability and high opportunity costs of native forest
lands; fragmented and unregulated land tenure in rural areas; and weaknesses in forest governance.
These drivers are expected to continue in the future leading to continued GHG emissions in the forest
sector unless measures are taken to address them.

The Government of Chile (GoCL) has committed to protecting the environment to ensure the long-
term sustainability of its economic growth, as well as to respond to Chile's status as a member of the
OECD and to meet its international commitments under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC). Through its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) as part of the
Paris Agreement, the GoCL has clearly signaled its commitment to contribute to global efforts to
mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, including through expansion of renewable energy,
reduction in energy consumption and increased forest carbon sequestration and management. Chile?s
NDC includes an unconditional commitment to reduce the carbon intensity of its Gross Domestic
Product by 30% below 2007 levels and by up to 45%, conditional to receiving international financial
support.

With regards to the forestry sector, in its NDC Chile has committed to restore and sustainably manage
100,000 hectares and to reforest another 100,000 hectares of mainly native forests, subject to the
amendment and extension of key legislation underpinning the relevant national forest programs. Chile
is also part of the Bonn Challenge and has committed to restoring a total of 500,000 hectares by 2020.
The forestry sector also has the potential to contribute to Chile?s clean energy ambition as established
in its Energy Policy 2050, since much of the energy used for heating purposes in the country comes
from biomass (29 percent of the primary energy use) and therefore has impacts in terms of climate
change (GHG emissions) and health (pollution).

Chile has around 17.34 million hectares of forests, of which around 81.8% are natural forests
(14,181,752 ha) while 17.1% (2,958,115 ha) are comprised of mostly exotic timber plantations, with
the rest being mixed forests. Chile?s overall forest cover is expanding. According to the Food and
Agriculture Organization gross deforestation is very low, estimated at around 27,000 ha annually
(0.16%), with (mostly exotic) plantations expanding by about 64,000 ha each year. This said, forest
degradation remains a serious problem for the country?s native forests, with almost 4 million ha of
forests affected in total.

Most degradation occurs in the native temperate forests of the south, where unsustainable and
unmanaged fuelwood extraction is a major contributor to the problem. This was illustrated in the
subnational Forest Reference Level (FRL) developed by the country for its southern regions and
registered with the UNFCCC in 2016, where forest degradation resulted in much higher GHG
emissions than those produced from deforestation. These emissions neutralize the absorptive capacity
of the native forest sector hindering its capacity to act as a net carbon sink. In addition, degradation
changes the structure of native forests in terms of their size and species composition, altering their
capacity to provide ecosystem services such as hydrological functions and biodiversity conservation,
and to provide development dividends.

The direct causes of these emissions have been widely documented and are well known in Chile,
including forest fires; unsustainable use of forest resources for timber, firewood production and
livestock grazing; expansion of agricultural and livestock activities in forest lands; encroachment of
monoculture tree plantations and urban expansion; the effects of climate change, desertification, land
degradation and drought; and pests and diseases. These causes are driven by underlying actors that
have been identified through extensive analytical and participatory work, which include: deficiencies
in the public policies regulating, promoting and controlling the management of vegetation resources;
low level of knowledge and cultural valuation of vegetation resources among the general public;
informality of firewood market; rural poverty with the consequent lack of alternative economic
opportunities for small forest owners; low profitability and high opportunity costs of native forest
lands; fragmented and unregulated land tenure in rural areas; and weaknesses in forest governance.
These drivers are expected to continue in the future leading to continued GHG emissions in the forest
sector unless measures are taken to address them.

Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF

The proposed operation is fully aligned with the World Bank Group?s Country Partnership Framework
for Chile (FY19-FY24), currently under development. The proposed operation will directly contribute
to Focus Area 3 on Improving Water, Land and Climate Change Management, and in particular to
Objective 7 on Strengthening climate change mitigation and adaptation capacities. In addition, the
World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic for Chile (Report No. 107903-CL), issued on June 6,
2017, identifies native forest degradation as one of the major challenges to environmental
sustainability in the country.

The proposed Carbon Finance transaction is part of a broader package of engagement of the Bank in
    support of Chile?s forest and climate change sectors. This support combines technical assistance,
    investments and results-based finance, including two FCPF Readiness Grants to support preparation of
    the ENCCRV (P124908; US$8.8 million); an NDC Partnership Support Facility grant to help identify
    investments opportunities for the ENCCRV (TF0A4793; US$250,000); a GEF operation to support
    investments in Sustainable Land Management (P085621; US$23 million); and a project-scale carbon
    finance transaction pilot under the BioCarbon Fund (P111918; US$3.87 million).

    The proposed Carbon Finance transaction is also aligned with the World Bank?s corporate
    commitments on Forests and Climate Change. The operation directly supports several Focus Areas
    under the WBG Forest Action Plan (Sustainable Forestry and Forest Smart Interventions) as well as
    Cross-Cutting Themes (Climate Change and Resilience, Rights and Participation, Institutions and
    Governance). In addition, the proposed operation is aligned with the WBG Climate Change Action
    Plan?s top-level priorities on Supporting Transformational Policies and Institutions, by translating
    Chile?s NDC into climate policies and investment plans into actions; and on Scaling Up Climate
    Action by mobilizing REDD+ financing to support large-scale, multi-sectoral programs in the climate-
    smart land use, water and food security high-impact area. Although Trust Funded operations, such as
    the proposed carbon finance transaction, do not count towards the WBG?s corporate goal of 28% of
    climate related financing, as this only considers IDA and IBRD resources, they are accounted as
    climate action delivered by the WBG from externally financed sources.
.



C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
    Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective is to incentivize reduced deforestation, forest degradation and the
    enhancement of forest carbon stocks (REDD+) in selected regions of southern Chile, through payment
    of verified emission reductions (ER) and to ensure that paid amounts are distributed according to an
    agreed benefit sharing plan.
    Key Results
    The achievements of the PDO will be measured through the result indicators included below,
    standardized for ERPA operations under the FCPF across the World Bank Group to reflect the nature
    of the ERPA as a transaction-based instrument:
    i. Volume of CO2 Emissions Reductions that have been measured and reported by the Program Entity,
    verified by a Third Party, and transferred to the FCPF Carbon Fund; (tCO2e);
    ii. Payment by the FCPF Carbon Fund for CO2 Emission Reductions generated by the Program
    (USD);
    iii. Emission Reductions payments distributed in accordance with agreed Benefit Sharing Plan and
    arrangements. (Yes/No).
.




    D. Project Description

    D. Project Description

    A. Scope of the instrument
    The operation consists in a stand-alone Carbon Finance Transaction between the World Bank as
    Trustee of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Carbon Fund and the National Forestry
    Corporation (CONAF) of Chile as the Program Entity, involving the delivery of and payment for
    greenhouse gas (GHG) Emission Reductions (ERs) generated from the implementation of the National
    Strategy on Climate Change and Vegetation Resources (ENCCRV, for its acronyms in Spanish).
A Carbon Finance transaction refers to a commercial transaction involving delivery of and payment
for ERs between a Project or Program Entity and the Bank as Trustee of carbon funds. It does not
involve the direct financing of any of the underlying investments generating the ERs paid by the
carbon funds. The World Bank manages a range of carbon funds and facilities representing different
profiles and segments of the carbon market. These funds, managed by the World Bank as Trustee for
the fund participants, purchase ERs on behalf of the fund participants, i.e., public and private entities
that have committed their monies to the funds. The ERs are generated by Projects and Programs
mitigating GHG emissions in eligible countries and Project or Program Entities are paid for delivery of
those ERs.

The instrument for the operation is an Emission Reductions Payment Agreement (ERPA). The ERPA
is the legal document that will be signed between the Seller (i.e. the Government of Chile through
CONAF as the Program Entity and AGCID as administrator of funds) and the Buyer (i.e. the FCPF
Carbon Fund through the World Bank), which sets out the commercial terms (e.g. volume, price,
conditions of sale and purchase, call and/or put options, advance payments etc.) of the transaction
negotiated between the two Parties. Whereas the ERPA covers the commercial terms of the transaction
that are negotiable on a case-by-case basis, the ERPA General Conditions represent the legal
underpinning of the ERPA, providing for a set of (non-negotiable) general rules and procedures for the
sale and purchase of ERs that apply to each transaction. The General Conditions are incorporated into
the ERPA by way of reference and, thereby, form an integral part of the ERPA itself. They were
approved at the 18th meeting of the FCPF Participants Committee on November 1, 2014, as per FCPF
Resolution PC/18/2014/2.

The World Bank financing for this operation is provided by the FCPF. The FCPF Carbon Fund results-
based payments are intended to provide an incentive to the recipient countries and the various
stakeholders?including forest-dependent Indigenous Peoples, other forest dwellers or the private
sector?within each of its target countries to achieve long-term sustainability in financing forest
conservation and management programs. The Carbon Fund will remunerate selected countries in
accordance with ERPAs for verifiably reducing emissions compared to a baseline scenario (reference
level).

B. The Government?s ER Program
As part of its efforts to implement Chile?s NDC commitments in the forestry sector, the Ministry of
Agriculture (MINAGRI), through CONAF, has developed the ENCCRV with the objective to position
the country?s natural forests as a key element of national climate change mitigation and adaptation
efforts. Chile?s NDC document clearly establishes the ENCCRV as the key instrument for meeting the
country?s climate change mitigation targets in the forest sector; while the National Climate Change
Action Plan 2017-2022 (PANCC, for its acronyms in Spanish), establishes the ENCCRV as the main
mitigation action in the forestry sector. The ENCCRV also represents the Government?s ER Program
under the FCPF, described in detail in Chile?s Emission Reductions Program Document (ERPD) and
approved during the 15th meeting of the Carbon Fund Participants in December 2016.

The ENCCRV was developed based on extensive analytical and participatory work supported by an
FCPF REDD+ Readiness Grant (P124908). The analytical work included studies on the direct causes
of deforestation, forest degradation and the barriers for the enhancement of forest carbon stocks at the
national level; and the underlying legal, technical, economic, and social drivers. This work was
coupled with a strong participatory process that included one National (125 participants) and 15
Regional workshops (1,266 participants); a Self-assessment process of the readiness of the country (74
participants); a pubic consultation (506 participants); and an Indigenous Peoples dialogue and
consultation (90 workshops; 1,1813 participants). Following this participatory process, the ENCCRV
was approved by the Ministerial Council on Sustainable Development on November 14, 2016.

Overall, the ENCCRV comprises a total of nine Strategic Actions designed to addressthe key drivers
of deforestation, forest degradation, and barriers to the enhancement of forest carbon stocks that are
implemented through 16 Enabling and 12 Direct Mitigat ion Measures (the ER Program Measures),
described in detail in Chile?s ERPD. Direct Measures include those that directly generate GHG
emissions through specific investments in activities on the ground (e.g. re/afforestation, forest
management, etc.). Enabling Measures include those with an indirect effect on GHG emissions
through policy or regulatory reforms.

Implementation of the ENCCRV will initially focus in five of the country?s most forested regions
where GHG emissions from deforestation and forest degradation are the highest: Maule, Biob?o, La
Araucan?a, Los R?os, and Los Lagos; covering a total of approximately 15,300,000 hectares and
representing the GHG accounting area of the ER Program. The ER Program is expected to have a
transformative impact on Chile?s policies, regulations, and practices associated with the management
of the country?s native forest resources, leading to the scaling up of the proposed ER Program
Measures at the national level in support of the country?s efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate
change.

The ER Program Measures will be implemented in both public and private (including community)
lands. Unlike standard project-level carbon finance transactions, due to the scale of ER Programs the
FCPF rules do not require that the Program delineates the geographic boundaries and land ownership
of each targeted area where ER Program Measures will be implemented. A Land Tenure Assessment is
required at the Program area level (more than 15 million hectares in the case of the Chile Program) to
identify any issues that might affect ER Program implementation and subsequent transfer of ER titles
to the FCPF. As such, a Land Tenure Assessment was carried out in the Program area based on
available datasets to characterize and map lands based on their land tenure type (public, private,
indigenous and agricultural communities, etc.) and status (regular, irregular, etc.) and suitability for
the implementation ER Program Measures. Results indicated that approximately 73% of the national
territory is comprised of regularized rural property and would be available for implementing ER
Program Measures. In addition, the Assessment indicated that land tenure is regulated by a robust
regulatory framework in Chile, and that it is a requirement to access the subsidies of environmental,
agricultural and forestry government programs. Given that there is a percentage of rural owners with
irregular land tenure, the Program will directly support their inclusion through an ER Program
Measure aimed at providing legal assistance for regularizing land titles, including collective land
tenure for indigenous peoples? lands, therefore addressing the risk of non-participation by vulnerable
groups. The results of the Land Tenure Assessment will also be used in the eligibility criteria for
accessing the Benefit Sharing Plan of the operation, prioritizing small forest owners as defined by the
Native Forest Law No. 20.283 (which includes indigenous and agricultural communities). The Land
Tenure Assessment has been publicly disclosed and is available on the ENCCRV website.

Unconditional financing for the implementation of the ENCCRV is based on a mix of CONAF?s
existing national budget and secured international grants, amounting to approximately US$74 million.
The ENCCRV considers a set of additional financing scenarios for scaling up its ambition, conditional
to securing incremental financial support from international climate funds, bilateral negotiations,
redirection of fiscal expenditure, and other sources including the private sector. The ENCCRV
financing only considers a fraction of the resources that Chile is investing in its forest sector annually
through the National Budget Law. For example, CONAF?s total budget for 2018 amounted to
approximately US$138 million, supporting a set of Programs which are all expected to enable ER
generation. This budget size has been maintained consistently in the past, and given Chile?s future
commitments as per its NDC is not likely to change. In addition, the ERPA proceeds, once
materialized are expected provide an additional source of financing for the ER Program Measures
through the BSP.

C. The Carbon Finance Transaction
The proposed operation would be among the first of its kind worldwide to provide results-based
payments for Reducing Em issions from Deforestation, forest Degradation, and enhancing forest
carbon stocks (REDD+). The World Bank, as the Trustee of the FCPF Carbon Fund, will pay the
Government of Chile (represented through CONAF, i.e. the Program Entity) for the GHG Emission
Reductions (ERs) generated from the implementation of the ENCCRV during the ERPA Term, i.e. fr
om November 2018 (or whichever date the ERPA is executed by both Parties) to December 2025,
unless terminated earlier.

Payments (i.e. disbursements) will be made upon the successful verification of results (i.e. volume of
ERs generated as per PDO indicator 1) after each monitoring and reporting event, and upon
confirmation by the World Bank that safeguard instruments and the Benefit Sharing Plan have been
properly implemented. Monitoring and Reporting events are expected to occur biannually in
accordance with an agreed ER Monitoring Plan. ER results will be measured against the Program?s
baseline, which consists in Chile?s National Forest Reference Level (FRL) registered with the
UNFCCC in 2016. Verification of ER results will be carried out by an Independent Reviewer
contracted by the World Bank, and in accordance with the criteria and indicators of the Carbon Fund
Methodological Framework.

The monetary value of the ERPA is defined by the ER volume and the unit price, which are both
subject to negotiations and reflected in the ERPA Term Sheet. The ER Program is estimated to
generate a total ER volume of 9,823,836 tCO2e between 2018 and 2024; this estimate is based on
conservative assumptions about the effectiveness of the Program in addressing the drivers of
deforestation and forest degradation in the Program Area without any conditional financial support
(i.e. based on existing resources). This total is then discounted to reflect the risk of uncertainty in the
calculations (8%) and the risk of reversals (21%), with a remaining ER volume of 7,139,964 tCO2e
available to be transacted.

Of the remaining volume, the volume of ERs included in the ERPA equals 5,200,000 tCO2e, as per
the Letter of Intent (LOI) signed in August 2014 between the World Bank and the Program Entity. A
unit price of US$ 5 per tCO2eq has been considered, which corresponds to the willingness to pay
expressed by CFPs and agreed with by the Program Entity, resulting in a total contract value of
US$26,000,000. Additional ERs at different prices may be included in the future as negotiated
between the Program Entity and the CFPs, and approved by national authorities (i.e. Ministry of
Finance).

It is important to consider that the expected contract volume and value represent ex-ante estimates
based on assumptions about the Program?s effectiveness in generating ERs. The actual total ER
volume available to be transacted and resulting schedule of payments will depend on the actual
effectiveness of the Program in generating ERs as reported and verified after each monitoring event.
An effectiveness analysis for the different financing scenarios of the ENCCRV in terms of ER volume
generation, showed that the baseline scenario (unconditional financing) is sufficient to generate a
steady flow of ERs to support the ERPA operation, as long as investments in ER Program Measures
prioritize the most cost-effective activities aimed at reducing emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation, rather than a/reforestation which have longer carbon sequestration times and a higher
emphasis on non-carbon benefits.

D. The Benefit Sharing Plan
ERPA proceeds will be distributed according to a Benefit Sharing Plan (BSP) compliant with the
FCPF Methodological Framework. Chile?s BSP is currently in draft form; a final version, satisfactory
to the World Bank, will be approved prior to effectiveness.
Beneficiaries of the ER Program are expected to be mostly small forest owners (including indigenous
communities) in vulnerable rural areas, therefore contributing to the WBG twin goals. The draft BSP
does not contemplate direct cash transfers to Program beneficiaries (monetary benefits). Rather,
beneficiaries will receive non-monetary benefits through the implementation of subprojects on their
lands, defined in a participatory way based on a list of eligible activities (e.g. technical assistance,
inputs, capacity building, and others) aimed at improving their environmental, social and economic
conditions through sustainable land management.

The draft BSP includes several provisions to ensure a transparent, participatory, and equitable
distribution of ERPA proceeds. Existing local multi-stakeholder platforms will be used in each Region
to validate the use of the ERPA proceeds based on a set of social, environmental, and economic
eligibility and prioritization criteria established in the final BSP. Priority will be given to small forest
owners, Indigenous Peoples, and women on a scoring basis. The safeguard instruments developed for
the ER Program, including the ESMF, RPF, and IPPF, will also apply to the activities financed under
the BSP.
PHCOMP




         Component Name:

         Comments ( optional)

E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The ER Program comprises five administrative regions in southern Chile (from Maule to Los Lagos)
covering a total of 16.5 million hectares, 35% of which are covered by native forests with a high
diversity, representing 11 of the 12 forest types present in the country, four of which are only found
within the Program area. 11% of the ER Program area is under some form of legal protection as part of
the National System of State Protected Areas (SNASPE).

Although Chile has an extensive and diverse endowment of native forest resources, their contribution
to the national economic growth is rather limited (native forest products represent only 3% of total
exports from the forest sector). Information on the actual dimension of their use and exploitation is
scarce. Unofficial data indicates that informality could represent as high as 80% of what is captured in
official information. The main uses of native forests include firewood extraction and use for shelter
and fodder for cattle, which in combination with causes such as fires, have led to a severe degradation
of a significant portion of this resource. This phenomenon represents an ecological and economic
devaluation of these forests, as they lose their ability to provide goods and services, including carbon
sequestration and storage, therefore generating a substantial loss of natural capital with its associated
GHG emissions. This process of progressive devaluation of native forest resources has led many times
to the abandonment of the forests and to their conversion to more profitable land uses through
deforestation, further increasing the emissions associated with the misuse of forest resources.

In terms of the social characteristics, the ER Program area includes three of the four regions in the
country with the highest concentration of indigenous populations, representing approximately 64% of
the total at the national level. In addition, there is a high concentration of small and medium forest
    owners. The majority of these populations are highly dependent on native forest resources, especially
    for heating and cooking. Some of the regions in the ER Program area have evolved from the 60s to
    nowadays, from a large rural population to a large urban one, driven by the lack of available land and
    employment/education opportunities in rural areas, especially for young people. Tourism is also an
    important contributor to the economy in the ER Program Area which relies on native forests for scenic
    beauty and associated recreational activities.
.




    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
     Lilian Pedersen( SLCSO )
     Ricardo Larrobla( SLCEN )
II. IMPLEMENTATION
The ER Program implementing agency will be the Chilean National Forestry Corporation
(CONAF) responsible for overseeing all forestry activities in the country, including
management of incentive programs for plantations and native forest management, national
parks, fire prevention and suppression and environmental impact assessments for activities in
forest areas. CONAF headquarters are in Santiago, and they maintain a large and diverse staff
throughout the country in regional and local offices. CONAF is a recognized public institution
with strong environmental competence. Since 2010, it established an Environmental
Assessment Unit (DEA, for its acronym in Spanish) in charge of the System of Environmental
Impact Assessment, Environmental Monitoring and Control, and other responsibilities to
oversee compliance with current environmental regulations related to the use and management
of forest resources and xerophytic formations, the conservation of native forests and protected
areas, and environmental licensing. CONAF has also instituted a Unit of Indigenous and Social
Affairs (UAIS, for its acronym in Spanish) which focuses on the inclusion and participation of
indigenous peoples in the formulation and implementation of sectoral plans, projects and
programs. The UAIS has qualified professionals with ample experience on indigenous issues
and maintains a local presence in the territories through its regional managers.
.




III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
    Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP          Yes            The ER Program is classified as Category B
    4.01                                                   since it consists mainly of policies and
                                                           measures aimed at reverting and preventing
                                                           forest degradation and deforestation in the
                                                           areas of intervention. Any potential
                                                           environmental impacts and risks stemming
                                                           from the implementation of on-the-ground
                                                           activities through the implementation of ER
                                                           Program Measures is expected be low,
                                                           localized and manageable.

                                                           A participatory Strategic Environmental and
                                                           Social Assessment (SESA) was carried out in
                                                           compliance with OP/BP 4.01 and following
                                                           FCPF Guidelines, in order to identify
                                                           measures to avoid and mitigate the potential
                                          negative environmental and social impacts
                                          associated with ER Program Measures. The
                                          SESA has provided key guidance and
                                          elements for the preparation of the Program?s
                                          Environmental and Social Management
                                          Framework (ESMF), to ensure that social and
                                          environmental risks are factored in the design
                                          and implementation of ER Program Measures
                                          and related subprojects. The ESMF identifies
                                          several operational instruments as well as
                                          prevention and/or mitigation measures to
                                          address environmental and social risks in
                                          subprogram sites. These measures include
                                          screening checklists (to determine potential
                                          impacts), negative lists (to exclude certain
                                          activities that are considered high-impact),
                                          and procedures to determine the need for
                                          development of site-specific assessments and
                                          safeguard instruments, particularly related to
                                          OP 4.04, 4.09, 4.36, 4.10, and 4.12. Since the
                                          Bank does not finance any of the underlying
                                          activities of the ER Program, but rather only
                                          pays for results, the ESMF will apply to all
                                          activities implemented under the Program
                                          regardless of the source of financing based on
                                          the current approach for safeguard application
                                          to FCPF ERPA operations, and will form the
                                          basis to identify, avoid, minimize and where
                                          necessary mitigate any potential adverse
                                          impacts from program activities.
Performance Standards for Private   No    This policy is not triggered as the scope of the
Sector Activities OP/BP 4.03              Program does not include activities financed
                                          by the Private Sector.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes   The application of this policy seeks to ensure
                                          that all options proposed in the ER Program
                                          take into account the conservation of
                                          biodiversity and critical natural habitats, as
                                          well as the numerous environmental services
                                          and products they provide to the Chilean
                                          society. Overall, the ER Program is expected
                                          to have significant positive impacts on natural
                                          habitats as it consists in the implementation of
                                          an effective strategy to reduce the degradation
                                          of its native forests. The SESA addressed
                                          issues related to natural habitats and potential
                                          impacts of the ER Program, which have been
                                          incorporated in the ESMF through a specific
                                          protocol that will be applied as needed.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes   Overall, the ENCCRV is expected to have
                                          significant positive impacts on the country?s
                                          vast native forests, especially in the five
                                          administrative regions targeted by the ER
                                          Program, by reducing deforestation and forest
                                          degradation while contributing to the well-
                                          being of forest-dependent communities. One
                                          of the key results of the SESA incorporated in
                                          the design of the ER Program has been the
                                          exclusion of industrial forest plantations as
                                          they have been associated with higher rural
                                          poverty rates as small-scale agriculture faces
                                          increased challenges and economic hardship
                                          such as less water available for irrigation, and
                                          possible contamination of crops from
                                          plantation pesticide fumigation. ER Program
                                          measures will target vulnerable small and
                                          medium native forest owners in order to help
                                          them stabilize their land and increase the
                                          Program?s environmental and social co-
                                          benefits, representing a paradigm shift from
                                          the past forest management model focused on
                                          the exotic species timber industry towards a
                                          more sustainable one. A specific protocol has
                                          been incorporated in the ESMF to be used as
                                          needed, reflecting the requirements of the
                                          Bank?s Operational Policy regarding forest
                                          management, in particular as these relate to
                                          the establishment of plantations and use of
                                          critical forest areas. ER Program Measures
                                          implemented through subprojects in forested
                                          areas will be based on forest management
                                          plans following national standards and
                                          legislation, and will be complemented with
                                          World Bank Policy provisions regarding
                                          certification and small-holder forest
                                          management.
Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes   This policy is triggered in a precautionary way
                                          since implementation of certain ER Program
                                          measures may potentially include the use of
                                          pesticides and herbicides at subproject sites as
                                          part of an effort to make forest and/or
                                          agricultural activities more efficient and
                                          economic. The critical provisions of the Bank
                                          Policy on Pest Management have been
                                          incorporated in the ESMF though a specific
                                          protocol to be used as needed that focuses on
                                          prioritizing integrated pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP   Yes   This policy is triggered in a precautionary way
4.11                                      to address cases where the ER Program could
                                      promote activities in areas containing sites
                                      deemed physical cultural resources (PCR).
                                      Though it is not anticipated that the ER
                                      Program will have any negative impacts on
                                      such sites, the existence of any such sites in
                                      areas affected by the ER Program will trigger
                                      provisions included in the ESMF on how to
                                      address preservation of known PCR sites,
                                      especially in areas inhabited by indigenous
                                      communities. A specific protocol has been
                                      included in the ESMF to be applied as needed.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes   This policy is triggered due to the presence of
                                      Indigenous Peoples in the ER Program Area
                                      (approximately 64% of the total at the national
                                      level) and their close relationship with native
                                      forest and vegetation resources. Since the
                                      early stages of preparation, the ENCCRV and
                                      the ER Program have had a special focus on
                                      participatory processes and vulnerable groups
                                      (particularly Indigenous Peoples), with the
                                      aim of identifying key issues and providing
                                      recommendations for their design. The SESA
                                      process began early in the Readiness phase in
                                      a highly participatory manner. Indigenous
                                      peoples participated in most of the 16
                                      Regional and National Workshops performed
                                      as part of the SESA process, which included a
                                      total of more than 1,300 people. In addition,
                                      an Indigenous People National Dialogue was
                                      carried out during 2016, with 1813 indigenous
                                      people participants in 90 workshops, to
                                      validate the approaches proposed in the
                                      ENCCRV.

                                      Through the SESA and the Indigenous
                                      Dialogue, Indigenous Peoples assessed the
                                      risks and benefits of the proposed ER Program
                                      Measures from their own perspective and
                                      contextual realities, informing potential
                                      mitigation measures. Some of the risks and
                                      impacts identified during SESA participatory
                                      processes and technical analysis performed,
                                      were: i) potential exclusion of vulnerable
                                      groups, including indigenous peoples and
                                      subsistence farmers; ii) the need for cultural
                                      approaches and ancestral methods to be taken
                                      into account in the design and implementation
                                      of ER Program Measures in their territories;
                                      iii) lack of appropriate consultation in the
                                      formulation of native forest management plans
in the influence area of their; iv) limited or
restricted access to resources in legally
protected natural habitats, potentially affecting
the livelihoods of indigenous peoples and
other vulnerable groups; v) potential
displacement of economic or other activities
affecting the livelihoods of indigenous peoples
and other vulnerable groups.

The ESMF includes an Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF) that has been
prepared in a culturally appropriate way in
compliance with the Indigenous Peoples
Policy (OP 4.10) for addressing issues related
to indigenous peoples during the
implementation of the ER Program. The IPPF
will serve a guidance for preparing site-
specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs)
during the implementation of the ER Program
under the principle of free, prior and informed
consultation, based on existing practices and
instruments developed by the UAIS. To
support and enhance the land and natural
resource management practices of indigenous
peoples, IPPs will be based on two natural
resource management instruments that have
been developed by the UAIS in a culturally
appropriate manner and in a participatory way
with Indigenous Peoples, namely the Modelo
Forestal Intercultural Mapuche (MOFIN) and
Modelo Ambiental Intercultural Andino
(MAIA). MOFIN is a community way of
doing things with regards to natural resource
management, forestry and territorial
development that allows to enhance the
?madre tierra-uke Mapu? (mother earth)
and the ?Ixofil mongen? (biodiversiy) in
accordance with the mapuche people way of
life, who are located in the ER Program Area.
MAIA is mostly taylored to aymaras,
quechuas and likan antai cultures, which are
not located in the ER Program Area. In the
case of exploitation of natural resources, the
IPPF clearly establishes that activities which
imply natural resource exploitation can be
only conducted by indigenous peoples.

Chile has also committed to follow its
obligations under ILO Convention 169 on
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples. As with OP
                                          4.01, the IPPF will apply to all activities
                                          implemented under the ER program,
                                          regardless of the source of financing.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes   During the Readiness phase, the SESA was
                                          used to assess the risk of potential restriction
                                          of access to natural resources as part of the
                                          design phase of the ENCCRV, providing
                                          adequate recommendations from the
                                          perspective of stakeholders. Based on this
                                          consultation process as well additional
                                          technical analysis, it is not expected that
                                          ENCCRV measures will result in the
                                          displacement of peoples. However, it is likely
                                          that measures such as grazing control,
                                          a/reforestation, forest planning and zoning,
                                          and regularizing land tenure, among others,
                                          could result in economic impacts, land
                                          acquisition or activity displacement. Also,
                                          strengthening of Protected Areas?
                                          Management Plans could result in restrictions
                                          or limited access to natural resources for
                                          indigenous peoples and other vulnerable
                                          groups depending on those resources for their
                                          livelihoods.

                                          To address this type of impacts, a Process
                                          Framework (PF) has been prepared as part of
                                          the ESMF. Additionally, a Resettlement
                                          Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to
                                          provide procedures to manage impacts in the
                                          event of potential relocation and/or land
                                          acquisition as a result of the implementation
                                          of the ER Program on the ground, including
                                          indigenous peoples and small farmers. The
                                          RPF and PF are included as a specific chapter
                                          of the ESMF. As with OP 4.01, the RPF and
                                          PF will apply to all activities implemented
                                          under the ER Program and that result in
                                          involuntary resettlement or access restriction,
                                          regardless of the source of financing. It also
                                          will apply to other activities resulting in
                                          involuntary resettlement, that in the judgment
                                          of the Bank, are i) directly and significantly
                                          associated to the ER Program; ii) necessary to
                                          achieve its objectives as set forth in the
                                          Program documents; and iii) carried out, or
                                          planned to be carried out, contemporaneously
                                          with the ER Program. Activities that could
                                          result in impacts which would imply loss of
                                          assets will be considered ineligible for
                                                        support.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No            This policy is not triggered as the Program
                                                        will neither support the construction or
                                                        rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                        investments which rely on services of existing
                                                        dams.
    Projects on International Waterways   No            This policy is not triggered as the Program
    OP/BP 7.50                                          will not finance activities involving the use or
                                                        potential pollution of international waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP      No            This policy is not triggered as the Program
    7.60                                                will not finance activities in disputed areas as
                                                        defined in the policy.
.




IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The various governing documents of the FCPF, including the Charter, establish a commitment
    to applying World Bank Safeguard Policies to FCPF operations. As per the guidance on the
    safeguards approach for FCPF ERPA operations, this includes the following elements:
    differentiated responsibility for the supervision of safeguard compliance depending on who is
    financing the underlying activities and whether or not they are included in the Government
    Program; comprehensive assessment of environmental and social risks associated with ER
    Programs and formulation and adoption of relevant safeguard frameworks and/or plans to
    address such risks; capacity assessment of the Program Entity to implement agreed safeguard
    frameworks and/or plans; preparation and adoption of safeguards action plan, where
    applicable; Program Entity?s self-monitoring and reporting along with independent third
    party monitoring and reporting on the implementation of safeguard instruments; feedback and
    grievance redress mechanism; and the World Bank?s oversight of effective implementation
    and compliance of Program Entity with agreed safeguard management system.

    According to the World Bank?s Operational Policies the Program is classified as Category B,
    as ER Program Measures under the ENCCRV will include clearly defined activities with
    foreseeable impacts and mitigation measures, and are expected to fall into categories B and C.
    A participatory Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) was carried out in
    compliance with OP/BP 4.01 and following FCPF Guidelines, in order to identify, avoid, and
    mitigate the potential negative environmental and social impacts associated with ER Program
    Measures. The safeguard policies triggered as a result of the SESA include OP4.01
    (Environmental Assessment), OP4.36 (Forests), OP4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP4.09 (Pest
    Management), OP4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP4.10 (Indigenous Peoples), and
    OP4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

    Overall, ER Program measures are expected to have net positive environmental and social
    impacts by reducing the secondary effects of forest degradation such as erosion, slope
    destabilization, landslide formation, and the incremental reduction of GHG emissions.
Restoration of degraded forests and the establishment of new forest areas will also have net
positive impacts by restoring forest ecosystem functions with the associated carbon
sequestration, biodiversity and environmental enhancements, including natural habitats. These
would constitute permanent and cumulative positive impacts.

No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected by the Program. Potential
adverse environmental impacts are expected to be mainly temporary and minor, and may
potentially include the use of pesticides and herbicides at subproject sites as part of an effort
to make forest and/or agricultural activities more efficient and economic. All of the above
impacts could be remedied and manageable considering the forest management practices
required by the Native Forest Law and its Regulations (in particular the Regulation on water,
soils and wetlands) which will be applied in the implementation of ER Program Measures, in
addition to the World Bank's safeguard policies.

Regarding OP 4.10, safeguards issues and impacts are related to: i) potential exclusion of
vulnerable groups, including indigenous peoples and subsistence farmers; ii) the need for
cultural approaches and ancestral methods to be taken into account in the design and
implementation of ER Program Measures in their territories; iii) lack of appropriate
consultation in the formulation of native forest management plans in their influence area; iv)
limited or restricted access to resources in legally protected natural habitats, potentially
affecting the livelihoods of indigenous peoples and other vulnerable groups; v)
potential/occasional displacement of economic or other activities affecting the livelihoods of
indigenous peoples and other vulnerable groups.

Regarding OP 4.12, ER Program Measures are not expected to result in the displacement of
peoples and even in impacts because of assets lost. However, it is likely that measures such as
grazing control, forest planning and zoning, regularizing land tenure, among others,
occasionally result in minor economic impacts, land acquisition or activity displacement.
Also, restoration of fire affected ecosystems and the strengthening of Protected Areas
Management Plans could result in restrictions or limited access to natural resources for
indigenous peoples and other vulnerable groups depending on those resources for their
livelihoods.

ER Program Measures also include activities that might affect policies, programs and plans
affecting the use of natural resources. The ESMF includes specific procedures for assessing
the appropriate instrument to be applied to such activities (such as a Strategic or Regional
Environmental Assessment) following the guidelines for the application of Bank safeguard
policies to Technical Assistance and to Land Use Planning activities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
No long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the Program area are expected.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Program design considers the most likely alternative to minimize adverse impacts based
on the national context. Based on the SESA, CONAF has excluded industrial exotic forest
plantations from the Program which have been associated with negative environmental and
social impacts in the past and will focus instead on small and medium native forest owners.
This is expected to increase the Program?s environmental and social co-benefits, representing
a paradigm shift from the past forest management model focused on the exotic species timber
industry towards a more sustainable one.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To ensure that social and environmental risks are factored in during the implementation of ER
Program, each proposed ER Program Measure will be screened for its environmental and
social impacts and appropriate environmental assessment and mitigation measures will be
implemented based on national Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS) and
World Bank safeguard policies. Given that specific locations for the implementation of ER
Program Measures are not currently defined, the safeguards procedures will be governed by
an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which sets out environmental
screening and eligibility criteria, and defines the environmental and social due diligence to be
followed, including the development of sire-specific plans when needed. The ESMF and its
instruments, including a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF) will guide the ESMS already in place in-country to ensure that
social and environmental risks are factored in the design and implementation of ER Program
Measures and related activities in accordance with World Bank Policies.

To support and enhance the land and natural resource management practices of Indigenous
Peoples, Indigenous Peoples Plans will be based on a natural resource management
instrument that has been developed by CONAF in a culturally appropriate manner and in a
participatory way with Indigenous Peoples, namely the Mapuche Intercultural Forest Model
(Modelo Forestal Intercultural Mapuche - MOFIM) which is tailored to the cultural uses of
the Mapuche people and applicable between the Regions of Biobio to Los Lagos. With
regards to involuntary resettlement, CONAF has determined that activities which would
imply loss of assets will not be eligible to support, while impacts related to economic
displacement or access restriction to natural resources in legal protected areas are covered by
a Process Framework.

The ER Program implementing agency will be the Chilean National Forestry Corporation
(CONAF) responsible for overseeing all forestry activities in the country, including
management of incentive programs for plantations and native forest management, national
parks, fire prevention and suppression and environmental impact assessments for activities in
forest areas. CONAF headquarters are in Santiago, and they maintain a large and diverse staff
throughout the country in regional and local offices. CONAF is a recognized public institution
with strong environmental competence. Since 2010, it established an Environmental
Assessment Unit (DEA, for its acronym in Spanish) in charge of the System of Environmental
Impact Assessment, Environmental Monitoring and Control, and other responsibilities to
oversee compliance with current environmental regulations related to the use and
management of forest resources and xerophytic formations, the conservation of native forests
and protected areas, and environmental licensing. CONAF has also instituted a Unit of
Indigenous and Social Affairs (UAIS, for its acronym in Spanish) which focuses on the
inclusion and participation of indigenous peoples in the formulation and implementation of
sectoral plans, projects and programs. The UAIS has qualified professionals with ample
experience on indigenous issues and maintains a local presence in the territories through its
regional managers.

The Program Implementation Unit (PIU) within CONAF will be placed in the Climate
Change and Environmental Services Unit (UCCSA, for its acronym in Spanish), which has a
dedicated technical team at the national level and regional focal points with experience in
engaging with a broad range of stakeholders in forest activities, including small forest owners,
indigenous peoples, agricultural communities, and others. Division of roles and
responsibilities for safeguards implementation will follow the existing national Environmental
and Social Management Systems (ESMS) in place and clearly described in the ESMF, which
are considered consistent with World Bank policies. The UCCSA will take on any additional
safeguards responsibilities that go beyond the specific duties of the DEA and UAIS as
attributed by national legislation, to fully comply with World Bank safeguard requirements,
and will be the overall responsible for coordinating safeguard functions under the ER
Program, including monitoring and reporting of safeguards compliance in progress reports
submitted to the Bank (at minimum annually), along with monitoring of other aspects of the
ER Program such as the implementation of the Benefit Sharing Plan. As the key counterpart
for the Bank?s operations in the forestry sector in Chile (FCPF and GEF), UCCSA has built
strong capacity in the application of World Bank safeguards policies and coordinating with
DEA and UAIS in the development of the SESA and the ESMF. Additional capacity and
financing needs for the application and reporting on the ER Program?s safeguard instruments,
including the development of site-specific safeguard plans, will be covered through the FCPF
funds.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As part of the SESA, CONAF carried out extensive consultation activities through workshops
at the national and regional level with indigenous peoples, small forest owners, civil society,
the private sector and other key stakeholders in order to consult, receive inputs, and validate
the ENCCRV. This included: 15 Regional workshops (1,266 participants), one in each region
of the country, with significant participation from women (37%) and Indigenous Peoples
(9%); one national workshop (125 participants); a Self-assessment process of the readiness of
the country (74 participants); a pubic consultation (506 participants); and an Indigenous
Peoples dialogue and consultation (100 workshops; 1,1813 participants). Details on these
regional workshops along with testimonial videos are available on line at:
http://www.enccrvchile.cl.

The ESMF, IPPF, RPF and Process Framework underwent a process of consultation and
validation from June to December 2017 with key representatives of the stakeholders that
participated in the SESA process based on a methodology agreed with the Bank. Final
versions of all the safeguard instruments have been disclosed and are publicly available on the
websites of CONAF and the World Bank.

During implementation, the ESMF and RPF include a specific section with clear guidelines to
    perform the free, prior and informed consultation with affected stakeholders involved in the
    implementation of ER Program Measures, including a minimum list of participatory activities
    and information to be provided. With regards to Indigenous Peoples, the IPPF establishes that
    the ENCCRV consultation process will be consistent with Supreme Decree No.66 of the
    Ministry of Social Development, conforming ILO Convention 169 Article 6 N1 and N2
    as well as IPPF guidelines and requirements (ESMF Annex 5). In addition, the ESMF
    establishes that ER Program Measures implemented on Indigenous lands and territories will
    have to conduct a free, prior and informed consultation process resulting in a recorded broad
    community support of the Indigenous Peoples affected, if they are direct beneficiaries of the
    Measures proposed.

    In addition, a Feedback, Grievance and Redress Mechanism (FGRM) will be in place during
    implementation of the ER Program based on CONAF? existing Office of Information,
    Complaints and Suggestions (OIRS, for its acronym in Spanish). Once activities on the
    ground are initiated, CONAF will work together with the OIRS of the five ER Program
    regions to ensure that any complaints are duly recorded and addressed.
.




    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/OtherPHEnvDelete
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  17-May-2018
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               19-Jun-2018
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure
    PHEnvCtry




    Chile                                                                  14-Aug-2018
    Comments:http://www.conaf.cl/nuestros-bosques/bosques-en-chile/cambio-climatico/enccrv/
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy ProcessPHResDelete
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  17-May-2018
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               19-Jun-2018
    "In country" Disclosure
    PHResCtry




    Chile                                                                  14-Aug-2018
    Comments:http://www.conaf.cl/nuestros-bosques/bosques-en-chile/cambio-climatico/enccrv/
    Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/FrameworkPHIndDelete
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  17-May-2018
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               19-Jun-2018
    "In country" Disclosure
    PHIndCtry




    Chile                                                                  14-Aug-2018
    Comments:http://www.conaf.cl/nuestros-bosques/bosques-en-chile/cambio-climatico/enccrv/
         Pest Management PlanPHPestDelete
         Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                             No
         Date of receipt by the Bank                                                17-May-2018
         Date of submission to InfoShop                                             19-Jun-2018
         "In country" Disclosure
         PHPestCtry




         Chile                                                                  14-Aug-2018
         Comments:http://www.conaf.cl/nuestros-bosques/bosques-en-chile/cambio-climatico/enccrv/
         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
         Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::

.




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




     OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
     Does the project require a stand-alone EA
                                                                 Yes    [X]    No        []    NA       []
     (including EMP) report?
     If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit
     or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve                 Yes    [X]    No        []    NA       []
     the EA report?
     Are the cost and the accountabilities for the
                                                                 Yes    [X]    No        []    NA       []
     EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




     OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
     Would the project result in any significant
     conversion or degradation of critical natural     Yes               []    No        [X]   NA       []
     habitats?
     If the project would result in significant
     conversion or degradation of other (non-critical)
                                                       Yes               []    No        []    NA       [X]
     natural habitats, does the project include
     mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




     OP 4.09 - Pest Management
     Does the EA adequately address the pest
                                                                 Yes    [X]    No        []    NA       []
     management issues?
     Is a separate PMP required?                                 Yes     []    No        [X]   NA       []

     If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and
     approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?
                                                                 Yes     []    No        []    NA       [X]
     Are PMP requirements included in project
     design?If yes, does the project team include a
     Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




     OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
     Does the EA include adequate measures related
                                                         Yes   [X]   No   []    NA    []
     to cultural property?
     Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to
     mitigate the potential adverse impacts on           Yes   [X]   No   []    NA    []
     cultural property?
PHCompliance




     OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
     Has a separate Indigenous Peoples
     Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate) been
                                                        Yes    [X]   No   []    NA    []
     prepared in consultation with affected
     Indigenous Peoples?
     If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
     safeguards or Practice Manager review the          Yes    [X]   No   []    NA    []
     plan?
     If the whole project is designed to benefit IP,
     has the design been reviewed and approved by
                                                        Yes    []    No   []    NA    [X]
     the Regional Social Development Unit or
     Practice Manager?
PHCompliance




     OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
     Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy
     framework/process framework (as appropriate) Yes          [X]   No   []    NA    []
     been prepared?
     If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
     safeguards or Practice Manager review the          Yes    [X]   No   []    NA    []
     plan?
     Is physical displacement/relocation expected?      Yes    []    No   [X]   TBD   []

     Is economic displacement expected? (loss of
     assets or access to assets that leads to loss of    Yes   []    No   []    TBD   [X]
     income sources or other means of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




     OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
     Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and
     institutional issues and constraints been carried   Yes   [X]   No   []    NA    []
     out?
     Does the project design include satisfactory
                                                         Yes   [X]   No   []    NA    []
     measures to overcome these constraints?
     Does the project finance commercial
     harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions   Yes   []    No   [X]   NA    []
     for certification system?
    PHCompliance




         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
         Have relevant safeguard policies documents
                                                          Yes                 [X]   No    []   NA   []
         been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?
         Have relevant documents been disclosed in-
         country in a public place in a form and language
                                                          Yes                 [X]   No    []   NA   []
         that are understandable and accessible to
         project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    PHCompliance




         All Safeguard Policies
         Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear
         institutional responsibilities been prepared for
                                                                       Yes    [X]   No    []   NA   []
         the implementation of measures related to
         safeguard policies?
         Have costs related to safeguard policy measures
                                                                       Yes    [X]   No    []   NA   []
         been included in the project cost?
         Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of
         the project include the monitoring of safeguard
                                                                       Yes    [X]   No    []   NA   []
         impacts and measures related to safeguard
         policies?
         Have satisfactory implementation arrangements
         been agreed with the borrower and the same
                                                                       Yes    [X]   No    []   NA   []
         been adequately reflected in the project legal
         documents?

    V. Contact point
    World Bank
          PHWB
               Contact:Stavros Papageorgiou
               Title:Environmental Specialist
          PHWB
               Contact:Leonel Iglesias Gutierrez
.
               Title:Sr Natural Resources Mgmt. Spe
.


          Borrower/Client/Recipient
          PHBorr
               Name:Agencia Chilena de Cooperacion Internacional para el Desarrollo (AGCID)
               Contact:Juan Pablo Lira Bianchi
               Title:Executive Director
.
               Email:agencia@agci.gob.cl
.

.


          Implementing Agencies
          PHIMP
               Name:Corporacion Nacional Forestal (CONAF)
               Contact:Jose Antonio Prado
               Title:Jefe de la Unidad de Cambio Climatico y Servicios Ambientale
.
               Email:jose.prado@conaf.cl
.

.
VI. For more information contact:
.

        The World Bank
        1818 H Street, NW
        Washington, D.C. 20433
        Telephone: (202) 473-1000
        Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects
    VII. Approval
     Task Team Leader(s):           Name:Stavros Papageorgiou,Leonel Iglesias Gutierrez
     Approved By:
     PHNonTransf




     Safeguards Advisor:           Name: Noreen Beg (SA)                      Date: 10-Sep-2018
     Practice Manager/Manager:     Name: Valerie Hickey (PMGR)                Date: 10-Sep-2018
     Country Director:             Name:Boris Enrique Utria (CD)              Date:21-Sep-2018
