The World Bank                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Nov-2018| Report No: ISDSA25993




                       Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                              Country Director:    Pierre Frank Laporte
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Karin Erika Kemper
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Maria Sarraf
                            Task Team Leader:      Salimata D. Follea
               The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
               Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
    P163004                                                       Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Salimata D. Follea                                            Cote d'Ivoire
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    30-Aug-2019                                                   B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    SAFE1                                                         No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY                 -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              4.50
    Total Financing                                                                                                 4.50
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS   -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                   4.50
         Climate Investment Funds                                                                                   4.50


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of local communities, community-based and civil society
  organizations to participate in sustainable forest and land management and REDD+ processes at the local, national and
. global levels.
         The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
         Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)




 Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION


The Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM) is a unique global initiative under the Forest Investment Program (FIP). The
DGM was set up to enhance the capacity of local communities in eligible countries and provide grants that support local
community initiatives. The proposed five-year DGM project in Côte d’Ivoire is a stand-alone project that is consistent with
FIP objectives and well-aligned with the ongoing FIP project in Côte d’Ivoire, complementing its aim to promote
sustainable forest management by focusing on the community aspects of forest and land management.
The DGM for Côte d’Ivoire has been prepared through a participatory process. The government led consultations with
communities in the Center and South-West regions, engaging a total of 1,489 participants, 15 percent of whom were
women. These consultations led to the appointment of community representatives to the DGM National Steering
Committee (NSC). Members of the civil society including local community (MALEBI), the government, SODEFOR, ANADER,
OIPR, SEP-REDD+ play an advisory role to the NSC. The NSC has subsequently held six meetings to guide preparation of
the DGM Côte d’Ivoire project, the process of identifying the National Executing Agency (NEA), and initiation of the
establishment of internal governance mechanisms for the NSC – including electing the president, members, and taking
into account community representation. The NSC has selected and tasked the non-governmental organization (NGO) CARE
International – Côte D’Ivoire with implementing the DGM project.

Project Components
Component 1: Capacity Building for Local Communities

This component aims to increase the capacity of local communities in project areas. The component will finance
capacity-building activities, communication events and materials, operational costs for workshops in targeted DGM
project areas, most of which are also FIP communities. This component will include three sub-components.
Sub-Component 1.1 – Capacity building of the NSC: This sub-component aims to increase and strengthen the capacity of
the DGM National Steering Committee. It will focus on decision-making skills, monitoring of sub-projects, grievance
processes, technical trainings, and national/international trips to other DGM and non-DGM countries. This sub-component
will train the NSC to make long-term decisions on selection of sub-grants by thinking about the consequences of each
action in the short, medium, and long-term as a basis for rationalizing natural resources-related decisions.
Sub-Component 1.2 – Capacity building, agroforestry and restoration techniques: This sub-component aims to provide
in-depth trainings to foster a technical understanding of agroforestry, forest restoration, and REDD+ activities. It will also
raise awareness and provide general and specialized trainings on the short-and long-term impacts of deforestation and
forest degradation and climate change, as well as the rationale for REDD+.
Sub-Component 1.3 – Capacity building of beneficiaries to develop sub-projects: It is anticipated that this sub-
component will finance necessary trainings for grant proposal writing. All potential grantees who have completed trainings
under Sub-Component 1.2 (with a signed certificate of completion) may then receive grant proposal training before
submitting their grant proposals.

Component 2: Development and implementation of a performance-based system to reduce pressure on forest
resources
          The World Bank                                                                                          Appraisal ISDS
          Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)



The objective of this component is to perform agroforestry activities in the project target areas to reduce pressure on
forest resources.
The project will finance performance-based agroforestry and afforestation sub-projects through: (i) initial supply of
seedlings to individuals or communities engaged in the DGM; (ii) sub-grant payments triggered first by introduction of a
certain number of plants onto landholdings (e.g. 50 to 100 per hectare, on the basis of a fixed price per planted tree) and
then by survival rate at the end of a specified period (up to 5 years); and (iii) long-term tree conservation. Performance-
based contracts will be established between the beneficiaries and the DGM project with clear provisions and actions that
will trigger payments to sub-projects. The sub-projects will be signed by men and women who will not be tied to land
ownership, which may exclude women from the benefit of the program. In addition, at least 50% of the funds from the
sub-projects will be dedicated to women for specific targeted activities. The provision will be included in the project
implementation manual.
Sub-projects will include: (i) agroforestry operations involving the introduction of trees, including of nutritional value, on
cocoa, rubber, palm oil and vegetable farms; and (ii) village afforestation or reforestation and tree planting with nutritional
value.
Each sub-project will be subject to a performance-based contract between the beneficiaries and the DGM project,
including clear provisions and actions to trigger the flow of payments. The performance-based system will draw lessons
from existing incentive payment mechanisms, particularly those in East Africa, which have pursued targeted strategies
and innovative practices to ensure that women benefit directly from these initiatives, e.g. non-signatory signatories, land
titles, direct payments (to both women and men), rotating leadership rules for payments to groups and digital systems to
track sub-projects.
Eligible beneficiaries should have their farmlands in the target areas of the DGM project. They will include small
individual farmers and farmer associations. Associations must provide proof of official recognition; they must also
demonstrate transparent and inclusive governance, including financial propriety, representative membership, rotating
leadership, and women in leadership positions.
To guide individuals or associations in the development of eligible sub-projects, this component will finance: (i) technical
assistance for the development of standardized operational manual framework for guiding beneficiaries in technical
development; technical assistance for agroforestry and forest plantations (nursery development, field preparation,
species, number of trees per hectare for agroforestry, value per tree, maintenance techniques, including firewalls, long-
term conservation techniques); (ii) technical assistance to assist communities in the development and implementation of
DGM project-financed sub-projects; and (iii) grants to beneficiaries for the implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of
sub-projects.
The sub-projects will be selected quarterly by the NSC that was set up on November 24, 2017 and formalized by order of
the Minister in charge of Environment. The eligible sub-projects will include, but are not limited to, the following activities:
a. Establishment of nurseries;
b. Promotion of environmental education activities (sensitization and training of primary and secondary school students,
   establishment of groves, creation of school nurseries);
c. Forest regeneration and reforestation;
d. Creation of orchards including those of medicinal, food, lumber, and firewood purposes;
e. Agroforestry (food crops and forestry species) and water and soil conservation activities;
f.   Integrated water management;
g. Climate-smart agriculture;
            The World Bank                                                                                     Appraisal ISDS
            Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)



h. Community forest management;
i.     Sustainable management of non-timber forest products.

Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring, and Communication

This component will support management, monitoring, and coordination of project activities. This component covers
the incremental operational and managerial costs of the NEA team to carry out its tasks and overall responsibilities, as
well as the additional costs for the design and implementation of a robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system and
an efficient project-related Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM). The GRM will be culturally appropriate and able to
address and resolve in a timely manner any project-related grievances (as per DGM Operational Guidelines). The GRM will
build on those implemented by other projects in the WB FIP and FCPF portfolios.
Expected outputs include: (i) overall project management; (ii) implementation support to the NSC; (iii) M&E; (iv)
communication, reporting, and knowledge management; and (v) the GRM. The project will finance staff, consultants,
goods, and operational costs of the NEA.



     Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
     The project’s activities target the country’s South-West (current cocoa loop) and Center zones (former cocoa
     loop).



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Salamata Bal, Social Specialist
    Abdoul Wahabi Seini, Social Specialist
    Abdoulaye Gadiere, Environmental Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

      Safeguard Policies                          Triggered            Explanation

                                                                       The operation will finance forest restoration,
                                                                       REDD+ activities; agroforestry operations involving
                                                                       the introduction of trees, including of nutritional
                                                                       value, on cocoa, rubber, palm oil and vegetable
     Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01          Yes
                                                                       farms, villages afforestation or reforestation and
                                                                       tree planting with nutritional value. In addition to
                                                                       that, the project intends to support the
                                                                       establishment of nurseries; the creation of
      The World Bank                                                                                   Appraisal ISDS
      Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)



                                                              orchards including those of medicinal, food,
                                                              lumber, and firewood purposes; water and soil
                                                              conservation       activities;   Integrated     water
                                                              management; Climate-smart agriculture, etc.
                                                              However, no one of the above activities’ locations
                                                              is known to date with certainty. Consequently, an
                                                              Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                              (ESMF) was prepared, reviewed, consulted upon
                                                              and disclosed in Cote d’Ivoire on March 16, 2019
                                                              and on the Bank’s website on March 19, 2019.
                                                              The project aims at enhancing the quality of the
                                                              management of forest and woodlands. But, some
                                                              activities will take place in GFs and those activities
                                                              may affect natural habitats. Consequently, the
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes
                                                              policy is triggered with the aim of paying special
                                                              attention to these particular ecosystems. The ESMF
                                                              includes a specific section setting out guidelines for
                                                              a proper management of natural habitats.
                                                              No activity of the project is expected to promote
                                                              timber exploitation or to finance activities which
                                                              will contribute to destroy the forest. OP4.36 is
                                                              triggered to underscore the attention that must be
                                                              paid to aspects related to the protection of the
                                                              forest resources during project preparation and
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes                  implementation. Improving Forestry management
                                                              policies is a primary focus of this project. While the
                                                              project will explore integrated forest management
                                                              as part of a strategy of increasing carbon
                                                              sequestration potential the main expected result is
                                                              improved forest management. The ESMF includes
                                                              guidance on managing forestry issues.
                                                              Agricultural intensification such as the agriculture
                                                              zero deforestation of cocoa production and
                                                              reforestation activities, for instance, could require
                                                              pest management in the course of project
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes
                                                              implementation. The ESMF prepared in compliance
                                                              with OP4.01 took into account critical issues that
                                                              might arise from pesticides misuse and promotes a
                                                              good pest management approach.
                                                              This policy is triggered because the project will
                                                              support some civil works that may need earth
                                                              excavations even if on a small scale. For that
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes
                                                              reason, the ESMF includes Chance find procedures
                                                              in case physical cultural properties are
                                                              encountered.
                                                              There are no Indigenous People as defined by the
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No
                                                              Bank in the project area.
        The World Bank                                                                                           Appraisal ISDS
        Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)



                                                                       No involuntary resettlement is anticipated.
                                                                       However, because of the possibility for limitation of
                                                                       access to natural resources a Process Framework
                                                                       was prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in
                                                                       the Cote d'Ivoire and on the bank's website on
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           Yes                     March 16, 2019 and on March 19, 2019
                                                                       respectively. In addition, due to potential land
                                                                       acquisition, a Resettlement Policy Framework(RPF)
                                                                       was also prepared, reviewed , consulted upon and
                                                                       disclosed in Cote d'Ivoire on March 16 and on
                                                                       Bank's website on March 19, 2019.
                                                                       The project will not finance dam or dam-related
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No
                                                                       investments.
                                                                       The project will not depend on international
 Projects on International Waterways
                                               No                      waterways and will not finance water resources use
 OP/BP 7.50
                                                                       activities.
                                                                       This project is not being implemented in any
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No
                                                                       disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
I. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   No significant environmental impacts are expected from this project as its objective is to promote sound natural
   resources management. However, it is necessary for the safe of the environmental integrity of the project to follow
   a structured assessment process to ensure that no activities will have unintended consequences on the environment.
   The ESMF has identified the following risks that will need special attention even if they are very limited and in small
   scale: (i) risk of conflict related to land use, (ii) risk of extension of cocoa crops, (iii) disappearance of certain plant
   species of ethnobotanical and medicinal utility following the use of pesticides, (iv) water and soil pollution, (v) erosion,
   (vi) bush fires, (vii) insufficient implementation of Benefit-sharing plan.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
   Land issues are very sensitive in Cote d’Ivoire. For instance, they have played a part in the period of instability seen in
   recent years and still have the potential to threaten the current stability. The financing of some activities for which
   land ownership is unclear could raise tension between communities. As precautionary measures, the project will
   check the land status for each activity so that it is clear that no concern exists before financing the activity. In cases
   of irreconcilable disagreement, the project will not finance the corresponding activity.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
   The project will explore all options while financing an activity to minimize its footprint on the space as well as its
   negative environmental and social impacts.
       The World Bank                                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
       Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)




4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The project was rated as a category ‘’B’’ and triggers six (06) safeguards policies. In order to prepare for addressing
  the potential negative impact, the Government has prepared three appropriate safeguards instruments: an
  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Process Framework (PF) and a Resettlement Policy
  Framework (RPF).
  The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for component's activities. It also includes:
  Guidelines for an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)and, a summary of the World Bank's safeguard
  policies. It will also contain chapters on preserving forests, natural habitats, safer management of pesticides as well
  as guidelines for a proper management of Physical Cultural Resources in case those properties are encountered.
  The RPF has been prepared by the government to address such circumstances and supervision and monitoring will
  identify if Resettlement Action Plans will need to be prepared during implementation to address any land acquisition
  or temporary displacement of livelihood activities. The RPF has been
  developed to address potential land acquisition or loss of economic activity on the part of individuals or groups of
  individuals in project intervention zones.
  The Process Framework describes the principles and procedures to follow up when potential limitation to accessing
  some natural resources may happen during a project implementation phase.
  These three documents have been prepared, in full compliance with the Ivoirian legal and regulatory framework and
  World Bank safeguard policies, including a broad consultation framework involving all relevant stakeholder groups,
  both public and private, as well as civil society. After consultations, these three safeguard instruments have been
  disclosed within the country on March 16 and on the World Bank’s website on March 19, 2019.
  Safeguards documents include guidelines on Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS), and clearly mentions that the
  company’s Environmental and Social Management Plan (Works-ESMP) must be approved by the PIU and their
  partners prior to the works commencement. Moreover, the bidding documents and the contracts for main
  contractors as well as the sub-contractors must also include sections related to OHS.
  To ensure that the safeguard instruments prepared in line with policies triggered by the project are implemented
  properly, the PIU will hire an environmental safeguard specialist and a social safeguards specialist. The social
  safeguards specialist must have additional experience in GBV, Social inclusion and any labor related risk. Both
  specialists will be fully in charge of all aspects of environmental and social safeguards aspects and will regularly
  monitor all safeguard requirements. More specifically, the two specialists, the whole PIU, the implementing agencies
  as well as the other stakeholders will ensure that children are not employed in civil works as labor force.
  World Bank implementing support missions will also include environmental and social safeguards specialists to ensure
  that all safeguard issues are addressed properly, in a timely manner.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  One of the key principles of this project from the outset was to foster participation of all relevant stakeholders
  composed of Ministry of forests and water resources, Ministry of environment and sustainable development, Ministry
  of agriculture and rural development, SODEFOR, OIPR, private sector, NGOs, communities, etc. This approach will be
  sustained throughout the project implementation. The environmental and social assessment studies, namely the
  ESMF, PF and RPF, were also carried out according to the same principle, using broad-based public consultation
  approach, involving the above stakeholder groups. The objective was to raise awareness of project activities and
  impacts and foster ownership on their part. All the relevant bodies have been adequately informed of the Project.
  Concerns of the communities and some details of consultations have been taken into account in the body of the
  report and other results provided as Annexes in the ESMF, PF and RPF.
                        The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
                        Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)




DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
       28-Feb-2019                                                       19-Mar-2019
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

RESETTLE_TABLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
28-Feb-2019                                                                19-Mar-2019
“In country? Disclosure

PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure

       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                 C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                             Yes

          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                               Yes
          and approve the EA report?

          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes



          NH_TABLE
          OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
        The World Bank                                                                      Appraisal ISDS
        Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)



Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                      NA
natural habitats?

If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures              NA
acceptable to the Bank?



PM_TABLE
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                            Yes

Is a separate PMP required?                                                           NA

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project         NA
team include a Pest Management Specialist?



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                   Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                      Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                      Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                      Yes
review the plan?



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?
            The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
            Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Cote d'Ivoire (P163004)



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




II. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Salimata D. Follea


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                       Hanneke Van Tilburg                       16-Sep-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Maria Sarraf                              16-Sep-2019

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
