The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2018| Report No: ISDSA24233




                       Regional Vice President:    Laura Tuck
                              Country Director:    Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Sameh Naguib Wahba Tadros
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Phillip Karp
                            Task Team Leader:      Kevin A. Milroy
              The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
              Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
                                                                 Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach
    P164635
                                                                 of the Sustainable Cities IAP
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Kevin A. Milroy                                              World
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    26-Feb-2018                                                      B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                                    Is this a Repeater project?
    GSUGP                                                            No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              2.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                 2.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                   2.00
         Global Environment Facility - IBRD as Implementing Agency                                                  2.00


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  To strengthen the Global Platform for Sustainable Cities (GPSC) for more integrated and sustainable urban planning and
. development through city-to-city and network knowledge sharing.
        The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
        Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)




 Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The project is supporting the knowledge platform of the GEF-funded Sustainable Cities Integrated Approach
Pilot (SC IAP) program. The SC-IAP consists of two tracks:

   A. City-level projects, located in 28 cities across 11 countries with around US$140 million total GEF grant
       funding. Each country is supported by one or several implementing agencies to manage the various
       projects in the participating cities. See Annex for additional information.
    B. The Global Platform for Sustainable Cities (GPSC), led by the World Bank with US$10 million-GEF grant
       funding. The GPSC is a knowledge platform that ties all participating cities together and provides a
       collaborative space for aspiring cities and a wide range of entities already working on urban
       sustainability issues.

Additional and complementary support for the GPSC is being provided through this project, the Urban
Networking for Sustainable Cities project (the "Resource Team").

Through a holistic and integrated approach, the SC-IAP program: (i) facilitates knowledge-sharing among city
leaders on policy reform and innovation to inform and inspire climate action; (ii) develops and deploys
common standards and tools, that will help enhance credibility, transparency and usability of cities’
commitments for environmental sustainability and GHG reductions; (iii) enhances the capacity of city leaders
to develop and execute city-wide low-carbon plans; and (iv) provides finance for selected urban low-carbon
infrastructure across a range of sectors like for example transport, energy, buildings, waste and water.

A key value-added to be brought by the SC-IAP program is promoting the integration of environmental
sustainability into city planning and management in SC-IAP target cities, and contributing these same
“environmental? considerations to a potentially larger number of other urban centers associated with the
existing initiatives mentioned above, therefore having a potentially transformative impact through the
network of cities embarked on this trajectory. To ensure this approach, the program is organized around two
major priorities (i) to help 28 cities promote an integrated approach through actual investment in their
priority; and (ii) to create a global platform for knowledge sharing among cities, primarily focusing on the 28
but others as well. This framework will help ensure that 28 cities can harness relevant state of the art thinking
/methods of integrated urban planning (from a global marketplace of an enormous amount of knowledge
products, guidelines and tools) , and at the same time share their experiences globally through networks of
Mayors and city experts. The knowledge sharing platform is therefore a unique feature of the program with
huge potential of scaling up of transformation by bringing focused, relevant and timely knowledge to SC-IAP
cities.
         The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
         Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)



The GPSC was launched in March 2016 as a platform dedicated to providing space for collaborative
engagement by cities with aspirations for sustainability, and a wide range of entities already working to
support those cities. The GPSC will engage partners and city networks to promote integrated urban design,
planning and management, resulting in sustainable, resilient, and environmentally sound urban development.
It aims to:

   i.   Promote and advise an improved approach and method to integrated urban planning and
        performance, to the 28 participating cities in the SC-IAP;
    ii. Train and connect the participating cities, as well as other cities that might be interested in this topic
        and in future participation in the program, on integrated sustainability planning by taking as starting
        points their concrete contexts, barriers and opportunities to achieve integration with a focus on urban
        infrastructure, policy, people and investments; and,
    iii. Provide access to a wide range of existing tools and knowledge relevant to integrated urban planning
         and implementation that will support the cities to deliver effective integrated urban planning.

The day to day activities under the GPSC (including via this complementary project) will include extensive
consultations and technical support to cities based on their demands and needs, and the expertise available
within the partnership players of the GPSC. This will include Data/Indicators & Tools, Sustainability Planning,
and Financial Sustainability among other such “services.? These services will be delivered in the form of
capacity building, training, technical assistance, review of sustainability plans, documents and processes.
North-south or south-south exchanges will also be strongly encouraged and facilitated. Support will be
available to cities on a continuing basis through the course of the project.

In order to accommodate these multiple priorities and at the same time facilitate the effectiveness of the
GPSC, additional effort is needed, through this current project, to harness the strengths of existing city
networks. This GEF-funded project is a response to this critical need, and will provide resources for an
enhanced and coordinated urban support to the SC-IAP cities and their efforts to increase connectivity with
other city good practices and solutions as well as to inform and connect them to global policy developments in
the field of sustainability, along with specific knowledge and data at the local level. Given the urgency of the
agenda, this offers an opportunity to extend the reach of the Cities-IAP in real time, accelerating the Program
replication pathway.

The Urban Networking for Sustainable Cities project (the "Resource Team") will be linked directly to the GPSC
project under the SC-IAP for which the WB serves as GEF Agency, and will offer technical support on a demand-
driven basis to cities around two thematic areas: local climate action and sustainable development. Through a
collaborative effort by key technical partners and city networks, and in conjunction with the SC-IAP program
activities, the Urban Networking project will enable wider access to other knowledge platforms, promote
peer-to-peer learning opportunities (webinars, one-on-one meetings, workshops, study tours), and access to a
wider range of good practices and other cities with relevant experience
           The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
           Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)



The project has four components of activities.

(1)     City Access Point to Resource Team Services - Identification and delivery of peer-to-peer opportunities
in the city network that have presence and useful practical experiences in areas of work included in the child
projects of the 28 SCIAP cities (e.g., transit-oriented development, water, finance for sustainability, planning,
indicators). Activities include needs assessments and capacity development plans; and, delivery and
documentation of peer-to-peer exchanges.

(2)    Learning Events, Webinars and Linkages to Global Events – Facilitating learning from the experiences of
the participating cities, and promotion of the work of the GPSC through awareness of and access to
international processes. Activities include City Academies, two-day training workshops for GPSC cities; side
events/panels during global city forums, and promotional events designed to promote participation in the
GPSC by non-GPSC cities; and, webinars providing insights and shared experience on a particular strategy or
solution related to climate change and sustainable development, including best practices and lessons of
experience from other cities;

(3)     Knowledge Management Documentation – Provide a platform to curate and catalog cutting-edge
knowledge, advocate for good practices related to sustainable urban development, connect cities through the
networks of the GPSC, and assist potential applicant cities to the GEF grants in the preparation of their
sustainability programs. Inputs include production of new knowledge products and adaptation or translation
of existing tools, such as working papers, guidelines or frameworks, which will be disseminated through the
GPSC technical knowledge library; and, contribution of existing knowledge products to the GPSC platform.

(4)     Project Management of the overall project, including coordinating different components and activities
led by specific partners. Activities include sub-granting supervision, report writing, activity coordination,
 representation at project meetings, periodic meetings with working groups, and related activities.

    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The GPSC covers around 28 cities (originally 23 approved) across 11 pilot countries: Brazil, China, Cote
    d’Ivoire, India, Malaysia, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Senegal, South Africa, and Vietnam.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Vincent Roquet, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Brandon Enrique Carter, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
       The World Bank                                                                                  Appraisal ISDS
       Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)



SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

 Safeguard Policies                      Triggered             Explanation

                                                               The project involves conducting needs assessment
                                                               and capacity development through knowledge
                                                               sharing and development of knowledge products to
                                                               promote good practice in environmental and social
                                                               sustainability. This includes climate action planning
                                                               and resilience planning through activities such as
                                                               supporting GHG inventory and low-carbon
                                                               infrastructure in the water and wastewater,
                                                               mobility and transport, buildings, and energy
                                                               sectors. The project also offers the possibility of
                                                               disseminating new approaches for fostering social
                                                               inclusion in infrastructure projects such as
                                                               improved design for community cohesion and
                                                               gender integration, for persons with disabilities, or
                                                               for prevention of gender-based violence. This
                                                               extends to new approaches to minimizing
                                                               involuntary resettlement including in situ
                                                               redevelopment and land consolidation and
                                                               readjustment. The quality of practices and
                                                               materials hosted on the GPSC platform will be
                                                               vetted by WRI and the Bank’s GPSC Task Team.
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes
                                                               The project includes no physical works, results in no
                                                               direct environmental or social impacts and is
                                                               mainly focused on knowledge sharing . However,
                                                               the project does involve technical assistance
                                                               through the development of new knowledge
                                                               products and adaptation of existing tools, such as
                                                               working papers, guidelines or tools, which will be
                                                               part of the technical knowledge library to be hosted
                                                               on the GPSC platform. The provision of TA under
                                                               the project triggers the Bank’s OP/BP 4.01 on
                                                               Environmental          Assessment.        Applicable
                                                               requirements under this policy include the
                                                               preparation and public disclosure prior to Appraisal
                                                               of a brief Environmental and Social Management
                                                               Framework (1 to 2 pages) highlighting the E&S
                                                               issues to be addressed in urban development plans
                                                               and investments covered by the GPSC. Public
                                                               consultations would be limited to an online public
                                                               comments period on the Draft ESMF.
           The World Bank                                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
           Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)



                                                                       Outcomes of the project will support knowledge
                                                                       sharing and capacity development for child
                                                                       projects, however implementation of the child
                                                                       projects is not causally or sequentially linked to the
                                                                       GPSC . The child projects may be implemented by
                                                                       different implementing agencies including the
                                                                       World Bank, UNIDO, IADB, ADB, Dev Bank of South
                                                                       Africa, etc, and will be subject to the relevant
                                                                       implementing agencies’ environmental and social
                                                                       standards or safeguards requirements. Any child
                                                                       project subject to future World Bank support will be
                                                                       subject to full World Bank safeguards requirements
                                                                       and due diligence.

                                                                       The World Bank’s environmental and social
                                                                       safeguards principles and good practice will be
                                                                       incorporated into the Knowledge platform
                                                                       (Component 3) and Learning and Promotional
                                                                       Events (Component 2), as appropriate. These
                                                                       principles will be set out in the Terms of Reference
                                                                       for the activities and included in the Operations
                                                                       Manual.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No
 Pest Management OP 4.09                        No
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            No
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No
 Projects on International Waterways
                                                No
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The project includes no physical works, results in no direct environmental or social impacts, and is mainly focused on
      knowledge sharing. However, the project does involve technical assistance through the development of new
            The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
            Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)



       knowledge products and adaptation of existing tools, and learning events where TA would be delivered through
       training, sharing of good practices and other activities. Assurance is needed that these activities would comply with
       World Bank safeguard policies, which aim to protect stakeholders and mitigate possible negative environmental and
       social consequences from the knowledge products and learning activities, and to promote positive environmental
       and social benefits.



     2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
       The training and capacity-building provided to officials from participating cities and countries, as well as the
       knowledge assets produced through the project that will become part of the GPSC knowledge library, will continue
       to have impacts after the life of the project.


     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.




     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
       The recipient, WRI, does not have direct experience implementing WB safeguards policy, but WRI's project staff have
       previous experience working with the policies. WRI monitors the safeguards policies of the WB, Asian Development
       Bank and others, as reported through WRI blog posts and working papers, and advocates for application of strong
       global environmental and social safeguards. For this project, WRI will review the individual activity plans and terms
       of reference for new knowledge products or training events, or adaptation of existing products and training events,
       with the World Bank task team (including safeguard specialists).


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The project has a global scope, with project beneficiaries being the cities and countries participating in the SC-IAP
       program, and stakeholders including civil society, private sector, governmental agencies, universities, and others. The
       ESMF will be publically disclosed and comments welcomed.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
08-Feb-2018                                                       12-Mar-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure
           The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
           Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)




 Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
 World                                                          12-Mar-2018
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                              No



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                 NA
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                  NA
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                 Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                 Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                 Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                 Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS
           The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
           Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)



                                          Kevin A. Milroy
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                          Xueman Wang

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager              Shobha Shetty                         01-Jun-2018

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
            The World Bank                                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
            Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)



                                                                                                                              ANNEX


                    Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP



Country Activity Summaries1

The following country child projects were approved as part of the SC-IAP:

       1. Brazil: $25m GEF Grant; $193m co-financing
          Project Proponent: Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MCTI)
          Implementing Agency: UNEP

           A Brazilian Knowledge Platform (+250 cities/users) is being developed with a focus on IT tools, indicators,
           content management, social media and capacity building, and its relevant connections to the Global Knowledge
           Platform (GKP). Recife and Brasilia will be pilot cities for the Brazilian KP.
               • Recife: will focus on green transport (solar boats, bikes and electric cars, ferries), green roofs, filtering
                    gardens, intermodal stations, and a transit app. Some themes include: coastal city, long transport time,
                    pollution, water shortage, and energy consumption
               • Brasilia: will focus on watershed restoration, dumpsite soil remediation, renewable energies (solar and
                    LED pilots), and an eco-econ zoning tool. Themes include: clean water, metro area, and an increasing
                    population.


       2. China: $32m GEF Grant; $411m leverage (initial estimate)
          Project Proponent: Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Housing, Urban and Rural Development (MOHURD) and
          seven participating cities
          Implementing Agency: WB

           China is currently developing the framework to select projects in the seven participating cities (Guiyang,
           Shenzhen, Ningbo, Nanchang, Beijing, Tianjin, Shijiazhuang). A new budget law and restrictions on land-based
           financing means Chinese cities must look for new sources of financing (PPPs, green bonds, capital market
           development). The project will focus on compact, mixed-used development, and transit-oriented development
           with a shift toward walking, biking and high quality transit. Key themes include people-centered development
           and green infrastructure/energy/ transport.


       3. Côte D’Ivoire: $5.2m GEF Grant; $21.3 co-financing
          Project Proponent: Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Environment, District of Abidjan
          Implementing Agency: AfDB, UNIDO

           Rapid urbanization has resulted in fragmented and dispersed urban growth on the plateaus of Abidjan. Poor
           transport infrastructure makes waste management difficult, and the reliance on imported used cars as a mode
           of transportation is a major source of air pollution. The projects in Abidjan attempt to improve spatial planning
           by creating a mobility plan, a resilience plan, and an intelligent transport system plan. The air quality will be


1
    The summary of country activities come from the first GEF-6 consultative committee meeting on October 8-9, 2015 in Paris, France.
     The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
     Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)



   monitored, and cleaner fuels, a younger vehicle fleet, better engine technologies and the enforcement of vehicle
   emissions will be promoted. Themes include: integrated land use and transport plan, air pollution and
   congestion.


4. India: $12.3m GEF Grant, TBD co-financing
   Project Proponent: Ministry of Urban Development
   Implementing Agency: UNIDO

   India already has three national initiatives on cities: Swaach Bharat (focusing on “Clean Cities?: hygiene, waste
   management, and sanitation), Smart Cities (core infrastructure, quality of life, sustainable environment), and
   AMRUT (basic services for quality of life). Many Indian cities lack in basic urban infrastructure.
       • Vijayawada: will focus on waste to energy plant, bio-methanation from sewage treatment plants.
       • Guntur: will focus on underground drainage system and a waste to energy plant.
       • Mysore: will focus on a compost plant and biogas plant.
       • Jaipur: will focus on a waste to energy plant and a common treatment plant for textiles.
       • Bhopal: will focus on a solid waste management and sewage management, as well as last mile connectivity
            to the city’s public transport system.


5. Malaysia: $2.7m GEF Grant; $18m co-financing
   Project Proponent: Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology
   Implementing Agency: UNIDO

   Running parallel to Malaysia’s Smart City Program, the SC-IAP projects will address three sectors: energy,
   transportation and buildings. Melaka already has a Green City Action Plan 2020 and this child project would help
   achieve some of the goals therein. Some priorities include directing and creating demand for sustainable
   development (incentive schemes, funding models, green procurement, PPPs), improving planning capacities of
   pilot cities through training modules, increasing local awareness, and electric vehicle pilot projects with the
   supporting infrastructure, the development of a Green Mobility Master Plan, and pilot projects promoting
   energy efficiency in commercial and governmental buildings. A Green Building Index was developed in 2009.


6. Mexico: $13.7m GEF Grant; $110m co-financing
   Project Proponent: BANOBRAS
   Implementing Agency: IADB

   All three participating cities have already undergone the first phase of IADB’s Emerging and Sustainable Cities
   Initiative; there are 117 indicators with an action plan. Support from SC-IAP will help implement the
   recommendations stated in the Action Plans.
        • Xalapa: will (1) rationalize mass urban transit, (2) integrate the railroad tracks to the urban space, (3)
            create a land bank to promote compactness, (4) create a pilot to integrate public spaces through
            walkways, and (5) implement a system of cycling routes. Regarding water, wastewater and sanitation: (1)
            ensure access to clean water sources, (2) increase sewer coverage, (3) improve operations of the water
            utility, and (4) build a new landfill.
        • Campeche: will (1) modernize water and wastewater system to reduce contamination of Campeche Bay,
            (2) create sub-centers to reduce congestion and concentrate growth.
     The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
     Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)



       •   La Paz: will tackle air pollution, water scarcity, and the creation of a photovoltaic plant for solar energy.


7. Paraguay: $7.4m GEF Grant; $240m co-financing
   Project Proponent: Secretariat of Environment, Ministry of Public Works, Municipality of Asuncion
   Implementing Agency: UNDP

   Asuncion is also part of IADB’s “Emerging and Sustainable Cities Initiative? and is looking to use the SC-IAP to
   implement their ESCI Action Plan. Priorities include: (1) creating an electric BRT system and bike paths, (2)
   closing old dumpsites and opening a new landfill with an integrated recycling stream, (3) creating a traffic
   management plan and implementing vehicle minimum standards, and (4) improving management of protected
   areas and the restoration of key habitats. Major themes include transport, solid waste, conservation of critical
   ecosystems services, flooding, and biodiversity/green areas.


8. Peru: $6.4m GEF Grant; $133m co-financing
   Project Proponent: Ministry of Environment
   Implementing Agency: IADB

   Peru is attempting to establish a National Platform of Sustainable Cities and Climate Change, with Lima as the
   first pilot. The City Action Platform attempts to (1) develop planning instruments for sustainability and disaster
   risk, (2) create an institutional framework for metro Lima (43 districts), (3) establish a baseline GHG emissions
   inventory, (4) improve water infrastructure and resources, (5) address solid waste management and food
   security, and (6) improve protected area management.


9. Senegal: $8.7m GEF Grant; $51m co-financing
   Project Proponent: Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development, Municipal Development Agency
   Implementing Agency: WB, UNIDO

   The projects in Senegal (cities are Greater Dakar and Saint Louis) aim to improve flood prevention, integrate
   urban planning, sustainability and resilience, and promote renewable energy, cleaner production and integrated
   waste management for sustainable industrial parks, particularly at the newly planned Diomniadio Industrial
   Park. Urban planning documents will be created for the city of Saint Louis and the Bambylor Area. Some themes
   include coastal erosion, flooding, traffic and congestion, low-carbon technologies, and creating an urban
   planning framework.


10. South Africa: $8m GEF Grant; $119m co-financing
    Project Proponent: City of Johannesburg
    Implementing Agency: UNEP, DBSA

   South Africa already has developed national indicators on sustainable cities, while Johannesburg also has
   developed local indicators (Growth and Development Strategy—GDS 2040) to articulate a desired
   environmental path. The City of Johannesburg hopes to invest in BRT corridors and nodes, develop a green
   building index, assess energy consumption, explore fuel alternatives for public transport, assess current waste
   composition and process, address food security (assess food flow and create food action plan), train local
   officials, invest in social housing, and create a biogas project for food waste, among others.
     The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
     Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP (P164635)




11. Vietnam: $13.5m GEF Grant; $180m co-financing
    Project Proponent: Ministry of Natural Resource and Environment (MONRE), Ministry of Planning & Investment,
    and participating cities
    Implementing Agency: ADB

   The main baseline project is the ADB supported Green Cities I Program, which will support urban and global
   environmental improvement and climate resilience in three secondary cities in Vietnam. This project has
   supported the preparation of Green City Action Plans (GCAPs) in Hue, Ha Giang and Vinh Yen, and may include a
   few other secondary cities. The project will also support national upscaling of sustainable, integrated, climate-
   resilient urban development, helping the central government prepare a national framework that will prioritise,
   provide incentives and develop capacity for green, climate resilient city investments across Vietnam. The focus
   will include the use of sustainable cities indicators to guide an integrated planning framework with linked
   financial mechanisms. Finally, the project will pilot 2-3 activities in support of sustainable, climate resilient city
   development, possibly focusing on physical investments, the use of software, or innovative finance or risk
   management mechanisms such climate insurance at the city level.
