The World Bank                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2017| Report No: ISDSA23939




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Mara K. Warwick
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Susan S. Shen
                            Task Team Leader:      Roberto B. Tordecilla
            The World Bank                                                                                   Appraisal ISDS
            Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development
    P164019
                                                                Project Phase II
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Roberto B. Tordecilla                                       Philippines
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    15-Mar-2018                                                 Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU02                                                       No

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    3.20                                                        0
    Financing Gap
    0
    Finance OLD
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    Philippines - Multi-donor Trust Fund Program for Mindanao                                                      3.20
    Total                                                                                                          3.20

    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The development objective of the proposed project is to improve access of targeted communities in conflict-affected areas
. in Mindanao to basic socio-economic infrastructure and alternative learning system.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.
            The World Bank                                                                                   Appraisal ISDS
            Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)




    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project location for Phase II will be mainly at the heart of the Central Mindanao Region, in the six
    acknowledged major camps of the MILF. These six camps are located in four provinces namely,
    Maguindanao, North Cotabato, Lanao del Sur and Lanao del Norte. All these four provinces are poverty- and
    conflict-stricken areas, with Lanao del Sur having a 72% poverty incidence. The four provinces are home to
    three groups of people: (i) Moros or Muslims, (ii) Lumads or indigenous peoples, and (iii) “settlers? who are
    mostly Christians whose families or ancestors were resettled people from Luzon and the Visayas. The
    Muslims comprise the overwhelming majority in the five provinces and one city of ARMM while the total
    population of indigenous people in ARMM in 2010 was 606,452. Due to its protracted nature, the conflict in
    the Bangsamoro area has mutated in various forms. Vertical conflict (state versus rebel groups) is primarily
    between the government and the MILF, but other armed groups such as the remnants of the Moro National
    Liberation Front, the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, and elements of the Abu Sayyaf Group pose
    challenges to state authority. Horizontal conflicts abound such as political elites competing for key electoral
    positions in the government or control over scarce resource in the area, inter-ethnic competition, or inter-
    communal conflict. An important geographic feature of the project area is the river basins that encompass
    the area. The four provinces are located within the Mindanao River Basin, the second largest river basin in
    the country, and span across four regions in Central and Southern Mindanao including ARMM. There are also
    lakes located in the four provinces. The largest of these are Lake Lanao and Lake Buluan with areas of 34,000
    and 6,134 hectares respectively. These bodies of water are considered to be major lakes in the Philippines
    and are the third and sixth largest lakes in the country. There are ten (10) protected areas in the region. The
    biggest of these is the Lake Lanao Watershed Reservation with a total area of 180,460 hectares and the
    South Upi Watershed Forest Reserve with 1,894 hectares.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    Maria Loreto Padua, Social Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation
      The World Bank                                                                                   Appraisal ISDS
      Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)



                                                             In general, most sub-projects under the MTF-RDP/2
                                                             are categorized as non-environmentally critical
                                                             projects and are exempted in securing
                                                             environmental compliance certificates (ECC) under
                                                             the Philippine EIA policy. Temporary, short-term
                                                             and minimal construction-related environmental
                                                             impacts such as the increase in dust, noise, and
                                                             vibration, generation of construction debris and
                                                             solid wastes, vegetation loss, and siltation due to
                                                             loose soil and unstable slopes as well as
                                                             occupational health and safety are anticipated and
                                                             will be mitigated during construction period.
                                                             Potential social risks relate to loss of structures,
                                                             crops, trees and other assets as a result of
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01     Yes                  acquisition of small parcels of land for required civil
                                                             works and exclusion/marginalization of vulnerable
                                                             groups.

                                                             The project has an environmental and social
                                                             screening and management mechanism that
                                                             identifies prohibited sub-projects (e.g. community
                                                             roads into protected areas or procurement of
                                                             pesticides) and those with adverse social and
                                                             environmental impacts. The project has planned
                                                             and earmarked resources for marginalized groups
                                                             such as women and IPs. The POs and Camp JTFCTs
                                                             will be properly informed of the prohibited sub-
                                                             projects so that they will be guided accordingly at
                                                             the outset of preparing the subproject proposals.
                                                             This policy is not triggered because the small-scale
                                                             nature of the community sub-projects under this
                                                             project is unlikely to impact natural habitats. As
                                                             practiced under the previous phase, safeguards
                                                             screening under OP 4.01 provides sufficient
                                                             guidance and process for the project team and
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No                   communities to avoid creating adverse impacts on
                                                             people and environment. Impacts on natural
                                                             habitats are avoided as socio-economic
                                                             infrastructures were sited either on existing
                                                             barangay roads (in case of access path or village
                                                             road rehabilitation), residential areas or village
                                                             centers.
                                                             The project activities are not expected to create or
                                                             induce deforestation and their environmental
Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No                   impact is not expected to compromise the integrity
                                                             and health of forested areas. Some minor clearings
                                                             of trees, shrubs and undergrowth within urban
      The World Bank                                                                                  Appraisal ISDS
      Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)



                                                             areas may be necessary under the physical
                                                             investments.
                                                             This policy is not triggered as activities under the
                                                             Project are not expected to trigger or require use of
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
                                                             pesticides, herbicides and other harmful
                                                             substances.
                                                             The EA screening described in the ESSF was
                                                             sufficient in guiding the project team and
                                                             communities in avoiding sites with PCR, which are
                                                             mainly graves and mosques in the Bangsamoro
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No
                                                             areas. Community volunteers who will supervise
                                                             the civil works are knowledgeable of their PCR. Only
                                                             small excavations will be required for some civil
                                                             works.
                                                             The MILF camps do not have defined boundaries
                                                             but they usually span several villages,
                                                             municipalities or even provinces. The selection of
                                                             communities to be assisted by MTF-RDP Phase II
                                                             will be done during project implementation. There
                                                             are IP communities in four of the six previously
                                                             acknowledged MILF camps, mostly belonging to the
                                                             Teduray and Ata Manobo groups. Some of them
                                                             have been served by MTF-RDP between January
                                                             2016 and March 2017.

                                                             The Project aims to promote protection and
                                                             welfare of IP communities by (a) ensuring free,
                                                             prior and informed participation of indigenous
                                                             peoples in the activities of the Project, so that they
                                                             are in a position to receive culturally compatible
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes                 social and economic benefits, (b) that IP are not
                                                             adversely affected during the development process
                                                             by ensuring their participation in the decision-
                                                             making processes of the project, (c) providing
                                                             avenues for IPs to determine their own
                                                             development priorities, through their indigenous
                                                             political structures, for sub-projects intended for
                                                             the IP communities, and (d) earmarking project
                                                             resources under the Community Development
                                                             Assistance Component.

                                                             The IPPF that is embedded in the ESSF has been
                                                             proven effective and sufficient in screening IP
                                                             presence once specific communities are selected
                                                             and     in     providing   culturally-appropriate
                                                             interventions. When IPs are present, subproject
                                                             proposals describe targeted activities for IPs and
           The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
           Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)



                                                                        the ESMP embeds the elements of an IP Plan. To
                                                                        strengthen project performance on IP, a social
                                                                        development specialist with IP expertise will be
                                                                        hired by the grant recipient.
                                                                        Small parcels of lands will be required for socio-
                                                                        economic infrastructure subprojects. Lands
                                                                        required for a community small-scale socio-
                                                                        economic infrastructure sub-project under MTF-
                                                                        RDP/2, similar to the previous phase, will most
                                                                        likely consist of government lands free of claims or
                                                                        encroachments, or of lands voluntarily donated by
                                                                        community members. The ESSF where the
                                                                        elements of an RPF is embedded will be the main
                                                                        instrument to address OP 4.12-related impacts. The
                                                                        ESSF now contains a voluntary land donation
                                                                        protocol. It should be noted also that resettlement
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes
                                                                        is in the negative list of MTFRDP Phase I and will be
                                                                        kept under Phase II.

                                                                        The ESSF provides a process where arrangements
                                                                        and proper documentations will ensure that the
                                                                        land donation is indeed voluntary, given that the
                                                                        donors is the legitimate owner of the land and is
                                                                        fully informed of the nature of the sub-project and
                                                                        the implication of donating the property.
                                                                        Implications refer to current and future
                                                                        implications.

                                                                        This policy is not triggered as no dams will be
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
                                                                        constructed.
 Projects on International Waterways                                    The project will not have activities on international
                                                 No
 OP/BP 7.50                                                             waterways.
                                                                        The project will not have activities in any disputed
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No
                                                                        areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Most sub-projects under the MTF-RDP/2 are small-scale and location-specific. No significant and irreversible impacts
      are foreseen. Temporary, short-term and minimal construction-related environmental impacts such as the increase
      in dust, noise, and vibration, generation of construction debris and solid wastes, vegetation loss, and siltation due to
      loose soil and unstable slopes as well as occupational health and safety are anticipated and will be mitigated during
      construction period.
            The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
            Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)




       Social impacts under the proposed projects are generally positive, given that the Project aims to provide much-
       needed socio-economic infrastructures and alternative learning programs in targeted poor and conflict-ridden
       communities. However, there are risks associated with exclusion of vulnerable groups such as women and IPs.




     2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
       Potential indirect and/or long term impacts are positive, such as improved access to community infrastructures and
       improved literacy of beneficiaries.


     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

       Not applicable.


     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
       The grant recipient has revised the Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework based on the lessons learned
       from the previous phase of MTF-RDP. A Resettlement Policy Framework that contains a Voluntary Land Protocol
       embedded in the Environment and Social Safeguards Framework has been prepared to manage any minor impacts
       that any subproject activities may cause. The Grant Recipient committed to hiring an IP expert to provide proper
       guidance in dealing with IP communities in targeted communities under the Project. Phase 2 continues to target
       women and the youths for Alternative Learning System while resources are earmarked for IP development projects
       based on their own prioritization process, with the support of a development specialist with intensive IP experience.
       On land acquisition, the Project prohibits use of project funds to purchase lands and funding of subprojects that will
       cause resettlement.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       Key stakeholders include the following: Members of the Government and MILF Implementing Panels, Members of
       the Joint Task Force on Camps Transformation, project staff of Community and Family Services International and
       Bangsamoro Development Agency, other relevant government agencies that the project team will identify during
       project implementation, and project-affected communities. The Bank has conducted a series of consultations with
       these stakeholders as part of project preparation. Regular consultations with these stakeholders will continue during
       project implementation.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
                      The World Bank                                                                                  Appraisal ISDS
                      Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)



        16-Mar-2018                                                   16-Mar-2018
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                      Date of Disclosure
            Philippines                                                  16-Mar-2018
            Comments
            The Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework was disclosed in the Grant Recipient's website.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure
16-Mar-2018                                                             16-Mar-2018
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
          Philippines                                                    16-Mar-2018
           Comments
           RPF is embedded in the ESSF.
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure
16-Mar-2018                                                             16-Mar-2018
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                      Date of Disclosure
            Philippines                                                  16-Mar-2018
            Comments
            IPPF is embedded in the ESSF
         The World Bank                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
         Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)



COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                       Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                         Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?      Yes



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                         Yes
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                         Yes
 review the plan?

 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                         NA
 approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                         Yes
 (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                         Yes
 review the plan?



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                         Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups          Yes
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
            The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
            Mindanao Trust Fund-Reconstruction and Development Project Phase II (P164019)



    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Roberto B. Tordecilla


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Susan S. Shen                             23-Mar-2018

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
