        The World Bank                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
        Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities (P166596)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                Appraisal Stage

                 Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2018| Report No: ISDSA24855




                                Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                                       Country Director:    Pierre Frank Laporte
                         Senior Global Practice Director:   Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi
                            Practice Manager/Manager:       Meskerem Mulatu
                                     Task Team Leader:      Boubakar Lompo




May 15, 2018
            The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
            Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities (P166596)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.
.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
                                                                  Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with
    P166596
                                                                  disabilities
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Boubakar Lompo                                                Burkina Faso
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    28-Jun-2018                                                   C-Not Required
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GED07                                                         No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY-NewFin1

    Total Project Cost                                                                                                3.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                   3.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00


    DETAILS-NewFinEnh1

    Non-World Bank Group Financing

       Trust Funds                                                                                                    3.00
         Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                3.00


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The project development objective is to increase the access to schooling of vulnerable children with a focus on children
. with disabilities.

May 15, 2018
            The World Bank                                                                                             Appraisal ISDS
            Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities (P166596)




    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.

    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF KNOWN)

    The project’s objective is to support the schooling of 7,000 vulnerable children from poor households with a focus on
    children with disabilities (71 percent), including at least 50 percent girls in the five poorest regions of the country and
    Ouagadougou. According to project activities, the Component 1: Improving access to preschools and primary schools
    (US$513,500) aims to implement an activity with potential minor environmental impacts and risks with Improvement of
    school environment by making small physical adjustments in schools to facilitate the mobility of children with disabilities
    or to organize remedial classes for children with disabilities at risk of school failure, etc. The risk is Low in the civil works
    view.

    The Borrower has experience in managing World Bank operations and have benefitted from other (past and ongoing) IDA
    projects which provided/are providing relatively sufficient capacity for understanding and applying safeguards policies
    (Education Access and Quality Improvement EAQIP (P148062). However, the Borrower and its potential Counterparts
    capacities have been assessed and evaluated and required to conduct environmental screenings on subprojects, reviewed
    and approved by the National Agency (BUNEE) and the Bank. The assessment and management of risks and impacts and
    the nature of this project environmental outcomes may also be influenced by or be dependent upon the role played by
    third interested parties.

    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Leandre Yameogo, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    Gertrude Marie Mathilda Coulibaly Zombre, Social Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

     Safeguard Policies                                   Triggered          Explanation

                                                                             According to project activities, the Component 1
                                                                             (Improving access to preschools and primary
                                                                             schools aims to implement an activity with potential
     Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      No             environmental impacts and risks with Improvement
                                                                             of school environment by making small physical
                                                                             adjustments in schools to facilitate the mobility of
                                                                             children with disabilities or to organize remedial

May 15, 2018
         The World Bank                                                                                           Appraisal ISDS
         Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities (P166596)



                                                                       classes for children with disabilities at risk of school
                                                                       failure, etc. However, simple mitigation measures
                                                                       plan (Environmental requirement) will prepared and
                                                                       included in the bidding documents for the
                                                                       contractors and monitored by the project
                                                                       implementation unit.

                                                                       The project activities will not be implemented in
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                            No
                                                                       areas hosting natural habitats.
                                                                       The project will not support activities related to
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                                     No            forest exploitation or management or might have
                                                                       potential adverse impacts on forested areas.
  Pest Management OP 4.09                                No            The project does not involve pests management.
                                                                       The project activities are not expected to infringe or
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                 No            impact any cultural artifacts in its targeted areas
                                                                       (schools to be rehabilitated with minor civil works).
                                                                       No indigenous people in the sense of this Policy are
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                          No
                                                                       located in the project areas.
                                                                       The project will not finance activities that involve
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                    No            land acquisition leading to physical and economic
                                                                       displacement.
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                              No            The project will not finance dams, not rely on dams.
  Projects on International Waterways                                  The project is not expected to affect international
                                                         No
  OP/BP 7.50                                                           waterways.
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                  No            The project will not be located in a disputed area.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

  A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential
    large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
 The proposed Project (Category C), is not expected to have large-scale, significant, and/or irreversible impacts. With no
 environmental policies triggered, the proposed Project aims to finance a wide range of activities among which there are
 some rehabilitation of existing infrastructures. The Recipient has benefitted from other (past and ongoing) IDA projects
 that have provided, and are providing relatively sufficient capacity for understanding and applying safeguard policies. The
 Legal and Regulatory Framework of Burkina Faso have also been assessed with the National Agency for Environmental
 Assessment (Bureau National des Evaluations Environnementales-- BUNEE) in charge of environmental assessments in the
 context of other projects under implementation. The social risk is low



  2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.


May 15, 2018
           The World Bank                                                                                          Appraisal ISDS
           Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities (P166596)



      The proposed Project (Category C), is not expected to have large-scale, significant, and/or irreversible impacts. With
      no environmental policies triggered, the project social and environmental risk is low.


  3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
      It is agreed that the project will support minor school rehabilitations (for example adaptation of the school
      infrastructure to the needs of children with disabilities -construction of ramps, adaptation of toilets, provision of catch
      up classes to children at risk of school failure; physical accompaniment of children with disabilities at risk of drop out,
      etc.) only in existing and functional schools. The project will not finance activities that involve involuntary taking of
      land, loss of assets or access to assets, loss of income sources or means of livelihood or the voluntary restriction of
      access to legally designated parks and protected areas.


  4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      The Borrower and its potential Counterparts capacities have been assessed and evaluated and required to conduct
      environmental screenings on subprojects, reviewed and approved by the National Agency (BUNEE) and the Bank. The
      assessment and management of risks and impacts and the nature of this project environmental outcomes may also be
      influenced by or be dependent upon the role played by third interested parties.


  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
      an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      The proposed Project (Category C), is not expected to have large-scale, significant, and/or irreversible impacts and no
      environmental policies triggered.



COMPLIANCE_TABLE
 B. COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL


 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
 disclosure?
 No

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
 language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and
 local NGOs?
 No



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies



May 15, 2018
            The World Bank                                                               Appraisal ISDS
            Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities (P166596)



    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
    No

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?
    No

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
    No

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                       Boubakar Lompo


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content




May 15, 2018
