The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                       Appraisal Stage


           Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jul-2017| Report No: ISDSA22958




                        Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar Calderon
                               Country Director:    Tahseen Sayed Khan
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Karin Erika Kemper
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Valerie Hickey
                             Task Team Leader:      Keiko Ashida Tao
          The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
          Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
                                                               Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the
P164257
                                                               Fisheries Sector
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Keiko Ashida Tao                                               Jamaica
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
05-Feb-2018                                                    Partial Assessment
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GEN04                                                          No

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
4.88                                                           0
Financing Gap
0
Finance OLD
Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                                   4.88
Total                                                                                                          4.88

2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The PDO is to increase adoption of climate resilience practices among targeted fishing and fish farming communities of
. Jamaica.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.
           The World Bank                                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
           Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)




3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
 Component 1: Strengthening the Fisheries Policy and Regulatory Framework (PPCR financing of US$0.573 million).
 This component will provide support to (1) Strengthening the policy and regulatory framework for climate resilient
 fisheries and aquaculture management, including inter alia, (a) developing strategy and action plan for the draft
 national Fisheries and Aquaculture Policy; (b) developing protocol and guidelines for fisheries and aquaculture
 productions to incorporate climate considerations; and (c) drafting regulations for community-led fisheries
 management framework; and (2) promoting sustainable fisheries management, including (a) establishing partnerships
 with various entities to manage marine protected areas, (b) developing and implementing sustainable fisheries
 management plans, (c) providing equipment and training in sustainable fisheries management.
    Component 2: Diversification and Fisheries-based Alternative Livelihoods (PPCR financing of US$2.68 million). This
    component will provide support to promote climate-resilient livelihoods among targeted fishing and fish farming
    communities through (a) developing climate-resilient freshwater aquaculture and coastal mari-culture/polyculture,
    including provision of training and equipment, refurbishment and upgrading of existing aquaculture farms, seed stock
    production, and local feed production; and (b) exploring artisanal longline fishing for offshore pelagics, including
    conducting a baseline stock assessment, developing a sustainable management strategy, and providing skills-based
    training and equipment to the existing pelagic fish farmers.
    Component 3: Capacity Building and Awareness Raising (PPCR financing of US$0.97 million). This component will
    provide support for (a) expansion of knowledge base on climate change impacts on fisheries sub-sector, (b) awareness
    building and behavior change, including development and implementation of a Knowledge Attitudes and Perceptions
    assessment and a behavior change strategy; and (c) capacity building for the Fisheries Division and fisheries and fish
    farming organizations in institutional strengthening, providing training in technical skills and business management,
    promoting community-to-community knowledge exchanges, and developing the Fisheries Information Management
    System.
    Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (PPCR financing of US$0.655 million). This
    component will provide support for (a) project management, including establishing the Project Implementation Unit
    (PIU) and the Project Steering Committee (PSC); developing and implementing the annual work plans; providing
    fiduciary management including procurement, financial management, audits, and safeguards; managing
    implementation risks; and reporting on project implementation progress; and (b) monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
    including developing and implementing the M&E plan; and contributing to the preparation of the annual PPCR Core
    Indicators Monitoring and Reporting Scorecard.


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The Project activities will be country-wide, including inland areas for aquaculture (e.g. Spanish Town west of
Kingston where existing facilities are located) as well as coastal areas for a variety of subprojects in and near
fishing communities. Upgrades to existing inland aquaculture facilities near Spanish Town will include
improvements to prevent river flooding. However, improvements to prevent river flooding near Spanish
Town neither require the involuntary taking of land nor have squatters been identified in the area. Changes
in facility design will be evaluated to ensure sound environmental management of wastewater discharges, to
       The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
       Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)



optimize water sourcing, to minimize potential release of cultured species, and to build in the international
best environmental management practices for aquaculture projects. Coastal projects may affect a variety of
environments and communities, including some with major tourist developments, sensitive environments,
and protected areas near the shoreline. There are several Marine Parks in Jamaican waters and along the
north coast (near Ocho Rios, Montego Bay, and Port Antonio) and the west coast (at Negril), and projects on
the south coast may affect the Protected Areas of Portland Bight or the Palisadoes. Specific areas for
intervention will be prioritized during project preparation, and may include Portland Cottage and Alligator
Pond on the south coast for aquaculture, mariculture, or polyculture activities. Community-based
monitoring, compliance, and surveillance (MCS) of reef-related fisheries may yield associated benefits of
ecosystem restoration and preservation of high biodiversity critical natural habitats, as well as enhanced
function of ecosystem services such as coastal erosion protection and tourism value. Small patch reefs and
seagrass meadows occur along many of the island’s coastlines and support local fishing activity, and efforts
will be explored to integrate the conservation of reefs and seagrass in concert with the project, to generate
additional project environmental benefits.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Gibwa A. Kajubi, Social Safeguards Specialist
Robert H. Montgomery, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Shafick Hoossein, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered            Explanation

                                                               The policy is triggered because the project
                                                               activities may include those could potentially have
                                                               adverse impacts, such as improvements to prevent
                                                               river flooding. Livelihoods Sub-projects are not
                                                               defined at the time of appraisal. Therefore, an
                                                               ESMF has been prepared and will be incorporated
                                                               into the Operations Manual, to provide
                                                               appropriate      screening,   consultation,     and
                                                               environmental and social management actions to
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes
                                                               maximize any environmental and social benefits,
                                                               meeting      the     environmental     assessment
                                                               requirements of OP4.01. Guided by the ESMF,
                                                               Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                               (ESMPs) will be developed for each sub-project
                                                               once they have been identified. The ESMPs should
                                                               take into account the WBG EHS Guidelines, in
                                                               particular, the General EHS Guidelines and the
                                                               Guidelines for Aquaculture. The project will carry
       The World Bank                                                                                  Appraisal ISDS
       Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)



                                                               out a social assessment under Component 3 at an
                                                               early stage of implementation to look at gender
                                                               and youth dynamics in the selected fisheries
                                                               communities, any impacts to vulnerable and
                                                               disadvantaged groups, including any gender
                                                               differentiated impacts, analysis of labor standards
                                                               including working conditions, and existing forced
                                                               and child labor practices (if any) in the sector. In
                                                               addition, the project will also include health and
                                                               safety considerations into its capacity building
                                                               activities.
                                                               The development of guidelines and regulations for
                                                               sustainable fisheries management regimes under
                                                               Component 1 might potentially affect some fishers
                                                               negatively. Following the Bank's Interim Guidelines
                                                               on the Application of Safeguard Policies to
                                                               Technical Assistance (TA), TORs will ensure that
                                                               relevant environmental and social issues are taken
                                                               into account in the development of such
                                                               guidelines and regulations and stakeholder
                                                               consultations are held meaningfully.
                                                               The policy is triggered because aquaculture or
                                                               mariculture sub-projects could affect or alter
                                                               sensitive coastal zones and marine environments,
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               Yes                  through construction or clearing activities,
                                                               emissions/discharge of nutrients and particulates,
                                                               introduction of species, or other identified
                                                               impacts.
                                                               The project does not consider any changes to
Forests OP/BP 4.36                        No                   forests including mangroves or any works in
                                                               forests as defined by the policy.
                                                               Pest management agents to control disease and
                                                               parasites pose a risk of contamination and will be
Pest Management OP 4.09                   Yes
                                                               managed with best international practice for
                                                               aquaculture activities.
                                                               Screening for presence of coastal or submarine
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11    Yes                  physical cultural resources has been included in
                                                               the ESMF.
                                                               Jamaica is an ethnically diverse country with
                                                               people of Maroon, Indian and Lebanese descent
                                                               constituting important minorities. However, there
                                                               are no groups present in Jamaica who display the
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             No
                                                               four characteristics of indigenous people as
                                                               defined by OP 4.10. Therefore this policy is not
                                                               triggered. The ESMF has been developed to
                                                               include social impacts identified under the initial
      The World Bank                                                                                   Appraisal ISDS
      Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)



                                                              social assessment. If any of these minorities are
                                                              more likely to be disproportionately impacted by
                                                              the project, this should be considered as part of
                                                              the more focused assessment under Component 3
                                                              at the early stage of implementation.
                                                              Grievance redress mechanisms including how to
                                                              access these mechanisms at the local level will be
                                                              developed under the project. The project will
                                                              assess whether there is a need for capacity
                                                              building on grievance redress or other
                                                              strengthening measures.
                                                              The project will not finance the construction or
                                                              installation of facilities in locations that would
                                                              require involuntary resettlement or land
                                                              acquisition, as defined under OP 4.12. The project
                                                              will not require involuntary taking of land for the
                                                              improvements to prevent river flooding in any
                                                              location. No squatters have been identified in the
                                                              project area. The ESMF includes sub-project
                                                              screening measures to ensure such impacts do not
                                                              occur.
                                                              The strengthening of the legislative framework
                                                              anticipated under Component 1 involves the
                                                              regulation of fisheries resources on a national level
                                                              to promote their sustainability. The project will
                                                              also strengthen community-based monitoring,
                                                              control and surveillance actions to limit illegal
                                                              activities. These represent community-based
                                                              natural resource management activities, where
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No
                                                              the beneficiary communities work collectively to
                                                              sustainably manage access to fisheries. These
                                                              community-based measures will be subject to an
                                                              assessment of the adequacy of the community-
                                                              based decision making process, and measures
                                                              necessary to mitigate adverse impacts on
                                                              vulnerable community members (if any). As such,
                                                              the project will not involve resettlement, land
                                                              acquisition or restriction of access to natural
                                                              resources in parks or protected areas as defined
                                                              under OP 4.12, but rather national legislative
                                                              efforts and community-based measures for
                                                              climate smart fisheries management. Thus, the
                                                              policy is not triggered.
                                                              As mentioned above, grievance redress
                                                              mechanisms will be developed under the project
                                                              and assessed whether there is a need for capacity
                                                              building on grievance redress or other
       The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
       Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)



                                                                    strengthening measures.



                                                                    The project will not finance the construction of
                                                                    new, or rehabilitation of existing, dams. No project
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                                                                    investments will rely on the performance of
                                                                    existing dams.
                                                                    The project will not support activities which affect
Projects on International Waterways
                                             No                     international waterways as defined under the
OP/BP 7.50
                                                                    policy. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
                                                                    The project will not be implemented in areas
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60        No                     known to involve disputed areas as defined in the
                                                                    policy. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   Aquaculture sub-projects could affect sensitive riparian areas, coastal zones and marine environments, via
   emissions of nutrients and particulates, introduction of species, and/or habitat alteration, and by poor control of
   pest management agents to control disease and parasites; accordingly, best management practices are defined in
   the ESMF and incorporated in project design. Better management of reefs and seagrass beds could result in
   significant positive benefits which link to improved biodiversity, storm protection, and erosion control. Changes in
   long-line fishing practice based on updated feasibility studies may improve conditions for affected pelagic by
   avoiding overexploitation.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
   Improvements in fishing management practices can strengthen the long-term sustainability of coastal and marine
   resources, particularly opportunities for conservation or preservation of reefs and sea grass beds, and feasibility
   studies to avoid overexploitation of pelagics.
   The development of guidelines and regulations for sustainable fisheries management regimes including monitoring,
   control, and surveillance as well as for the use of seabed for mariculture and pelagic fisheries management under
   Component 1 might potentially affect some fishers and fish farmers negatively.



 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
   Individual sub-projects have yet to be defined, therefore screening and alternative evaluation is included in the
   ESMF.
           The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
           Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)



   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
     capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by the Recipient to guide the
     evaluation and screening of ecologic and economic aspects of projects in reefs and coastal areas, the challenges of
     species selection and control of invasives, the feasibility of artisanal long-line fishing improvements. The ESMF
     includes sub-project screening measures to rule out any construction or installation of facilities in locations that
     would require involuntary resettlement or land acquisition. The ESMF will be included in the Operations Manual to
     address the safeguards issues.
     The Ministry of Industry, Commerce, Agriculture and Fisheries (MICAF) has not implemented Bank-supported
     projects. However, the Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) will be closely working with the MICAF to develop,
     disclose and implement the instruments. The PIOJ has direct recent experience with development of ESMFs for
     another PPCR project (Climate Data and Information Management Project) as well as other World Bank projects,
     and understands the requirements and processes.
     A grievance redress mechanism must be development under the project as an avenue to raise concerns as well as
     feedback about the project and describe the means to access these mechanisms at the local level. There will be a
     need for capacity building on grievance redress or other strengthening measures.


   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
     with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     NGOs and workers in the protection of marine areas, artisanal fishermen, and other stakeholders have been
     consulted through local workshops. Additional consultations on project activities will be called for in the ESMF.

 DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Date of submission for disclosure
23-Mar-2017                                                  26-Sep-2017
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
 Jamaica                                                        26-Sep-2017
 Comments
 Disclosed on the web sites of the MICAF and PIOJ.



PEST_TABLE
           The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
           Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)



Pest Management Plan

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Jamaica                                                         26-Sep-2017
 Comments
 N/A
 COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                   Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                   Yes
 credit/loan?



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                   No
 natural habitats?

 If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
 (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                     NA
 acceptable to the Bank?



 PM_TABLE
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                        Yes

 Is a separate PMP required?                                                                       No

 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
 PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the                             NA
 project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
        The World Bank                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
        Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)




PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                      Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                         NA
impacts on cultural property?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                         Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups           Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                         Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                         Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal                     Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS


 Task Team Leader(s)                      Keiko Ashida Tao
          The World Bank                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
          Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector (P164257)



    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager               Valerie Hickey                        27-Sep-2017

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
