The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                       Appraisal Stage


          Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2018| Report No: ISDSA25331




                        Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                               Country Director:    Martin Raiser
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Tobias Linden
                             Task Team Leader:      Rabia Ali
              The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
              Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                     Project Name
                                                                   Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the
    P165310
                                                                   most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia
    Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
    Rabia Ali                                                      Mongolia
    Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
    17-Jun-2019                                                    B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
    GED02                                                          No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                                   2.75
    Total Financing                                                                                                      2.75
    Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                        2.75

         Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                   2.75


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
            The World Bank                                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
            Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)



    Project Development Objective
    The project development objective (PDO) is to train vulnerable, disadvantaged youth in 25 of Mongolia’s poorest rural
    districts across five provinces with socioemotional skills for improved performance in school and preparation for entry
    into self-employment.

  The PDO will be achieved through a school-based, community-driven program targeting 6,000 youth to support acquisition
  of socioemotional skills that are linked not just to success in school, but are also highly valued in the labor market. The
  project will address the largely unmet need for socioemotional and entrepreneurship skills stemming from extremely
  limited labor market opportunities that lead to high inactivity among youth in these locations and a job profile dominated
. by traditional herding, unpaid work and self-employment in the informal sector.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
    Component 1 (development and implementation of an innovative community-driven program on entrepreneurship-
    focused socioemotional skills for vulnerable rural youth of the project) will (i) develop a hands-on, innovative
    entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional learning (ESEL) curriculum and associated package of learning materials for
    use by youth and teachers in schools and LLCs in target soums; (ii) develop materials to train teachers in target schools
    and LLCs on implementing the ESEL course, including counseling and mentoring of students, and deliver the teacher
    training; (iii) design and implement community awareness information campaigns in each year of the project;
    (iv) design and implement sensitization trainings for parents; (v) establish a multi-stakeholder networking platform
    consisting of local councils at the aimag and soum levels to undertake bottom-up design of all project deliverables,
    ensure alignment with local economic conditions, and support implementation of project activities, including design of
    localized solutions to challenges faced.

    Component 2 (introduction of a small grant mechanism to enable target youth to practically apply entrepreneurship
    knowledge) will (i) design and pilot an innovative seed capital scheme to finance competitively-selected business
    proposals developed by youth teams in target soums who would receive customized business training and personalized
    coaching and mentoring, and implement their proposals under supervision of ALCs and SLCs; (ii) sensitize stakeholders
    to and align all project activities with the Children's Rights and Business Principles (CRBP); (iii) disseminate the most
    successful business ideas implemented under the seed capital scheme, including through experience sharing events for
    target youth and community-based information campaigns; and (iv) conduct a comprehensive economic assessment
    and market analysis to explore potential for creation of school-based enterprises (SBEs) in the project’s target soums.

    Under Component 3 (project management and administration, monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge
    dissemination), the project will (i) support operations of SCJ project management team that will manage day-to-day
    activities and conduct M&E of project activities, including regular updating of the project’s results framework (RF),
    management of a project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and monitoring compliance with safeguards
    policies under the ESMF; (ii) design and conduct the baseline and end-line surveys as part of the project’s final
    evaluation; (iii) conduct an annual audit; (iv) conduct a mid-term Review (MTR) for the project; (v) produce an
    implementation completion results report (ICR); (vi) provide training support for participatory M&E by the project’s
    stakeholders; and (vii) undertake knowledge dissemination activities, including development of communication
    materials, public outreach campaigns, and consultations and fora at the local and national levels.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
       The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
       Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)



The project will target youth in 25 soums in Gobisumber aimag (Central region); Zavkhan and Khovd aimags
(Western region); Uvurkhangai (Khangai region); and Sukhbaatar (Eastern region). The location of the project
triggers Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 due to presence of ethnic minorities. The project will not finance civil
works, and is expected to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Erdene Ochir Badarch, Social Specialist
Xiaodan Huang, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered              Explanation

                                                                  As OP 4.10 on indigenous peoples is triggered (see
                                                                  below), the project is a category B project, and OP
                                                                  4.01 is triggered to address potential
                                                                  environmental impacts as provided for in the ESMF.
                                                                  Overall, the project does not finance civil works
                                                                  under any component. Component 1 of the project
                                                                  will support development and implementation of
                                                                  an innovative community-driven education
                                                                  program on entrepreneurship skills for vulnerable,
                                                                  rural youth. There is thus no adverse environmental
                                                                  impact expected under this component. Under
                                                                  Component 2, the project will finance and oversee
                                                                  implementation of a competitive small grants
                                                                  scheme (up to $1,000 per grant) to enable older
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01       Yes                    youth in the project’s target group to practically
                                                                  apply entrepreneurship knowledge and social
                                                                  emotional skills acquired under component 1 to
                                                                  identify and harness unexploited business
                                                                  opportunities at the local level. Youth team
                                                                  business ideas are expected to be concentrated in
                                                                  (i) services and sales, e.g. in tourism and hospitality;
                                                                  (ii) small-scale, labor-intensive production of hand-
                                                                  made goods; and (iii) food production, agriculture
                                                                  and animal husbandry. The screening process for
                                                                  grants will weed out those ideas that that pose
                                                                  substantial environmental risks. SCJ has prepared
                                                                  an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                  Framework (ESMF) that includes a risk mitigation
                                                                  strategy to ensure that the risk of adverse impact
           The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
           Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)



                                                                        on the environment remains low throughout the
                                                                        duration of the project.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No
 Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No
                                                                        This Policy is triggered due to presence of ethnic
                                                                        minorities in the project's target locations. The
                                                                        ESMF prepared by SCJ outlines measures to
                                                                        enhance the project’s benefits for IP communities
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    Yes
                                                                        and ensure that the project includes
                                                                        representatives of IP communities in the multi-
                                                                        stakeholder networking platform consisting of local
                                                                        councils established under the project.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
 Projects on International Waterways
                                                  No
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
I. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Risk of adverse environmental impact

      The project will not lead to any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts on the environment in its target
      areas. The project does not finance civil works under any component.

      Component 1 of the project will support development and implementation of a community-driven education program
      on entrepreneurship skills for vulnerable, rural youth. This component consists of training-related activities only with
      no environmental impact.

      Under Component 2, the project will finance and oversee implementation of a competitive small grants scheme to
      enable target youth to practically apply entrepreneurship knowledge and social emotional skills acquired under
      component 1 to identify and harness unexploited business opportunities at the local level. Criteria for selection of
      business ideas will be aligned with soum-level economic development priorities. A large share of grant proceeds will
      go towards initial investments in small equipment, tools, and materials, and operating costs at start-up. Grant
      operation will be governed by criteria and procedures described in the grant manual to be developed in the first year
      of the project. Youths’ business ideas are expected to be concentrated in (i) services and sales, e.g. in tourism and
       The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
       Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)



  hospitality; (ii) small-scale, labor intensive production of goods (handmade products from locally-sourced raw and
  other materials, arts and crafts, clothing and textiles, toys, etc.); and (iii) food production, agriculture and animal
  husbandry (e.g. running semi-settled or intensive farming, animal health and breeding, farming management, animal
  feed e.g. making fodder, greenhouse and food processing, vegetable planting, growing, cooking, pickling etc.). The
  screening process for these grants, together with the specific actions described in (4), will weed out any business
  ideas that that pose moderate or high risk of adverse environmental impact and will ensure that the risk remains low
  for the duration of the project.

  Risk of adverse social impact

  Certain ethnic minorities covered by OP 4.10, who either speak a language other than Mongolian or a dialect of the
  Mongolian language, are resident in a number of project soums. These are the Kazakh, Buryat, Darigang, and Hotgoid
  minority groups. By design, project activities target the most vulnerable and disadvantaged youth in rural areas, who
  also tend to be among the socially excluded groups, including ethnic minorities. Since key project outputs (training
  materials under components 1 and 2 and selection of grant proposals) will be designed in consultation with
  communities in target soums, including ethnic minorities, who will also be involved in monitoring implementation
  progress through representation on the project’s participatory M&E arrangements and the mechanisms of ALCs and
  SLCs, the risk of adverse impacts on and exclusion of the minority populations in the project’s locations is estimated
  to be very low. The project activities are designed to improve equity and social cohesion. At the same time, to ensure
  that this risk remains low throughout the course of the project, the project will undertake a number of social the
  following social safeguard actions and these are described in question (4) below.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  No potential indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area are expected.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The risk for adverse impacts was low and the implementing agency has agreed to incorporate in project design the
  risk-mitigation measures described in (4) below. As such, there was no need for project alternatives.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  As agreed at the project initiation stage, SCJ has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
  (ESMF). The purpose of this ESMF is to provide SCJ's project implementation team a set of policies and guidelines that
  will assist the team in the screening, appraisal and supervision of the environmental and social aspects of the project.
  The Framework outlines (1) the WBG and Government of Mongolia (GOM) policies that will apply to this project and
  (2) the implementation arrangements that will be put in place to ensure that these policies are implemented
  successfully and that the project meets all the applicable requirements of the World Bank Group (WBG), as well as
  Mongolian laws and regulations. The ESMF outlines risk mitigation strategies in the following areas:

  The environment
     The World Bank                                                                                          Appraisal ISDS
     Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)



In order to ensure that the risk of adverse environmental impact due to the component 2 grant activities remains low
throughout the project, the following safeguards are integrated into project activities:

•     Sensitization of youth as part of the component 1 ESEL training to laws, regulations and good practices related
to environmental management and sustainability in the context of key business areas of interest. An equivalent
training will be delivered to all project stakeholders, i.e. teachers and school administrators, as well as ALCs and SLCs,
involved in design, implementation and M&E of project activities.
•     The grants will not finance any proposals for activities that pose moderate or higher risk of adverse
environmental impact. Such activities will be weeded out at two stages of proposal development:
o     The grant template provided will include a section on assessment of potential environmental impact of proposed
activities, and youth team supervisors and teachers supervising preparation of proposals will work with youth teams
to ensure that their proposals do not include such activities. Grant proposals will also include a mandatory section
containing description of the practices to be employed to manage and minimize adverse impacts, including
production of noise, congestion, refuse or litter, and measures for safeguarding the well-being of workers and family
members involved in the businesses.
o     The criteria and procedures for short-listing and selection of proposals described in the grant manual will include
an assessment of environmental risks and the soum-level panel responsible for reviewing, evaluating and selecting
proposals will reject proposals that include such activities. To further reduce potential for adverse impacts for
activities linked to agriculture and animal husbandry, preference will be given to ideas that convert processed raw
materials into an end product.
•     Implementation of risk mitigation measures approved for each business idea and clearly described in each
successful proposal will be monitored by SLCs and reported on quarterly in SLC progress reports to ALCs and SCJ.

Overall, thus, no significant, irreversible, or major environmental impacts are anticipated under the project, but each
grant proposal will be screened and the decision to proceed with the business idea (or to continue its implementation)
will be made on a case-by-case basis and through ongoing monitoring. With these restrictions and mitigation
measures in place, the risk of adverse impacts on the physical environment is assessed to be low.

Social risks

Based on consultations conducted during project preparation as well as the extensive experience of SCJ in
implementing projects in the project’s target locations, the project will undertake the following social safeguards
actions in order to ensure that IPs benefit in culturally appropriate ways and that the risk of adverse impacts on
minority groups remain low:

•    By working with soum-level education, social protection and other government authorities who have the most
up-to-date demographic data on social groups resident in the communities they serve, community awareness
information campaigns to be undertaken in each year of the project will be designed to ensure outreach to socially
excluded and ethnic minority groups resident in the project’s target locations, in order to ensure that they are aware
of the project’s planned activities;
•    The multi-stakeholder networking platform to be set up under component 1 of the project consisting of local
councils at the aimag and soum levels to undertake bottom-up design of all project deliverables, in particular the ESEL
the course, ensure alignment with local economic conditions, and support implementation of project activities,
including design of localized solutions to implementation challenges faced, will include representatives of each ethnic
minority group resident in project locations;
•    All training and other materials developed under components 1 and 2, including the grant manual, will be
translated into the Kazakh language and trainings delivered in the local dialects of each ethnic minority;
       The World Bank                                                                                          Appraisal ISDS
       Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)



  •    In soums where minority groups are present, the panels set up to review and select youth grant proposals under
  component 2 will include representatives of the relevant minority groups;
  •    The personalized coaching and mentoring offered to youth under the project will address socioemotional needs
  of youth from ethnic minority groups;
  •    The M&E focal points of SLCs will be responsible for collecting data on the above activities as part of the project’s
  routine M&E activities, and the information will be aggregated by the SCJ project management team for reporting to
  the World Bank and government authorities responsible for oversight of the project at the national level. This will
  allow for timely identification and resolution of any social safeguards issues that arise during project implementation.

  Assessment of SCJ's capacity to implement safeguards measures

  The design and implementation of this demonstration project hinges on intensive community participation and
  mobilization at the grassroots level in a bottoms-up approach, informed by and consistent with local labor market
  conditions and skills needs. A particular strength of the implementing agency is that, unlike existing donor-funded
  projects relevant to skills development typically implemented by MECSS and MLSP or other line ministries, Save the
  Children Japan (SCJ), a non-governmental organization, has deep soum-level networks to conduct the outreach
  needed in remote, rural parts of Mongolia for a project that hinges on intensive community participation and
  consultations at the grassroots level – networks that UB-based government implementing agencies do not possess.
  While the implementing the “Improving Primary Education Outcomes Among the Most Vulnerable Children in Rural
  Mongolia? project (P130760) between 2012 and 2017, SCJ gained significant experience with World Bank safeguards
  policies. The target locations under this successful project overlap with those proposed under the new operation, and
  although the target group of beneficiaries is a completely different age group and the proposed interventions are
  new and innovative, the overlap allows SCJ to build on an existing foundation of outreach networks and deep
  familiarity and understanding of the social and economic conditions in these remote soums. Further building on this
  foundation, training on overseeing the adherence to relevant safeguards policies will be offered to SCJ’s project
  implementation team, as well as ALCs and SLCs, as part of the Bank’s project implementation support to the project.

  From the very beginning of its operation in Mongolia (1994), SCJ has been working in provinces with the largest ethnic
  minority populations in the country, namely Bayan-Ulgii, Khovd and Dornod provinces. SCJ’s work in these areas
  includes support to education of children of ethnic minorities, strengthening preschool and primary education,
  support to education of children with disabilities and emergency responses during difficult times. In 2005-6, SCJ
  brought the issue of education for Kazakh minority children to the attention of the government and other
  stakeholders by undertaking and documenting a comprehensive situation analysis on the subject. The findings were
  submitted to the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. The Committee accepted the findings
  and formally recommended to the Government of Mongolia that minority children should be able to learn in their
  mother tongue, as well as in Mongolian. SCJ also supported a number of small projects to promote bilingual education
  programs for Kazakh children in 2007-9.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The most critical stakeholders are the beneficiary youth of socioeconomically marginalized communities, including
  ethnic minorities, and their parents and households, and teachers, training managers and directors of schools and
  LLCs, followed by soum-level stakeholders that include representatives of community and business associations,
  soum labor and social protection officers and soum government, aimag government departments of education, social
  protection and labor departments. National level stakeholders are MECSS, MLSP and the Mongolian National
  Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
                          The World Bank                                                                                      Appraisal ISDS
                          Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)




                     In addition to the consultations with MECSS, MLSP, community members, youth, and education and labor officers in
                     rural soums conducted during project preparation, World Bank safeguard policies and project documents including
                     the draft ESMF were disclosed to and shared with provincial and local authorities through face-to-face and online
                     meetings and their feedback incorporated into project documents. These documents, including relevant safeguards
                     policies, will be published on the websites of authorities in target soums. Information on safeguards policies will be
                     integrated into the project’s community awareness campaigns and will be available on hard copy in all soum offices
                     and during public follow-up consultations undertaken with stakeholders at the local and national levels during project
                     implementation for design of specific project outputs, such as the training content.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                   DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure
       10-May-2019                                                             24-Jun-2019
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                               Date of Disclosure
            Mongolia                                                              21-Jun-2019
            Comments
            Disclosure of ESMF


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     Date of submission for disclosure
10-May-2019                                                                     27-May-2019
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                               Date of Disclosure
            Mongolia                                                              21-Jun-2019
         The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
         Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)



 Comments
 Disclosure of ESMF



COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                   Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                   Yes
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                   Yes
 review the plan?

 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                                   NA
 approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                   Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                    Yes
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                   Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                   Yes
 cost?
            The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
            Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia (P165310)



    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




II. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Rabia Ali


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                       Surhid P. Gautam                         25-Jun-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Tobias Linden                            25-Jun-2019

.
