         The World Bank
         Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
                    Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24222




Mar 18, 2018                                                                                          Page 1 of 10
          The World Bank
          Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



   I.      BASIC INFORMATION

OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
 A. Basic Program Data

 Country                               Project ID                 Additional Project ID (if any)   Program Name
 Indonesia                             P164686                                                     Investing in Nutrition
                                                                                                   and Early Years
 Region                                Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date             Task Team Leader
 EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC                 02-Apr-2018                19-Jun-2018                      Samuel Thomas Clark
                                                                                                   Ali Winoto Subandoro
 Financing Instrument                  Managing Unit              Sector                           Theme
 Program-for-Results Financing         GSUID (9505)               Early Childhood
                                                                  Education(%), Public
                                                                  Administration - Health(%),
                                                                  Social Protection(%),
                                                                  Sanitation(%), Water
                                                                  Supply(%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crisis and Emergencies)?




 COST & FINANCING

 SUMMARY (USD Millions)

 Government program Cost                                                                                       14,638.00
 Total Operation Cost                                                                                           9,662.00
        Total Program Cost                                                                                      9,642.00
        IPF Component                                                                                               20.00
 Total Financing                                                                                                9,662.00
 Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00



 FINANCING (USD Millions)


Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                  400.00

   World Bank Lending                                                                                             400.00




Mar 18, 2018                                                                                                       Page 2 of 10
         The World Bank
         Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)




Total Government Contribution                                                                           9,242.00


 Environmental Assessment Category (IPF Component)

 B - Partial Assessment




 B. Program Development Objective(s)

Program Development Objective(s)

To increase simultaneous utilization of nutrition interventions by 1,000-day households in priority districts.


 C. Program Description

 The proposed Program—Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (INEY)—will directly contribute to Indonesia’s
 achievement of the World Bank Group's twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and increasing shared
 prosperity. It will support a large Government program to strengthen investment in nutrition services, which
 is proven to be directly linked to improved human capital and to adult earning potential and economic growth.
 INEY is also closely aligned with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Indonesia, which includes
 a central focus on improved service delivery and addressing inequities in income and opportunities.

 The PforR Program will complement the Bank’s existing portfolio of operations and advisory services.
 Specifically, the INEY PforR will focus on the following:

         1. Addressing the management and system problems that undermine program convergence at
            each level of intervention delivery (central, district, and village);
         2. Plugging critical gaps in the Government’s mix of sector programming; and
         3. Strengthening citizen engagement in the frontline delivery and oversight of nutrition
            interventions.

An Investment Project Financing (IPF) component will support the implementation of the PforR Program.
The IPF component will finance catalytic investments to accelerate improvements in implementation capacity
and strengthen intervention delivery systems that lay the foundation for long-term and sustainable reform.
Particularly, it will (a) strengthen multisectoral coordination by the Secretariat of the Vice President (SoVP);
(b) strengthen the capacity of Bappenas (National Planning Development Agency) and the Ministry of Finance
(MoF) to implement their planning and budgeting functions and enhance the use of results-based
approaches; (c) provide technical support to sector line agencies and subnational governments that are
responsible for nutrition intervention delivery; and (d) strengthen the systems for monitoring, evaluation, and


Mar 18, 2018                                                                                               Page 3 of 10
         The World Bank
         Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)


continuous learning at the TNP2K Secretariat and Bappenas, including promoting innovations and
implementation research. The IPF component is financed by the Global Financing Facility (GFF) multidonor
trust fund.

 D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

 The IPF component of the INEY PforR program will support capacity of line ministries (MoH, MoE, MoSA,
 MoV and MoHA) to support districts to implement strategic interventions to reduce stunting. The National
 Strategy to Accelerate Stunting Reduction (NatStrat Stunting) directs national ministries to focus their
 programs and activities on 100 districts with high stunting prevalence and incidence in 2018, and launches an
 ambitious plan to scale up to all 514 districts and cities by 2021. There is at least one district per province
 including Jakarta, and in 2018 cover 1,891 sub-districts, 21,888 villages and an estimated 3.1 million stunted
 children. Due to the nature of activities supported by the component, which contribute to supporting the
 implementation and convergence of the activities under the INEY PforR, there are no significant potential
 adverse social and environmental impacts that are associated with this component. The component is
 expected to result in a positive impact through strengthening multi-sectoral coordination, improvement of
 national level planning and budgeting functions, provision of technical support to sector line agencies
.responsible for nutrition intervention delivery, and strengthening the systems for monitoring and evaluation.

 E. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

 Vivianti Rambe,Ina Binari Pranoto,Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana,Fajar Argo Djati,Alkadevi Morarji Patel




  II.      SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

 SAFEGUARDS

 Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?          Explanation (Optional)
Projects on International Waterways                                The TA activities under the IPF will not be located on
                                               No
OP/BP 7.50                                                         International Waterways area.
                                                                   The TA activities under the IPF will not be located in
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No
                                                                   Disputed Area.
                                                                   The main objective of the IPF component of INEY
                                                                   PforR program is to strengthen the capacity of
                                                                   program agencies to monitor, coordinate and
                                                                   implement the Stunting Reduction Acceleration
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes                 Strategy (SRAS). Nature of the investments under
                                                                   this component will be limited to TA type of
                                                                   activities. The component will not support any
                                                                   physical works or other activities that generate
                                                                   downstream adverse environmental impacts.


Mar 18, 2018                                                                                                       Page 4 of 10
         The World Bank
         Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)




                                                            At a broader context, INEY PforR is not currently
                                                            planning to support infrastructure investments. An
                                                            initial Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
                                                            (ESSA) of the PforR program has been conducted to
                                                            ensure that PforR program’s environmental and
                                                            social risks will be managed adequately and that it
                                                            complies with the basic principles of sustainable
                                                            development. The ESSA focused on reviewing the
                                                            adequacy and implementation of relevant national
                                                            policies related to handling, distribution and storage
                                                            of supplements and vaccines as well as the safe
                                                            handling of medical wastes at the Primary Health
                                                            Care Facility. Within this context, the program will
                                                            collaborate with the existing government programs
                                                            (e.g. I-SPHERE, etc.) to strengthen institutional
                                                            capacity and compliance. This policy is triggered
                                                            taking into account triggering OP 4.10 as explained
                                                            below.


                                                            Activities to be conducted under the IPF component
                                                            (as well as PforR program) will not convert or
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No           degrade any protected areas, known natural
                                                            habitats, or established or proposed critical natural
                                                            habitats. Thus, OP/BP 4.04 is not triggered.
                                                            The IPF component (as well as PforR program) will
                                                            not affect the health, quality or management of
Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No
                                                            forests, forested areas, or tree plantations. Thus,
                                                            OP/BP 4.36 is not triggered.
                                                            The IPF component (as well as PforR program) will
                                                            not involve any activities related to pesticide use and
Pest Management OP 4.09                        No
                                                            pest management. Therefore, OP 4.09 is not
                                                            triggered.
                                                            The IPF component (as well as PforR program) will
                                                            not involve any physical construction activities that
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No
                                                            will interact with physical cultural resources. . Thus
                                                            OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered.
                                                            The TA activities under the IPF are expected to
                                                            improve the quality of implementation through
                                                            support to the key government counterparts in
                                                            implementing convergence stunting reduction
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  Yes
                                                            programs at both national and local levels.
                                                            Measures to enhance participation of Indigenous
                                                            Peoples, as well as of vulnerable and or marginalized
                                                            groups, will inform the planning and delivery of


Mar 18, 2018                                                                                                 Page 5 of 10
            The World Bank
            Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)


                                                                 activities supported by INEY PforR. Engagement for
                                                                 the interventions supported by the Program will take
                                                                 into account the principles of free, prior and
                                                                 informed consultations to obtain broad community
                                                                 support. A social inclusion specialist will be recruited
                                                                 to provide technical support to implementing
                                                                 agencies to ensure that interventions and program
                                                                 approaches take into account local contexts, culture,
                                                                 belief and value systems of Indigenous Peoples. This
                                                                 will be through training of relevant frontline service
                                                                 providers, particularly the Human Development
                                                                 Workers (HDW). No standalone safeguards
                                                                 instrument for Indigenous Peoples will be required
                                                                 under the TA.
                                                                 The project does not involve any land or
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12               No             infrastructure requiring land. OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                                                                 Resettlement is not triggered by the project.
                                                                 The TA activities under the IPF will not involve any
                                                                 construction of dam and will depend on the
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                         No
                                                                 reliability of dams (large, small, dam under
                                                                 construction).
.


     III.    KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The main objective of the IPF Component of INEY PforR program is to strengthen the capacity of program
agencies to monitor, coordinate and implement the Stunting Reduction Acceleration Strategy (SRAS). Nature
of the investments under this component will be limited to TA type of activities. The component will not
support any physical works or other activities that generate downstream adverse environmental impacts.

At a broader context, INEY PforR is not currently planning to support infrastructure investments. An initial
Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) of the PforR program has been conducted to ensure
that PforR program’s environmental and social risks will be managed adequately and that it complies with the
basic principles of sustainable development. The EA focused on reviewing the adequacy and implementation
of relevant national policies related to handling, distribution and storage of supplements and vaccines as well
as the safe handling of medical wastes at the Primary Health Care Facility. Within this context, the program
will collaborate with the existing government programs (e.g. I-SPHERE, etc.) to strengthen institutional
capacity and compliance. Overall, the program activities are not expected to have a significant adverse
environmental footprint, but will provide an opportunity to enhance systems related to ensuring safe, clean

Mar 18, 2018                                                                                                       Page 6 of 10
         The World Bank
         Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)


and sustainable public health provisions.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:

At a program level, the ESSA screening exercise indicated that key environmental risks mainly relate to (i) safe-
handling of pharmaceutical waste and disposal systems managed by Primary Health Care Facility (Posyandu
and Puskesmas), and (ii) the provision of access to – and make use of – improved drinking water supply, better
sanitation facilities and sanitation conditions.

At the IPF component level, there will be no indirect environmental impact predicted due to the nature of TA
type of activities.


3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

 N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Since no safeguard issues are anticipated within the IPF component, no measures are warranted. However,
the component will incorporate technical inputs from the safeguards specialists into TA’s Terms of References
(e.g. workshops, coordination meetings, capacity building, etc.) to ensure safeguards aspects are
mainstreamed.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

At the IPF Component level, since there are no safeguard issues anticipated under this component, no
consultations are necessary.

However, at a Program (INEY PforR) level, the preparation of ESSA involved consultation and engagement with
the following stakeholders:

a. Potentially affected and beneficiary communities or their representatives : 36 villages across 8 districts.
b. Village Governments: Village Heads, Posyandu cadres, ECED teachers, BPSPAM (village level water board
   associations) cadres, community leaders and religious figures from 36 villages across 8 districts.
c. District Governments: Bupatis, district planning departments (BAPPEDA), district financial management
   offices (DPKD), district sector departments (Health, Public Works, Education, Social Affairs and Village
   Development and Community Empowerment) in eight districts from seven provinces between November
   2017 and February 2018. It also included consultations with Camat (sub-district heads), Puskesmas heads
   and technical staff in 18 sub-districts.

Mar 18, 2018                                                                                                        Page 7 of 10
          The World Bank
          Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)


d. Central Government Agencies: Echelon I, II and III as well as technical staff from the SOVP, Bappenas,
   MOF, MOH, MOEC, MPWH, MOSA, MOHA and MOV.
e. Civil Society Organisations: Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement Secretariat, Nutrition International,
   University of Indonesia, Survey Meter, and Tanoto Foundation as part of the preparation process.
f. Development Partners: DFAT, UNICEF and MCC/MCA-I, MAHKOTA (Towards a Strong and Prosperous
   Indonesia), KOMPAK (Indonesia Governance for Growth), and MAMPU (Empowering Indonesian Women
   for Poverty Reduction).

.

    B. Disclosure Requirements

 OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                                19-Apr-2018
     Date of "in-country" disclosure                                            09-Apr-2018
     Date of Disclosure by the Bank                                             23-Apr-2018
   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of
   the EA to the Executive Directors
 OPS_IP_DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                                19-Apr-2018
     Date of "in-country" disclosure                                            09-Apr-2018
     Date of Disclosure by the Bank                                             23-Apr-2018



    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project
    decision meeting)
    OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
     Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes [ ]         No [✔ ]     N/A [ ]
    OPS_IP_COMP_TABLE
    OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as
  appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous                 Yes [ ]         No [ ]      N/A [✔ ]
  Peoples?
OPS_IR_COMP_TABLE_FINAL
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process
    framework (as appropriate) been prepared?                                         Yes [ ]          No [ ]     N/A [ ]

    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
    Manager review the plan?                                                          Yes [ ]          No [ ]     N/A [ ]
    OPS_PDI_COMP_TABLE

Mar 18, 2018                                                                                                        Page 8 of 10
         The World Bank
         Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)


 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
   Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank
                                                                                 Yes [ ]    No [ ]   N/A [✔ ]
   for disclosure?
   Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
   form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-          Yes [ ]    No [ ]   N/A [✔ ]
   affected groups and local NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
   Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
   been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard         Yes [✔ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ ]
   policies?
   Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the
                                                                                 Yes [✔ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ ]
   project cost?
   Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
   monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard             Yes [✔ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ ]
   policies?
   Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
   borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal          Yes [✔ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ ]
   documents?


 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Mar 18, 2018                                                                                           Page 9 of 10
         The World Bank
         Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



 APPROVAL


 Signed and Submitted by

                                          Name                            Date
                                          Samuel Thomas Clark
 Task Team Leader(s):
                                          Ali Winoto Subandoro
 Environmental Specialist:                Ina Binari Pranoto

 Social Development Specialist            Alkadevi Morarji Patel
                                          Fajar Argo Djati
 Additional Environmental and/or
                                          Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana
 Social Development Specialist(s)
                                          Vivianti Rambe


 Approved by

 Safeguards Advisor:                       Peter Leonard                  23-Apr-2018

 Practice Manager/Manager:                 Kevin A Tomlinson              23-Apr-2018




Mar 18, 2018                                                                            Page 10 of 10
