The World Bank                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
JSDF: Community-based Social Service Delivery Project (P165346)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2017| Report No: ISDSA23950




                       Regional Vice President:    Cyril E Muller
                              Country Director:    Satu Kristiina J. Kahkonen
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Michal J. Rutkowski
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Cem Mete
                            Task Team Leader:      Yuliya Smolyar
              The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
              JSDF: Community-based Social Service Delivery Project (P165346)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P165346                                                     JSDF: Community-based Social Service Delivery Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Yuliya Smolyar                                              Ukraine
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    30-Apr-2018                                                 Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSP03                                                       No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              2.85
    Total Financing                                                                                                 2.85
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                   2.85
         Japan Social Development Fund                                                                              2.85


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
. To improve access of the vulnerable people to social protection services in selected communities.
        The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
        JSDF: Community-based Social Service Delivery Project (P165346)



Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

Component 1. Development of Social Protection Services Delivery Capacity (US$680,000) would finance technical
assistance, provision of training and goods required to develop capacities of community governments and service
providers to plan, manage and deliver services. The component would assist the governments in 30 participating
communities to carry out participatory needs assessment, to identify access barriers and to develop three-year service
development plans to address the coverage gaps. The project would work with the social protection units in the
community governments who would receive technical support and basic equipment to develop their institutional
capacity to plan and mange service provision. Then the proposed project would train the staff of those units and other
relevant stakeholders to prepare applications for social protection services micro-projects drawing on the service
development plans. Furthermore, this component would finance training of existing or potential community service
providers to enhance their ability to deliver social care services at expected level of standards. Through such a training,
potential service providers from among the CSOs would be able to better understand their role in providing services, the
accreditation requirements and mechanism of contracting out services from nongovernment actors, the standards of
service delivery, reporting, and monitoring, etc.

Component 2. Social Protection Services Micro-projects (US$1,658,000). This component would invest in community-
based social protection services micro-projects to improve coverage by the services of vulnerable groups identified
through participatory needs assessments under Component 1 above. Such micro-projects might include home delivery
programs for the elderly, youth centers, daycare centers for the disabled or children, nursing etc. Ten communities would
be selected to implement the micro-projects.

The project funds of up to UD$140,000 would be allocated for each micro-project to finance minor civil works, goods,
consultants’ services, and service-specific training. The local governments would be responsible for implementation of
the micro-projects. Under the micro-projects, they would be able to finance improvement of services of the public
providers as well as to purchase services from non-public providers. Allocations of funds to specific types of services,
service providers and client groups would be guided by social needs assessments and service delivery plans developed
under Component 1 above. No contributions are expected from local governments; however, they would be required to
cover 100 percent of recurrent cost of the service to operate for at least three years after the micro-project
implementation.

Component 3. Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Dissemination
(US$512,000) would consist of the following sub-components:

           3.1 Project Management and Administration would help to expand the USIF’s operational capacity to manage
           project activities and assist communities and local governments to comply with technical, fiduciary,
           safeguards and other implementation requirements.

           3.2 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The proposed project would use the existing USIF Management
           Information System (MIS). In addition, the project would finance beneficiary assessments (baseline, mid-term
           and final) to inform achievement of project outcomes.
            The World Bank                                                                                     Appraisal ISDS
            JSDF: Community-based Social Service Delivery Project (P165346)



              3.3 Knowledge Dissemination would support activities to document examples of successful community
              initiatives such that they could inform national policies as well as to disseminate them amongst non-
              participating communities through publications, events, etc.


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The proposed project would be implemented in 30 communities of two oblasts of Ukraine (see lists below).
    Small-scale civil works might be performed in 10 of these communities to be selected at project
    implementation. Therefore, the salient physical characteristics of the specific sites relevant to the safeguards
    analysis are currently unknown. Odesa oblast: Velykomykhailivska village community, Baltska town
    community, Bilyayivska town community, Rozkvitivska village community, Chervonoarmiyska community,
    Konoplianska village community, Shyriayevska village community, Yaskivska village community, Berezivska
    town community, Mayakivska village community, Vylkivska town community, Tzebrykivska village
    community and Znamjanska village community. Ternopil oblast: Skala – Podilska village community,
    Melnytse – Podilska village community, Ozerianska village community, Borshchivska town community,
    Bilche-Zolotetska village community, Kolodnenska village community, Chernykhivetska village community,
    Vyshnivetska village community, Ozernianska village community, Zalozetska village community, Kozlivska
    village community, Pochayivska towm community, Lopushnenska village community, Shumska town
    community, Velykodederkalska village community, Zborivska town community and Saranchukivska village
    community. The above mentioned locations are not close to the conflict area and there is no significant
    presence of IDPs. Therefore the risk associated with the conflict is not significant.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Arcadii Capcelea, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    Mariia Nikitova, Social Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation

                                                                      The proposed project does not envisage extensive
                                                                      civil works involving new constructions and thus
                                                                      does not raise any significant adverse environment
     Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes                   concerns. The potentially adverse environmental
                                                                      impacts are mainly associated with civil works
                                                                      during micro-projects` implementation, and
                                                                      include, inter alia, dust, noise, small-scale soil and
      The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
      JSDF: Community-based Social Service Delivery Project (P165346)



                                                             water pollution, generation of waste materials,
                                                             waste disposal, and damage to soil and vegetation
                                                             by excavation works. The impacts are minor and
                                                             can be prevented or minimized through
                                                             appropriate preventive actions and mitigation
                                                             measures. Therefore, the proposed project is
                                                             classified as Environmental Category ‘B’, requiring
                                                             a partial environmental assessment. Since micro-
                                                             projects are not pre-identified and would be
                                                             determined in course of project implementation by
                                                             applicant     communities     through     intensive
                                                             participatory      process,     a      project-level
                                                             Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                             (ESMF) would apply that would establish screening
                                                             mechanisms and govern the process of
                                                             development and implementation of specific
                                                             mitigation plans. The ESMF have been discussed
                                                             with stakeholders and publicly disclosed and
                                                             consulted in April 2018. Site-specific ESMP/ ESMP
                                                             Checklists (ESMP/ESMP-CLs) would be prepared for
                                                             micro-projects as needed. Requirements of the
                                                             project-level ESMF and site-specific ESMP/ESMP-
                                                             CLs would be part of USIF Operational Manual.
                                                             The project does not involve activities related to
                                                             conversion or degradation of natural habitats. No
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No
                                                             potential adverse impacts on natural habitats are
                                                             expected.
                                                             The project does not consider any changes to
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No                  forests or any works in forests as defined by the
                                                             policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No                  The project does not involve pest management.
                                                             The project is not expected to have impacts on
                                                             physical cultural resources. No activities are
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No
                                                             planned in the vicinity of a physical cultural
                                                             resources sites.
                                                             There are no groups in Ukraine who display
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No
                                                             characteristics of indigenous peoples.
                                                             Any sub-projects that may require land acquisition,
                                                             physical displacement, or result in any issues
                                                             associated with involuntary resettlement (that
                                                             would require application of the World Bank
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No                  Operational Policy (OP) 4.12 on Involuntary
                                                             Resettlement) will not be eligible for financing
                                                             under the scope of this project. The implementing
                                                             entity will be screening the sub-projects
                                                             accordingly. The ESMP and OM will detail how sub-
          The World Bank                                                                                      Appraisal ISDS
          JSDF: Community-based Social Service Delivery Project (P165346)



                                                                     projects will be screened to ensure these aspects
                                                                     are reflected. Project will not seek any forms of
                                                                     voluntary donations of land from the community.
                                                                     The project will not finance the construction of
                                                                     new, or rehabilitation of existing dams. No project
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                                                                     investments will rely on the performance of
                                                                     existing dams.
 Projects on International Waterways                                 The project will not support activities that affect
                                              No
 OP/BP 7.50                                                          international waterways, as defined by the policy.
                                                                     The project will not be implemented in disputed
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60        No
                                                                     areas as defined in the policy.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.    SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The proposed project does not raise any significant adverse environment concerns. The potentially adverse
      environmental impacts are mainly associated with small-scale civil works during micro-projects` implementation.
      These potential negative environmental impacts trigger the Operational Policy OP 4.01. The impacts are minor and
      can be prevented or minimized through appropriate preventive actions and mitigation measures. Therefore, the
      proposed project is classified as Environmental Category ‘B’, requiring a partial environmental assessment. Since
      micro-projects are not pre-identified and would be determined in course of project implementation by communities
      through intensive participatory process, a project-level Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
      would apply that would establish screening mechanisms and govern the process of development and implementation
      of specific mitigation plans.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.




 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.




 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      At appraisal, the World Bank team discussed and agreed with USIF the ESMF document. After public discussions and
      finalization, the ESMF would be included into USIF OM to guide micro-project activities. Once micro-projects are
      identified, they would be screened by the USIF and ESMP/ESMP-CL would be developed for them. These documents
      would be consulted in local communities. Final versions of these documents would become an integral part of civil
      contracts for micro-projects.
            The World Bank                                                                                     Appraisal ISDS
            JSDF: Community-based Social Service Delivery Project (P165346)



       The USIF built some capacity for applying environmental safeguards under the previous Bank-funded project.
       However, the safeguards practices of the agency have been outdated. USIF would engage a Safeguards Consultant to
       deliver training and to support its staff working in the field. Moreover, since community governments are likely to
       have low safeguards capacity, USIF`s Environmental Consultant and field staff would work with the governments in
       the communities who will implement micro-projects to help manage their safeguards responsibilities under ESMF.
       The safeguards staff in the World Bank`s task team would support USIF via training and continuous consultations. The
       team would carry out supervision of environmental and social impacts and adequacy of mitigation activities.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.



DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Date of submission for disclosure
13-Apr-2018                                                     16-Apr-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
 Ukraine                                                           30-Mar-2018
 Comments
 The ESMF document has been disclosed through the web-sites of USIF and Odesa and Ternopil regional administrations
 for public discussions. The document has been finalized upon completion of the discussions.


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                     No



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
            The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
            JSDF: Community-based Social Service Delivery Project (P165346)



    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Yuliya Smolyar


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Cem Mete                                  01-May-2018

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
