          The World Bank
          Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
                    Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 14-Sep-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSA26218




Sep 10, 2019                                                                                          Page 1 of 13
          The World Bank
          Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)



   I.      BASIC INFORMATION

OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
 A. Basic Program Data

 Country                             Project ID                  Additional Project ID (if any)   Program Name
 India                               P166868                                                      Strengthening
                                                                                                  Teaching-Learning And
                                                                                                  Results for States
 Region                              Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date             Task Team Leader
 SOUTH ASIA                          16-Oct-2019                 17-Dec-2019                      Shabnam Sinha
                                                                                                  Margaret M. Clarke
 Financing Instrument                Managing Unit                Sector                          Theme
 Program-for-Results Financing       HSAED (9256)                 Early Childhood
                                                                  Education(%), Public
                                                                  Administration -
                                                                  Education(%), Secondary
                                                                  Education(%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crisis and Emergencies)?




 COST & FINANCING

 SUMMARY (USD Millions)

 Government program Cost                                                                                      3,350.00
 Total Operation Cost                                                                                         3,350.00
        Total Program Cost                                                                                    3,325.00
        IPF Component                                                                                            25.00
 Total Financing                                                                                              3,350.00
 Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00



 FINANCING (USD Millions)


Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                500.00

   World Bank Lending                                                                                           500.00




Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
         The World Bank
         Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)




Total Government Contribution                                                                                       2,850.00


 Environmental Assessment Category (IPF Component)
 C-Not Required




 B. Program Development Objective(s)

Program Development Objective(s)

The Project Development Objective (PDO) for STARS is to improve the quality and governance of school education in
project states.

 C. Program Description

          1.      The Operation, STARS will support the Government’s larger school education program, the
          centrally sponsored scheme of Samagra Shiksha. The scheme reorganizes the existing parallel
          management structures of the SSA, RMSA and teacher education into a unified structure and
          administrative mechanism, pooling together existing and additional personnel at national and sub-
          national levels. The Integrated Scheme on School Education envisages the ‘school’ as a continuum from
          pre-school, primary, upper primary, secondary to senior secondary levels. The vision of the scheme is to
          ensure inclusive and equitable quality education from pre-school to senior secondary stage in accordance
          with the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) for Education. The major objectives of the Scheme are
          provision of quality education and enhancing learning outcomes of students; bridging social and gender
          gaps in school education; ensuring equity and inclusion at all levels of school education; ensuring
          minimum standards in schooling provisions; promoting vocationalisation of education; support states in
          implementation of Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009; and strengthening
          and up-gradation of State Councils of Educational Research and Training (SCERTs)/State Institutes of
          Education and District Institutes of Education and Training (DIET )as nodal agencies for teacher training.
          The Scheme would be implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme by the Department through a single
          State Implementation Society (SIS) at the State level. Samagra Shiksha is a national program covering all
          the 29 states and 7 Union Territories of India.

          PforR Program Scope


          2.      The World Bank PforR program under STARS will be moving away from a sector wide approach
          of supporting the entire centrally sponsored scheme of Samagra Shiksha, towards supporting
          strategically identified components of Samagra Shiksha the government’s school education program.
          The scope of STARS will be to carve out areas of support from the Samagra Shiksha that would include (i)
          providing support at the federal level to strategically critical areas for meeting requirements of improving

Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                             Page 3 of 13
         The World Bank
         Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)


          education outcomes like strengthening early childhood education, learning assessment systems and
          governance reform (ii) strategically engage in 6 select states of India to bring to scale carefully chosen
          components and innovative approaches that would help meet the development objective of the program.
          This tiered approach will address challenges of Learning States that need more support to improve their
          reform initiatives (Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha) and share the success of the more
          progressive Lighthouse States (Himachal Pradesh, Kerala and Rajasthan) to scale up their reform
          initiatives and strengthen areas that need support financing.

                                              STARS: Operation Boundaries:




          3.      Program Financing: The Samagra Shiksha program is being implemented across all the 36 states/
          union territories. The overall expenditure for 2019-25 under the Government’s ongoing Samagra program
          is estimated at US$36 billion. The STARS Program is carved out of the Government’s Samagra Shiksha
          Abhiyan program to support school education enhancement under the existing framework, by targeting
          MHRD at the federal level and six pilot participating States in India, through a combination of investments
          in ongoing and new reforms/interventions. The cost of the PforR Operation (STARS) is USD 3.35 billion
          which will be financed by (a) MHRD, GoI financing (national support) of US$1.79 billion; (b) States’
          contribution over the operation period of US$ 1.06 billion; and (c) World Bank financing of US$500 million.
          The World Bank financing of US$500 million to the MHRD will be over a period of six years from the date
          of approval of the Operation. The proposed World Bank financing comprises of a US$ 475 million
          assistance to the Program using the PforR instrument and a US$ 25 million TA component (“Project?) using
          the IPF instrument. The World Bank’s contribution through the PforR instrument will thus account for
          about 15 percent of the total estimated expenditures of the Program (Refer table xxx Operation
          Expenditure Framework). The Program expenditure framework is derived from a current baseline
          (supported through Center and State budget) and estimates for FY19–25 interventions.

                                                                         Amount
                                Source                                                              % of Total
                                                                       (USD Million)
           Program Cost                                                    3,346                      100%



Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                            Page 4 of 13
         The World Bank
         Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)



                   Borrower/Recipient
           GOI funding                                                    1,789                  53.43%
           State Funding                                                  1,057                  31.64%
           International Bank for Reconstruction and
                                                                              500                14.93%
           Development (IBRD)
                    Total Program Financing                               3,346                    100%


          C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators


          4.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) for STARS is to improve the quality and governance
          of school education in project states.

          PDO Level Indicators include:
                  Percentage of students achieving minimum proficiency in grade 3 language in project states
                    (disaggregated by gender, Scheduled Caste [SC], and Scheduled Tribe [ST])
                  Secondary school completion rate in project states: (disaggregated by gender)
                  Improved governance in project states (as measured by select indicators from MHRD’s
                    Performance Grading Index)

          5.      The Intermediate Outcome Indicators are:
                   Strengthened Early Years Education
                     o Number of teachers trained in (a) ECE, (b) Early reading and numeracy
                     o Percent of preschool classes/ECE centers with relevant TLM
                   Improved Learning Assessment Systems
                     o Participation in international standardized learning assessment (PISA)
                     o Strengthened learning assessment systems and capabilities at national and state levels
                   Improved teacher performance and classroom practice
                     o Strengthened in-service teacher training and teacher knowledge in project states
                     o Percent of schools implementing learning enhancement program for upper primary and
                          secondary grades in project states
                   Strengthened School to Work/High Education Transition
                     o Career guidance program for improved transition from school to further education and
                          careers
                     o Labor-market relevant courses offered at the secondary and higher secondary stages

          6.      Strengthened governance and decentralized management
                  a. Improved teacher management in project states
                  b. Strengthened school management in project states
                  c. Improved education service delivery in project states through partnerships and school
                      monitoring
                                                       STARS: Results Chain




Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                    Page 5 of 13
         The World Bank
         Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)




          7.       Theory of Change- and the selection of DLIs: The education sector in India while on a rapidly
          developing trajectory, is characterized by certain inherent challenges; unless these are addressed head
          on, neither can learning outcomes be achieved nor can systemic change and governance reform be
          implemented. Firstly, there are persisting low levels of learning in the early grades results in a substantial
          number of children moving from lower to upper grades without learning even the basics of reading and
          writing. Insufficient or deficient ECE programs are leading to poor basic cognitive and language
          competencies in the early years, which influence their learning levels in school. Adding 2 years of early
          childhood education to the schools can generate a return as high as $ 25 for every $ 1 invested - with
          about 30 to 60 percent additional income over one person's lifetime. Hence this is a critical input into the
          reform agenda for school outcomes improvement as well as the achievement of the PDO. It is therefore
          the first component of the project and DLI no. 1 is expected to be a direct outcome of a robust ECE

Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                               Page 6 of 13
         The World Bank
         Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)


          program with enough teaching learning resources and trained teachers with a robust institutional
          mechanism for training that will lead to improved learning at the early primary education level. This is also
          a critical component of State Incentive Grants that will incentivize ECE provision with financial incentives.
          Secondly, while India has a large-scale learning assessment system, there is a need to enhance its validity
          and credibility with sustained learning assessment systems improvement. Further, since India does not
          participate in any international standardized learning assessment programs, it is difficult to gauge student
          outcomes on an independent third-party evaluation system. India’s participation in the international PISA
          will be a major step in this direction and this has been included in the second result area of the program
          and is being incentivized through DLI no 4. Thirdly, improving learning outcomes would depend
          substantively on quality classroom instructional processes that is incumbent on a prepared teaching
          workforce. The third result area will support of teacher development and school leadership activities in
          the project states along with a strong school remediation program based on use of instructional
          technology and innovative mechanisms to enhance classroom instruction and learning. This is being
          supported through the DLI matrix in two ways: DLI 3 on improving governance index scores ensures that
          teacher management systems and teacher presence is ensured with their attendance and deployment
          being monitored. Further, the State Incentive Grants under DLI 6 will incentivize states through financial
          incentives to ensure that teachers are provided with need-based training especially through transparent
          online portals providing a menu of training modules to make training relevant to the teachers. Subject
          knowledge of teachers will be evaluated and used to revise in-service training modules, thus
          strengthening ins-service teacher training and making it teacher owned. Learning enhancement programs
          and remedial programs to improve student outcomes will be supported. Fourthly, secondary education,
          for many children, is also a terminal stage, when they leave school and begin acquiring productive work
          skills. There is recognition that students need to be provided with varied options and guided approaches
          to support them in secondary school, which would be both vocational and academic in nature. Often
          students opting for higher education move into the labor market without the relevant transversal soft
          skills that are important for success in the labor market. Career counselling is critical. Clarifying and
          standardizing VET training and assessment systems, credit transfers and equivalence, and career
          counselling approaches through effective coordination between the skills development and the school
          education sectors would be important and a key determinant of transition from secondary to
          tertiary/vocational systems. This is covered under DLI 3 and DLI 6 through the SIG. Lastly and most
          importantly, the project focusses significantly on governance reform for improving education service
          delivery. Unless service delivery is improved through improving decentralized frontline delivery channels,
          education outcomes will be difficult to meet Further, the theory of change is also based on the premise
          that strategic partnerships with the non-state actors would be an important factor in improving public
          school governance and service delivery. Hence governance has been provided significant attention, both
          through the DLI no 3 and DLI 6.




          D. Operation Instrument:


          The proposed support under STARS is in the form of a hybrid operation that uses two lending
          instruments: (a) a program component using the Program for Results (PforR) instrument, and (b) a

Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                              Page 7 of 13
         The World Bank
         Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)


          technical assistance (TA) component using the Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument.1 The PforR
          component will be used to facilitate large scale reforms at the state level through DLIs that would govern
          the actions for triggering the disbursement via the MHRD. Firstly, it is expected that states would
          undertake significant initiatives to drive innovations/implementation strengthening of ECE and support to
          the early years as this is now a critical ask also of the draft New Education Policy STARS will support it very
          integrally. This is expected to drive the learning outcomes enhancement in Class 3. Further, support to
          the states will include improving completion of secondary level with the Class 10 school leaving exam
          undertaken by increased number of students. The largest area of the PforR financing would be for
          decentralized management and state capability enhancement for improved implementation- this will
          happen through DLI 6 that is governed by a 100-point State Incentive Grant score card that would monitor
          major triggers that are expected to nudge states towards meeting project outcomes. This SIG matrix is
          aligned with the intermediate outcome indicators in the RF and is designed to incentivize states towards
          (a) strengthening delivery of education services and (b) progressing on two additional components based
          on state priorities.

          7.       The IPF TA component is expected to be a catalyst to moving the PforR actions through a more
          flexible financial instrument that would help MHRD procure services that would help the reform agenda
          moving forward. This would include hiring of agencies at the national level like Project management Unit
          (PMU) that would supplement the capacity and human resource constraints at the national level and
          further through the PMU- at the state levels. The Independent Verification Agency (IVA) would also be
          using the TA funds to ensure best quality firm being hired. STARS encourage innovations and non-
          traditional partnerships for education service delivery- the IPF TA will help the government undertake
          pilots as tests beds to try out charter schools, direct benefit transfers for school choice, reform in ECE
          systems, technology pilots to improve governance etc.


          8.      Rationale for use of IPF for TA. The TA component aims to build the capacity of MHRD through,
          among others: (a) establishing a program management unit (PMU) in MHRD to strengthen existing
          capacities in financial management, planning, and program coordination; (b) providing support to MHRD
          to help improve their program design and pilots; and (c) supporting M&E, impact evaluation, and third-
          party assessments/validation of implementation activities and program outcomes. The IPF instrument will
          allow MHRD to access the best quality (potentially high-cost) services through national and international
          contracting that might not otherwise be possible using existing country systems.

          9.      Technical Assistance (TA): An IPF based TA component of $ 25 million will be provided to build
          the capacity of MHRD through some major initiatives that will be rolled out by the MHRD and managed
          by the MHRD. Key areas of support would be as follows:

                                                    TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
                        Action                              Cost                                Broad Tasks
           Hiring of an agency as program xxx                                        Strengthen existing capacities in
           management unit (PMU) in                                                  financial management, planning,
           MHRD                                                                      and program coordination etc.
                                                                                     (b) provide support to MHRD to




Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                                Page 8 of 13
         The World Bank
         Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)


                                                                            help improve their program
                                                                            design and pilots; and (c)
                                                                            support       M&E,         impact
                                                                            evaluation, and third-party
                                                                            assessments/validation          of
                                                                            implementation activities and
                                                                            program outcomes
           Pilot projects/initiatives on key                                ECE, teacher reform, learning
           areas of the project                                             assessments,         decentralized
                                                                            management; partnerships with
                                                                            non-state actors etc
           Hiring of the Independent                                        Third party evaluations of the
           Verification Agency (IVA)                                        DLIs:
                                                                                     DLI 1: Increase in
                                                                                        students achieving
                                                                                        minimum
                                                                                        proficiency in grade
                                                                                        3      language      in
                                                                                        project states
                                                                                     DLI 2: Improvement
                                                                                        in secondary school
                                                                                        completion rate in
                                                                                        project states
                                                                                     DLI 3: Improvement
                                                                                        in governance index
                                                                                        scores in project
                                                                                        states
                                                                                     DLI 4: Strengthened
                                                                                        assessment systems
                                                                                        in project states
                                                                                     DLI 5: Partnerships
                                                                                        developed           to
                                                                                        facilitate      cross-
                                                                                        learning between
                                                                                        states
                                                                                     DLI 6: State level
                                                                                        improved       service
                                                                                        delivery

           Knowledge    Sharing/National                                    Identification of best practices in
           and International Exposure                                       key areas identified with the
           Visits                                                           World Bank




Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
           The World Bank
           Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)


    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

           Five of the six states i.e. Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha and Rajasthan
           supported under STARS have designated Schedule V Areas. Presence of SC and ST communities varies
           across states. Further, It needs to be noted that five of these states include a total of 26 aspirational
           districts out of the 117 districts identified by NITI Aayog. Four states supported under STARS, Maharashtra,
           MP, Odisha and Kerala have LWE areas identified by the Government of India. Interventions proposed
           under STARS will work towards minimizing social conflict and improving inclusionary outcomes through
           enhanced governance mechanisms and targeted interventions in these districts.

.

    E. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

    Sangeeta Kumari,Kalyani Kandula,Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar,Kanchan Rajeevsingh Parmar




     II.    SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

    SAFEGUARDS

    Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
                                                                       OP 7.50 is not triggered for this project as
 Projects on International Waterways
                                                  No                   there are no interventions in international
 OP/BP 7.50
                                                                       waterways.
                                                                       OP 7.60 is not triggered as the project is not in any
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No
                                                                       disputed area.
                                                                       The IPF component of the project supports technical
                                                                       assistance (TA) activities such as research and
                                                                       studies to improve knowledge and learning
                                                                       outcomes, monitoring and evaluation, institutional
                                                                       strengthening.The IPF component by nature of its
                                                                       activities does not have any environmental and
                                                                       social impacts. There are no investments proposed
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              No                   under the IPF component.

                                                                       As part of the overarching Program-for-Results
                                                                       (PforR), an Environmental and Social Systems
                                                                       Assessment has been prepared to assess country
                                                                       systems and capacities, and put into place a program
                                                                       action plan with mitigation measures for
                                                                       environmental and social effects.
 Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                                  No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03

Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                              Page 10 of 13
            The World Bank
            Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)


                                                                    OP 4.04 is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                    finance any interventions in natural habitats or that
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No
                                                                    would adversely impact natural habitats.

                                                                    OP 4.36 is not triggered for this project the project
                                                                    will not finance any interventions in forest areas and
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No
                                                                    no conversion/degradation of forests is envisaged.

                                                                    OP 4.09 is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                    finance or promote the use of large scale/significant
 Pest Management OP 4.09                        No                  qualities of pesticides or chemical pest control
                                                                    methods that would cause adverse impacts to
                                                                    human health and the environment.
                                                                    OP 4.11 is not triggered as the IPF component will
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No                  not finance any investment/ civil works that will
                                                                    impact physical and cultural properties.
                                                                    OP 4.10 is not triggered as the IPF component will
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No                  not finance any investment/ civil works in schedule V
                                                                    areas.
                                                                    OP 4.12 is not triggered as the IPF component will
                                                                    not finance any investment/ civil works that will
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            No
                                                                    impact resettlement.

                                                                    OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project will not
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No                  construct any new dams or support activities that
                                                                    are concerned with the functioning of existing dams.
.

     III.    KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential
 large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 Not applicable

 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
 Not applicable

 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
 Not applicable

 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 Not applicable



Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                        Page 11 of 13
         The World Bank
         Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)


 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
 with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Not applicable
.
.

 B. Disclosure Requirements




 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project
 decision meeting)

 OPS_PDI_COMP_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
   Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank
                                                                                   Yes [ ]         No [ ]      N/A [✔ ]
   for disclosure?
   Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
   form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-            Yes [ ]         No [ ]      N/A [✔ ]
   affected groups and local NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
   Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
   been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard           Yes [ ]         No [ ]      N/A [✔ ]
   policies?
   Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the
                                                                                   Yes [ ]         No [ ]      N/A [✔ ]
   project cost?
   Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
   monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard               Yes [ ]         No [ ]      N/A [✔ ]
   policies?
   Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
   borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal            Yes [ ]         No [ ]      N/A [✔ ]
   documents?


 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




Sep 10, 2019                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
         The World Bank
         Strengthening Teaching-Learning And Results for States (P166868)



 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



 APPROVAL


 Signed and Submitted by

                                        Name                                Date
                                        Shabnam Sinha
 Task Team Leader(s):
                                        Margaret M. Clarke
  Environmental Specialist:             Kalyani Kandula

  Social Development Specialist         Kanchan Rajeevsingh Parmar
  Additional Environmental and/or       Sangeeta Kumari
  Social Development Specialist(s)      Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar


 Approved by

 Safeguards Advisor:                     Maged Mahmoud Hamed                11-Oct-2019

 Practice Manager/Manager:               Cristian Aedo                      14-Oct-2019




Sep 10, 2019                                                                              Page 13 of 13
