The World Bank                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (P164356)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                     Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jul-2018| Report No: ISDSA24042




                      Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar
                             Country Director:    Yaye Seynabou Sakho
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Timothy Grant Evans
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Daniel Dulitzky
                           Task Team Leader:      Amparo Elena Gordillo-Tobar
              The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
              ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (P164356)


.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                 Project Name
    P164356                                                    ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases
    Task Team Leader(s)                                        Country
    Amparo Elena Gordillo-Tobar                                El Salvador
    Approval Date                                              Environmental Category
    15-Aug-2018                                                C-Not Required
    Managing Unit                                              Is this a Repeater project?
    GHN04                                                      No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              1.80
    Total Financing                                                                                                 1.80
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                   1.80
         Pharmaceutical Governance Fund                                                                             1.80


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The objective of the Project is to support the Government of El Salvador in piloting an integrated health care service
  delivery model to improve the prevention, early detection, and treatment of cervical cancer as well as the prevention of
. NCD risk factors in selected regions of the Recipient.
          The World Bank                                                                                           Appraisal ISDS
          ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (P164356)



    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

1.     Component 1. Health service delivery model for the prevention, early detection and treatment of NCDs
(US$1.15 million)

2.      Subcomponent 1.a. Development of the health service delivery model for the prevention, early detection and
treatment of NCDs, including the carrying out of consultations with national indigenous people’s organizations. (US$0.4
million). The proposed component will foster the design and implementation of an integrated service delivery model for
the prevention, early detection, and treatment of NCDs (e.g. cervical cancer, diabetes, and kidney disease). This builds
upon El Salvador’s National Strategy for Chronic Diseases. Technical discussions about the best possible delivery model
to control the rise of NCDs will be carried out with representatives from the Ministry of Health (MOH) and key stakeholders
working on NCDs in the different regions of the country.

3.       Subcomponent 1.b. Pilots in the country’s Selected Municipalities for the implementation of a roadmap of the
health integrated service delivery model for the prevention, early detection, and treatment of NCDs (US$0.75 million). This
includes: (i) the documentation of the main features of the health integrated service delivery model, highlighting scalability
and sustainability issues; and (ii) the carrying out of a social assessment to identify any potential beneficiary vulnerable
populations. A framework/roadmap on service delivery will be implemented in three regions: Paracentral, Central and
Oriental. The roadmap will document the main features of the delivery model, highlighting scalability and sustainability
issues. The Paracentral and Central regions have been selected for the cervical cancer pilot, as a greater percentage of
women has never been screened for cervical cancer in these areas. For the cervical cancer component, the Project will
also build upon previous efforts under which 28,050 women between 30-59 years of age were tested for HPV. This Project
will complement the treatment of the 11.5 percent of women that tested positive for HPV. At the same time, the activity
aims at increasing cervical cancer detection rates within the Paracentral region and extending the use of screening to the
Central region. In the Oriental region, the piloting of integrated services will be directed to curve the increased number
of cases with diabetes and kidney disease.

4.      The proposed NCD pilot is expected to: (i) avert high levels of morbidity and mortality; (ii) pre-empt an escalation
of health care costs associated with delayed health care seeking behavior; and (iii) provide a basis for a comprehensive
approach to NCD management (i.e., patients need to be aware of their conditions to seek care). Identifying NCD patients
early on will save lives, improve patients’ quality of life, and curtail the impoverishing effects of high out -of-pocket
spending due to catastrophic illnesses (i.e. complications of cervical cancer, diabetes and kidney disease).

5.       Component 2. Innovations in the prevention of risk factors (US$0.45 million). The proposed component will
include innovations in care delivery and coverage strategies such as: (i) promotion and implementation of cervical cancer
prevention strategies including HPV vaccination among girls 9-13 years of age; (ii) testing innovative screening tools; (iii)
the assessment of referral and counter-referral mechanisms among primary, secondary, and tertiary care levels; the
identification of health provider needs and the carrying out of workshops to train health providers at different levels of health
care; and (iv) organizing facilities for diagnostic work. These innovations will be implemented using the existing health
infrastructure, and in convergence with similar health programs.

6.     Component 3. Monitoring and Management (US$0.2 million). This component will provide support for the
monitoring and technical supervision of the Project and the carrying out of annual financial audits.

.
        The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
        ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (P164356)



4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The project will be implemented in three sub-regions of El Salvador. The project won’t finance any civil works
or pre-investment studies that potentially affect the natural environment and the people of these regions,
but improving the integrated services delivery model for the prevention, early detection, and treatment of
NCDs, may have indirect environmental negative impacts. The main environmental indirect negative impact
are in regards of the health risk; treatment and disposal of healthcare waste may pose health risk indirectly
through the release of pathogens and toxic pollutants into the environment. The alternative of incineration is
now available such as autoclaving, which with the resources of previous Bank’s project are implementing.
The Project will continue support the Hospital Waste Management Plans (HWMP) developed in previous
Bank’s project to prevent and mitigate the potential indirect negative impact. In this regard, during the
Project preparation stage the team will identify with the client (MINSAL) the funds required for the
implementation of the HWMP in the health centers included in this Project. Under component 1a, the
project provides technical assistance to develop a health service delivery model. Due to its national scope, it
acknowledges the existence of indigenous communities and triggers OP4.10. Given the scope and type of
activities, the client will not need to prepare an IPPF or an IPP. Instead, it will consult IPs via their
representative national level organizations and specific actions – if needed – will be included to ensure that
they can benefit in a culturally appropriate manner. Under component 1b and 2, the health service delivery
model will be piloted in 3 municipalities: Apastepeque, La Palma and Jiquilisco. Based on information
provided by the client and confirmed by a national indigenous organization (CCNIS), there are no indigenous
communities that comply with OP 4.10 criteria. However, there are individuals that self-identify as
indigenous and other vulnerable populations may be present. Under OP 4.01, a social assessment will be
undertaken to identify any vulnerable populations who could benefit from it, their main ethnic and socio-
cultural characteristics and specific behavioral risk factors that contribute to suffering cervical cancer and
other NCDs. The assessment will provide recommendations to ensure that these vulnerable individuals can
benefit positively from the Project.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Gunars H. Platais, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Erika Piber, Social Safeguards Specialist
Paula Andrea Rossiasco Uscategui, Social Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered            Explanation

                                                                 The policy is triggered because both technical
                                                                 assistance for the development of a health service
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes                  delivery model, and the implementation of a pilot
                                                                 in 3 municipalities may have positive or negative
                                                                 impacts in vulnerable populations. A Social
        The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
        ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (P164356)



                                                             Assessment will be conducted to identify such
                                                             populations,         and       provide        specific
                                                             recommendations to ensure they can benefit from
                                                             the project.
                                                             This policy is not triggered given that the Project’s
                                                             interventions are not located within or in the
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No
                                                             proximity of natural habitats; hence no conversion
                                                             or degradation of natural habitats is expected.
                                                             This policy is not triggered since the Project
                                                             activities are not expected to impact forested
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No
                                                             areas, forest dependent communities or involve
                                                             changes in management of forests.
                                                             This policy is not triggered given that the Project’s
 Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
                                                             activities do not include the use of pesticide.
                                                             This policy is not triggered given that the Projects
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No                 activities do not affect any physical or cultural
                                                             resources.
                                                             The policy is triggered because technical assistance
                                                             activities for the development of the health service
                                                             delivery model has a national scope and
                                                             acknowledges the existence of Indigenous Peoples
                                                             in El Salvador. No negative impacts on Indigenous
                                                             Peoples are expected as a result of this project.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes                Because these are technical assistance activities,
                                                             the client will not need to prepare an IPPF or an IPP.
                                                             The client will consult IPs via their representative
                                                             national level organizations and specific actions – if
                                                             needed – will be put in place to ensure that they
                                                             can benefit from this project in a culturally
                                                             appropriate manner.
                                                             This policy is not triggered given that the Project
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No                 does not finance any infrastructure that can result
                                                             in land acquisition and/or resettlement.
                                                             This policy is not triggered given that the Project
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No                 will not support the construction or rehabilitation
                                                             of dams.
                                                             This policy is not triggered given that the Project
 Projects on International Waterways
                                          No                 will not affect international waterways as defined
 OP/BP 7.50
                                                             under the policy.
                                                             This policy is not triggered given that the Project
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No                 will not affect disputed areas as defined under the
                                                             policy.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.   SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES
        The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
        ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (P164356)




1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
  potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
  N/A



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The project will be implemented in three (3) sub-regions of El Salvador: Paracentral, Central, and Oriental. The project
  won’t finance any civil works or pre-investment studies that potentially affect the natural environment and the people
  of these regions, but improving the integrated services delivery model for the prevention, early detection, and
  treatment of NCDs (cervical cancer, diabetes, and kidney disease), may have indirect environmental negative impacts
  due the increase of hazardous hospital waste that should be properly managed. The main environmental indirect
  negative impact are in regards of the health risk (health care waste contains potentially harmful microorganism which
  can infect patients, health workers and general public; and the spread of drug-resistant microorganism from health
  facilities into the environment); treatment and disposal of healthcare waste may pose health risk indirectly through
  the release of pathogens and toxic pollutants into the environment (landfills can contaminate drinking water,
  incineration of waste results in the release of pollutants into the air and also the generation of dioxins which are
  associated with a range of adverse health effects). The alternative of incineration is now available such as autoclaving,
  which with the resources of previous Bank’s project are implementing.

  For technical assistances activities, no negative impacts on Indigenous Peoples are expected as a result of this project.

  Regarding implementation of pilot, there may be presence of individuals for whom the project is relevant, but whose
  ethnic, gender and other characteristics may prevent them from benefiting from it. Potential indirect or long-term
  impact have not been determined. During pilot preparation, a social assessment will be undertaken to identify
  vulnerable groups (including indigenous individuals) who could benefit from it, their main ethnic and socio-cultural
  characteristics and specific behavioral risk factors that contribute to suffering cervical cancer and other NCDs (diet,
  habits, sexual behavior/violence, etc.), as well as describe the implications and opportunities the pilot would bring.



3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The project will continue support the Hospital Waste Management Plans (HWMP) developed in the previous Bank’s
  project to prevent and mitigate the potential indirect negative impact. In this regard, during the project preparation
  stage the team will identify with the client (MINSAL) the funds required for the implementation of the HWMP in the
  health centers included in this project.
  Regarding technical assistance activities, the client will develop a strategy to ensure that IPs are consulted via their
  representative national level organizations and that specific actions – if needed – are put in place to ensure that IPs
  can benefit from this project in a culturally appropriate manner.

  Regarding the pilot, the social assessment will take place at early stages of pilot preparation and will feed into its
  design, incorporating adaptations that would accommodate for the special needs of some of the most vulnerable
  populations relevant for the project. It will entail a desk review and consultations with beneficiary communities.
                            The World Bank                                                                                      Appraisal ISDS
                            ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (P164356)




                     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
                       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                       The borrower has demonstrated the capacity to address safeguard policy issues by the successful implementation of
                       the Hospital Waste Management Plans (HWMP) which are effectively preventing and mitigating any potential indirect
                       negative impact. MINSAL has knowledge and experience preparing safeguards instruments in previous WB projects.
                       MINSAL has also shown political will and interest in addressing Indigenous Peoples’ access to health services and how
                       to complement Western and indigenous health, as they have been working with indigenous leaders in the
                       development of the National Policy of Indigenous Peoples’ Health, expected to be adopted in 2018.


                     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
                       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                       Regarding technical assistance activities, client will ensure that IPs are consulted via their representative national
                       level organizations.

                       The preparation of the social assessment will require consultations with indigenous and non-indigenous community
                       beneficiaries, including vulnerable populations. Following this assessment, these stakeholders are expected to be
                       informed, consulted and to participate during implementation.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Date of submission for disclosure


         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure


       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
         The World Bank                                                                  Appraisal ISDS
         ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (P164356)



  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                  No



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                    NA
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    NA
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     NA
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    NA
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                    NA
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                    NA
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                    NA
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


 Task Team Leader(s)                      Amparo Elena Gordillo-Tobar
           The World Bank                                                     Appraisal ISDS
           ESV:Addressing Non-Communicable Diseases (P164356)



    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager            Andrew Sunil Rajkumar   03-Aug-2018

.
