The World Bank                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Dec-2018| Report No: ISDSA25877




                       Regional Vice President:    Cyril E Muller
                              Country Director:    Linda Van Gelder
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Susan Shen, Acting Practice Manager
                            Task Team Leader:      Ifeta Smajic, Gloria La Cava
              The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
              Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P165485                                                     Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Ifeta Smajic                                                Kosovo
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    22-Mar-2019                                                 B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU03                                                       No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              2.79
    Total Financing                                                                                                 2.79
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                   2.79
         Japan Social Development Fund                                                                              2.79


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The Project Development Objective is to improve the socio-economic inclusion of at least 3,000 disadvantaged youth (ages
. 15-29) in vulnerable communities in Kosovo through civic engagement activities.
             The World Bank                                                                                     Appraisal ISD
             Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)



     3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION


1. The proposed project seeks to promote the socio-economic inclusion of disadvantaged youth in targeted
   locations by providing them with access to soft-skills building activities and participation in local development
   initiatives. The project is expected to enhance youth’s participation in local decision making while building a
   stronger link to local government and community. Municipal support for youth initiatives, especially on sub-
   projects that involve municipal assets, will create new opportunities for engagement and relationship building
   between youth and city officials. Participating youth will be able to make tangible contributions to their
   community and increase their knowledge of how to participate in civic activities. Through structured
   engagement in local development, youth will build new skills, gain volunteering opportunities and enhance their
   social capital. The project focuses on applied soft skills because these are lacking in the formal education while
   being in high demand by employers in Kosovo. To recognize the indirect benefits of strengthened soft skills,
   work experience and expanded networks on access to economic opportunities, the project anticipates a modest
   income increase for beneficiaries.

2. The proposed project will complement a planned youth operation in Kosovo “Youth Inclusion and
   Entrepreneurship? (YIEP) focused on increasing socio-economic opportunities for inactive youth through
   improved access to skills building, sustainable entrepreneurship services and civic participation. YIEP (US$ 10.4
   million) provides supply side solutions intended to support youth socio-economic inclusion in an economy with
   limited job creation, particularly for disadvantaged youth. The proposed JSDF will complement YIEP inclusion
   efforts by piloting demand side solutions aimed at addressing youth’s socio-economic needs at community level.
   Youth activated through the proposed JSDF grant will be directed to additional socio-economic and
   entrepreneurship opportunities offered by YEIP to enhance their chances of economic integration. YIEP service
   hubs will be established in regional centers that can serve the same municipalities, targets the same
   disadvantaged youth population and will be implemented in coordination (e.g. outreach activities, M&E system
   with aligned indicators). The proposed project is not included in the preparation of YEIP as it represents a new
   initiative to be piloted by the Government of Kosovo (GoK) prior to scaling in subsequent interventions based on
   project results. The GoK has expressed interest in streamlining support for youth programing through existing
   government systems. In particular, the MLGA will evaluate results from the pilot to integrate support for youth
   initiatives as part of its future performance-based incentive grant allocation system. See Annex 2 for a summary
   of the linkages between the current project and YIEP.

3. The project draws on global experience supporting disadvantaged youth in FCV contexts (e.g. Youth Livelihoods
   Development in Southern Iraq Project, Kosovo Youth Development Project). In particular, by operating at a local
   level and employing bottom-up approaches, the proposed project will improve targeting of beneficiaries and
   support project cost effectiveness. The project also builds on lessons learned from global community driven
   initiatives, which show that involving beneficiaries in all stages of the project cycle results in better quality
   service deliver, lower implementation costs, and greater community satisfaction. For example, the Macedonia
   “Youth Empowerment through Community Development? Project (2009-2014) shows that taking a proactive
   approach to activating vulnerable youth at the community level through specialized and grassroots
   organizations is effective in reducing their vulnerabilities. Additionally, the Kosovo Youth Development Project,
   which supported youth entrepreneurship and provision of business incubators at the local level, showed the
   potential of improving sustainability of youth services by involving local governments, i.e., incubators that
   received local government support continued to operate beyond the project duration.
              The World Bank                                                                                          Appraisal ISD
              Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)



Component 1: Youth Driven Community Development Initiatives (US$ 1,719,000)

4. This component will finance sub-grants for youth driven socio-economic initiatives that support youth inclusion
   and livelihoods at community level. This component expects to finance 150 youth driven initiatives by engaging
   at least 3,000 disadvantaged youth in the identification, prioritization and design of sub-projects. Among the
   3,000 direct beneficiaries, minimum 500 participating youth will benefit from volunteering opportunities to
   positively impact their communities and other disadvantaged youth, while also gaining valuable work experience
   and skills that makes young people more attractive for potential employers. Volunteers will receive targeted
   technical and soft skills training and coaching to ensure they are prepared, supported and can acquire
   meaningful employment and life skills from the volunteering opportunities. Youth driven community initiatives
   will benefit about 5,000 youth through greater access to youth related services and community infrastructure.

5. Partnership with municipalities. The Ministry of Local Government Administration (MLGA) will allocate to
   municipalities funds earmarked for youth initiatives in two annual rounds. The MLGA has pre-selected 10
   municipalities to participate in the first round of municipality grant allocations based on the following
   considerations: (i) limited donor presence with youth programs, (ii) regional representation, (iii) minority-led
   local governments, and incidence of radicalization and recruitment. Youth driven activities will be implemented
   in vulnerable communities within selected municipalities. The communities will be identified at the beginning of
   the project by means of a needs and mapping assessment, which will include (i) large demand and limited supply
   of youth services, (ii) high concentration of poverty, ethnic minorities, IDPs and/or returnees, (iii) history of
   ethnic tensions, and (iv) risks/incidence of violence, radicalization and recruitment.

6. Pre-selected municipalities will undergo a capacity assessment to ensure they have the capacity to effectively
   manage their incentive grant allocation. This assessment will be based on the MLGA’s performance-based
   incentive grant allocation system, which evaluates municipal performance on a range of financial and
   management indicators.1 In line with MLGA’s current implementation of the Municipal Performance
   Management System, the Ministry will allocate incentive grants to the selected municipalities, but will retain
   financial management responsibilities for the incentive grants. To be eligible to participate, municipalities must
   match 15 percent of their incentive grant allocation in counterpart funding and provide space for project
   meetings and events. In addition, municipalities will commit staff to facilitate the implementation and
   supervision of sub-projects. Municipal contributions will ensure local ownership and sustainability of youth
   programming by integrating activities to local development plans, and will build greater cooperation and trust
   between youth and municipal stakeholders.

7. Scope of investments. Youth groups/CBOs will be eligible to submit sub-project proposals that address youth
   socio-economic needs. These proposals will be identified through an inclusive and participatory process, which
   includes focus group discussions with different youth sub-groups (ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities,
   LGBTI, women, IDPs and refugees) to ensure that the needs of all youth are properly reflected in sub-project
   design. Sub-project proposals can include (i) economic services intended to improve youth employability and
   income generating opportunities (i.e. skills building trainings, access to maker spaces, entrepreneurship
   trainings, ICT courses, etc), (ii) youth related community infrastructure improvements (i.e. repair of youth
   centers, parks, classrooms, youth-friendly spaces in health centers, and libraries), (iii) youth cultural and sports
   activities, (iv) psychosocial support and emotional counseling, or (v) additional youth volunteering opportunities

    1
     Changes in pre-selected municipalities resulting from this assessment must receive no-objection from the World
    Bank.
              The World Bank                                                                                                 Appraisal ISD
              Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)



    intended to address a community need. Specific youth driven initiatives cannot be determined a priori as they
    are demand driven and will respond to disadvantaged youth’s unmet needs at community level. These are some
    of the activities identified by experts on prevention of violent extremism (PVE) as lacking in fragile
    communities. By investing in youth skills, knowledge, and activities, the proposed project will empower
    disadvantaged youth to become active agents in their communities and decrease their vulnerability to negative
    influences. Excess demand for sub-grants and youth expectations will be managed through transparent
    communication about funds availability, application process and eligibility criteria.

8. Selection Criteria. Sub-project proposals will be reviewed against to-be agreed selection criteria, which would
   assign greater weigh to sub-project that: (i) involve extensive youth participation in the identification and design
   of the sub-project, (ii) bring social change to the community, (iii) integrate key principles of environmental and
   financial sustainability, include opportunities for youth volunteerism during the implementation phase of the
   sub-project, (iv) are aligned with municipal youth plans, and (v) bring youth from different ethnic backgrounds
   together, so as to strengthen to inter-ethnic collaborations and bridge the existing social divide.2 To ensure sub-
   projects have community support, proposals must be endorsed by at least one community entity (neighborhood
   councils, religious associations, youth centers, etc.). The size of the sub-grant shall not exceed US$ 30,000.
   Detailed rules and procedures for administrating the sub-grant program will be provided in the sub-grants
   manual.

Component 2: Youth Stakeholders Training (US$ 777,000)

9. This component will finance: (i) community mobilization and outreach activities, (ii) soft skills training and
   project preparation/management training for youth in target communities, (iii) technical support for youth
   groups and CBOs who submitted an application pre-selected by municipalities for funding, and (iv) follow up
   support and supervision throughout sub-project implementation. The MLGA will competitively select
   experienced service consultants (NGOs) to implement activities under this component. This component expects
   to directly benefit 3,000 youth through soft skills and project management training, and indirectly benefit about
   5,000 disadvantaged youth by strengthening the technical specifications of sub-projects designed to improve
   disadvantaged youth’s access to socio-economic services.

10. Community mobilization: the facilitating partner NGO will conduct community outreach campaigns to increase
    awareness among disadvantaged youth, including youth CBOs, of the project activities and encourage them to
    apply. Outreach activities will include door to door campaigns, meetings with key community stakeholders and
    youth networks (neighborhood councils, youth groups, youth centers, local NGOs, and representatives of the
    religious community), social media campaigns (via Facebook and Instagram), use of radio and placement of
    flyers and posters in strategic locations in the target areas (youth centers, cafes, local authorities’ offices, or
    other locations where youth congregate). Community needs and mapping assessments will be used to identify
    targeted measures to mobilize and facilitate participation of hard-to-reach youth and women. Based on the
    specific constrains identified in targeted communities, tested strategies for ensuring that young women, remote
    and minority youth are given equal opportunities and are positively supported to join the project will be
    integrated. Examples include women & minority-led outreach and provision of training within communities to
    address mobility constraints. The facilitating partner NGO will also prepare brief community profiles outlining
    youth needs and existing youth friendly infrastructure services, so as to inform sub-project designs and support
    youth groups in the prioritization of community objectives.

    2
     One quarter of the surveyed youth in the 2018 Public Pulse survey identified participation in joint activities as the
    best way of improving Kosovo Serb and Kosovo Albanian relations. UNDP Kosovo (2018) Public Pulse Analysis.
              The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISD
              Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)




11. Soft skills and project management training: the facilitating partner NGOs will provide soft skills training to
    3,000 disadvantaged youth focused on leadership skills, creativity, conflict mediation, communications, and
    team work. These trainings will increase youth employability by focusing on soft skills valued by potential
    employer and critical to effectively manage a business, and will also facilitate collaboration in joint community
    work. Soft skills training will be the entry point for all youth interested in elaborating sub-project proposals
    under the project. Upon completion of soft skills training, youth beneficiaries can form groups or use existing
    NGOs to prepare sub-project proposals. Trainings will be focused on community mobilization, sub-project
    preparation (including design, beneficiary targeting, budgeting) and implementation (procurement, financial
    management, participatory monitoring and evaluation). The training will be based on state of the art curriculum
    about community project design and management, including participatory approaches and climate-smart
    project identification and design.3 The use of disruptive technologies will be considered for its potential to
    enhance access to project benefits, facilitate online youth engagement and develop critical thinking skills among
    participants. In addition, sub-projects selected for funding will receive ongoing support to ensure effective sub-
    project implementation.

Component 3: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge
Dissemination (US$289,000)

Project Management

12. The MLGA will establish a Project Management Unit (PMU) responsible for the overall implementation of the
    project. The PMU will be comprised of a team of seconded staff from the MLGA, as well as small team of
    consultants to support key reporting, fiduciary, and safeguard functions. Specifically, seconded staff from the
    ministry will include a Project Director, two Component Coordinators (one for each component), Capacity &
    Performance Specialist, and an M&E Specialist, while the team of consultants financed by the project will
    include a Project Coordinator, Financial Management Specialist, a Procurement Specialist, and a Safeguards
    consultant. In addition, the MLGA will provide working space, transportation, and cover logistical and
    administrative expenses.

13. The PMU’s main responsibilities will include: project coordination, procurement, financial management,
    safeguards, communication and knowledge management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and grievance
    management. Under component 1, the PMU would be responsible for: (i) assessing municipalities fiduciary and
    program management capacity for project implementation based on the Municipal Performance Management
    System, (ii) managing the allocation and disbursement of project funds, (iii) supervising municipal compliance
    with project criteria, (iv) providing no-objection for the selection of sub-projects to ensure they comply with
    safeguards/ fiduciary requirements. For municipalities who meet the criteria outlined in the project description
    but demonstrate relatively low capacity, the PMU may choose to initiate one or several corrective actions, such
    as: (i) allocating funds but taking over the procurement process for physical works, (ii) deploying the Capacity &
    Performance Specialist from the MLGA to work directly with municipal officers responsible for opening calls,
    evaluating proposals and managing procurement activities for sub-projects that involve municipal assets, and/or
    (iii) requiring additional/more frequent reporting from municipal officials. For component 2, the MLGA will

    3
      By raising awareness and practical knowledge about climate change and environmental sustainability among the
    targeted youth, the project encourages selection and design of youth-driven initiatives that include climate
    considerations. Examples could include climate-informed refurbishment of infrastructure or behavioral change
    initiatives (e.g., solid waste reduction, residential energy efficiency, emissions free transportation).
                    The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISD
                    Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)



          procure experienced Facilitating Partner NGO(s) to conduct soft skills training, sub-project proposal writing and
          management training, and provide technical support to youth groups/CBOs throughout the sub-project cycle.
          The contractual agreements between the MLGA and Facilitating Partner NGOs will include project
          implementation support to youth groups/CBOs and municipalities.

      14. The MLGA will work closely with selected municipalities throughout project implementations. To be eligible to
          participate, municipalities will commit resource to support project activities. Once participating municipalities
          are confirmed, a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the MLGA and each municipality will be
          signed. The MOU will outline each party's requirements and responsibilities for the implementation of sub-
          projects. In particular, municipalities responsibilities will include: (i) chairing the Grant Approval Committees and
          participating in the selection of sub-projects, (ii) providing 15 percent in matching funds to support youth driven
          initiatives, (iii) supporting community outreach activities, alongside Facilitating Partner NGOs, to introduce the
          project to potential youth beneficiaries, (iii) operations and maintenance for activities related to municipal
          infrastructure or spaces, and (iv) technical support to youth groups by facilitating municipal engineers for sub-
          projects requiring technical specifications.

      Monitoring and Evaluation

      15. MLGA will track progress of all youth-driven initiatives using an online Management Information System (MIS)
          that integrates beneficiary survey and activity progress data (survey data is part of the MIS budget). A project
          learning framework will be developed to facilitate adaptive project management and collection of evidence
          related to project outcomes as stated in the theory of change (annex 1). Relevant stakeholders will be able to
          view and populate the platform with real-time field data and the platform will allow for adaptive project
          management using project analytics The MIS will be coordinated with the M&E system under YIEP, including
          aligned indicators and shared beneficiary data. Upon completion of activities, such as community mobilization
          and stakeholder training, the Ministry will prepare a short completion report summarizing results and lessons
          learned. The M&E specialist will populate the MIS with baseline and project-end survey data, which will allow for
          evaluation of the project’s effects on targeted youth.

      Knowledge Dissemination

      16. Knowledge sharing will take place throughout the project. A dedicated website and social media pages will be
          developed to provide information about project activities and intermediate results. In addition, a knowledge
          management consultant will be contracted to consolidate lessons learned throughout project implementation.
          Lessons learned would be disseminated in annual forums, where youth stakeholders and beneficiaries will have
          an opportunity to present sub-project results. These annual forums will also provide an opportunity for youth to
          interact with participants from other communities in a safe and guided environment. The forums will be widely
          documented and the media will be invited so as to strengthen the narrative of youth as positive members of
          their community. Kosovo government officials, the Government of Japan, and other development partners will
          be invited in order to raise awareness about the importance of investing in youth local development initiatives.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
       The World Bank                                                                                  Appraisal ISDS
       Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)



The project will target vulnerable communities in 10 or more municipalities in Kosovo. An indicative list of 10
participating municipalities includes Gjilan, Kaçanik, Mitrovicë, Leposavic, Rahovec, Pristina, Prizren, Zveqan,
Malishevë, and Mamushë. The pre-identified municipalities are spread across Kosovo and vary in size and
population density. Two municipalities (Leposavic and Zveqan) are located in the Serb-majority North. The
Ministry of Local Government Administration (MLGA) will allocate incentive grants to selected municipalities
earmarked for youth initiatives in two annual grant cycles. The grants will be distributed to approximately
150 youth driven initiatives (endorsed by a community entity). The civil works will include existing buildings
only and take place in urbanized locations, including open spaces such as parks. No new construction is
envisaged by the Project.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Bekim Imeri, Social Specialist
Natasa Vetma, Environmental Specialist
Ivana Ivicic, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered            Explanation

                                                               Project is B category due to grant schemes that will
                                                               support light civil works in youth related
                                                               community infrastructure (e.g. rehabilitation and
                                                               repair of youth centers, parks, classrooms, youth-
                                                               friendly spaces in public buildings). These civil
                                                               works may cause temporary and localized
                                                               environmental impacts typical for such as dust and
                                                               noise emissions, waste generation, traffic safety
                                                               risks, Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks
                                                               and other. To effectively manage environmental
                                                               challenges      in   the     implementation,     the
                                                               Implementing        Institution     will    prepare
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes
                                                               Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                               (ESMF), publicly consulted and finalized before the
                                                               appraisal. ESMF is designed to screen out all A
                                                               category, high-risk and ineligible activities. The
                                                               ESMF sets procedures and guides sub-project
                                                               screening and assessment, including preparation of
                                                               Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                               (ESMPs) or ESMP Checklists for the sub-projects as
                                                               well as their application. The only social risk
                                                               identified is related to targeting and outreach i.e.
                                                               the project misses the most vulnerable youth
                                                               segment in the selected municipalities. For this the
      The World Bank                                                                                  Appraisal ISDS
      Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)



                                                             project envisages that as a support to the PMU and
                                                             selected      local    governments,      specialized
                                                             NGO/consultancy is hired to help with targeting.,
                                                             outreach and mobilization of the most vulnerable
                                                             youth.
                                                             Small scale works may take place in public green
                                                             spaces. ESMF procedures and criteria will rule out
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No                  all sub-projects taking place in protected and
                                                             sensitive      environments      (National    Parks,
                                                             monuments of nature, etc.)
                                                             Project does not envision activities that could
                                                             impact forests. In an unlikely scenario that
                                                             individual trees are to be removed in the course of
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No
                                                             Project implementation, the final user of funds
                                                             (Applicant) must obtain a provision form the
                                                             competent authority (Kosovo Forest Agency).
                                                             There are no activities planned that include or
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
                                                             require pest control.
                                                             ESMF will not allow activities that can impact
                                                             protected buildings, archeological sites, religious
                                                             objects and similar cultural resources.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No
                                                             As chance findings are unlikely, but possible, an
                                                             adequate clause will be included to environmental
                                                             documentation providing management procedures
                                                             (ESMP Checklists and site specific ESMPs).
                                                             There are no indigenous peoples in the project
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No
                                                             area.
                                                             OP/BP 4.12 will not be triggered as decided during
                                                             the concept stage. Nature of the grant investments
                                                             and activities have not changed. The project will
                                                             not finance any new construction but could finance
                                                             rehabilitation of public facilities to make them
                                                             more appropriate for youth or equipment for youth
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No                  activities. All rehabilitation activities will be
                                                             conducted in public facilities on public land and
                                                             there will be no need for land take. Thus, neither
                                                             involuntary nor voluntary land transactions are
                                                             anticipated. Sub-projects that may trigger the
                                                             World Bank Policy OP 4.12 will be excluded by
                                                             means of a screening process defined in the ESMF.
                                                             The Project does not include activities that relate to
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No
                                                             dams.
Projects on International Waterways                          Project does not include activities that impact
                                         No
OP/BP 7.50                                                   water bodies.
                                                             The project is likely to include municipalities
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No
                                                             Northern Kosovo, which does not recognize the
           The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
           Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)



                                                                         National Government of Kosovo and where there
                                                                         may be limited accessibility for the PMU, MLGA as
                                                                         well as the WB team. However, LEGEC concluded
                                                                         that, based on several agreements and accords
                                                                         signed in 2012 and 2013, this policy would not
                                                                         apply. Nevertheless, risks associated with problem
                                                                         of limited access to the North of Kosovo needs to
                                                                         be recognized.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The project has been classified as Category B mainly for light civil works in public spaces under the Component 1 grant
      scheme. Only rehabilitation and repair works are expected on buildings and other public spaces such as community
      parks. Works can take place only in parks that are not protected for its natural features. No works on protected
      cultural heritage will be allowed.

      The Project triggers Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) due to possible rehabilitation works and no other WB
      Safeguard policies. Adverse environmental impacts typical for small scale construction works, however, they would
      be local, non-severe and temporary, including, but not limited to: dust emission and air pollution, noise and vibrations
      from operating machinery and transport vehicles, vibrations and noise emission, traffic disturbance and access risks,
      limited risk of water and soil contaminated form accidental pollution and spills, OHS risks, construction and small
      quantities of hazardous waste generation. Grants under the Project will not be used for construction of new facilities
      or annexes, production extensions or purchase of production equipment or chemicals. As physical investments are
      limited to rehabilitation works of existing public facilities, policy for Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is not
      triggered. The infrastructure investments that might need land acquisition will be excluded through a screening
      process defined in the ESMF.

      Technical designs and exact location of works are yet to be defined, therefore, the Implementing Agency (MLGA) has
      prepared a process ESMF to screen out high-risk and category A sub-projects, generally excluded sectors, projects
      triggering other WB Safeguards policies, as well as other non-eligible activities prior to appraisal. In addition to soft
      activities with no impact to the environment (trainings, technical support, etc.) only small scale civil works in
      urbanized areas are expected with predictable impacts for which mitigation and monitoring measures are easily
      tailored and addressed by the simplified ESMP (ESMP Checklists). However, as designs and specific locations are
      unknown, the ESMF allows sub-projects with site specific impacts and includes both ESMP and ESMP Checklist
      templates and procedures.

      OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats Policy is not triggered as none works in the sensitive or nature protected areas will be
      supported.

      The WB Policy OP/BP 4.11 for Physical Cultural Resources is not triggered as ESMF screens out all interventions that
      can impact objects of cultural resources and heritage as defined by the WB OP 4.11 as well as national legislation.
      National systems are found adequate for processing and managing the change findings.
       The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
       Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Long term as well as any later or additional impacts occurring in the operational phase are not expected as a result of
  the project implementation.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Rehabilitation and repairs of youth infrastructure will cause environmental impacts that are small, localized and short-
  term. No works in the protected areas are allowed. No new construction will be supported.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  To address environmental issues that may occur in implementation of the Project Component 1, MLGA has prepared
  the ESMF defining procedures for screening and environmental due diligence of proposed activities under the grant
  scheme as well as serving as guidelines for safe and sustainable implementation of sub-projects, supervision,
  monitoring and reporting. It also provides tools to screen out of non-eligible and high-risk projects. Based on ESMF,
  the sub-projects will be classified B or C category. For B category sub-projects grant applicants will prepare ESMP or
  ESMP Checklist satisfactory to the WB. All EAs (ESMP Checklists and site specific ESMPs), upon public consultations,
  will become an indispensable part of the bidding and contracting package.

  MLGA is the Project Implementing agency and is responsible for the Project’s overall environmental and social
  safeguards compliance. Upon the Project effectiveness (in 6 months the latest), MLGA will hire a part-time safeguards
  specialist who will perform initial screenings of sub-projects. The PMU will provide no-objection for the selection of
  sub-projects to ensure they comply with safeguards. PMU will supervise the implementation of ESMF through quality
  EA (ESMP, ESMP Checklist) documents confirming that sub-project environmental screening, assessment, monitoring
  and reporting procedures and agreements are adhered to. MLGA (PMU) will also regularly review ESMP/ESMP
  Checklist compliance reports submitted by Applicants and carry out supervision site visits.

  Adequate (half-day) training for the safeguards consultant will be provided by the World Bank. The safeguards
  consultant will train the Municipality staff designated for grant processing if needed.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  A satisfactory ESMF has been prepared by the Client, and publicly consulted in Albanian, Serbian and English language
  before appraisal. ESMF was disclosed, with the call for comments and public consultations meeting announcement,
  on the MLGA website on November 30, 2018 (hard copy made available at government premises) where remained
  for over 14 days. In addition, a good practice was confirmed by sending direct invitation of relevant stakeholders (e.g.,
  pre-selected municipalities, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports, Environmental Protection
  Agency). Given that the beneficiaries of the project are youth, social media will be used as a mode of communication
  for the project, including communication on safeguard issues. Public consultation meeting was held in Pristina on
  December 12, 2018. ESMP Checklists and site specific ESMPs (if any) prepared in the course of this project will be
            The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
            Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)



      disclosed, in Albanian, Serbian and English, on MLGA website and websites of municipalities allocating the grant
      (hardcopies available at premises) for at least 14 days with calls for comments. The final version of environmental
      documents would address all relevant comments and have integrated minutes of the public consultations.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure
14-Nov-2018                                                   07-Dec-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Kosovo                                                          30-Nov-2018
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                   Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                     Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     Yes
 disclosure?
            The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
            Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo (P165485)



    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Ifeta Smajic
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Gloria La Cava

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Kevin A Tomlinson                         12-Mar-2019

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
