The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
Project (P168731)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Sep-2018| Report No: ISDSA25606




                       Regional Vice President:    Cyril E Muller
                              Country Director:    Johannes C.M. Zutt
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Michal J. Rutkowski
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Cem Mete
                            Task Team Leader:      Ahmet Levent Yener, Sirma Demir Seker
              The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
              Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
              Project (P168731)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
                                                                 Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for
    P168731                                                      Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
                                                                 Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Ahmet Levent Yener                                           Turkey
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    08-Oct-2018                                                  B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GSP03                                                        No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              2.13
    Total Financing                                                                                                 2.13
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                   2.13
         Free-standing TFs for ECA ECCTR Country Unit                                                               2.13


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
         The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
         Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
         Project (P168731)



Project Development Objective
  The development objective of the project is to support the growth of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and increase
  employment and entrepreneurship opportunities for Syrians under Temporary Protection (SuTP) and Turkish Citizens in
. the pilot province of Gaziantep.


 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The Project has two components. Component 1 for EUR 1.405 million will support Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Organization (KOSGEB) to implement a pilot small-grant scheme in a pilot province (Gaziantep) to support
existing businesses of SuTP and Turkish citizens, and new SuTP entrepreneurs. Component 2 for EUR 0.435 million will
strengthen institutional capacity of KOSGEB.

Component 1. Small-grant for SMEs (EUR 1,405,000)

This component will finance small-grants to Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) and new entrepreneurs. (i) Support to
existing businesses (EUR 840,000). Financial support to a total of 30 existing SME will target businesses owned by both
SuTP and Turkish citizens. Participating SME will be selected from those operating in the manufacturing sector or sectors
using medium-high, and high technologies. The SMEs owned by Turkish citizens will be eligible if they commit to
employing new SuTP employees (if they haven’t done so before the effectiveness of this Project). While the upper limit
of the SME support is EUR 40,000, the average grant amount is calculated as EUR 28,000. (ii) Support to new
entrepreneurs (EUR 565,000). KOSGEB will select and support 30 new SuTP entrepreneurs. Selected entrepreneurs will
receive employment support, start-up advances, machinery, equipment and software funding as well as technical
support. The upper limit of new entrepreneur support is EUR 130,000; 230,000; and 330,000 for low technology
manufacturing firms, medium-high firms, and high technology firms respectively. The average grant per entrepreneur is
calculated as EUR 18,844.

KOSGEB will use the selection criteria of the SME Development Support Program (KOBIGEL) and Entrepreneurship
Support Program (ESP) to identify beneficiaries. KOSGEB will initiate the process with a call to the target group and collect
pre-applications. KOSGEB team will conduct thorough analysis on the proposed project plans, by taking various factors
into consideration (i.e. changes in net sales, net exports, and employment). The analysis reports will be evaluated by a
higher committee and ranked accordingly. If there are more demands for this support than the funds available, KOSGEB
will follow the ranking, and continue until no funds are available. The applicants of the new entrepreneur support will
participate in the applied entrepreneurship program of KOSGEB as well.

Component 2. Institutional Support for KOSGEB (EUR 435,000)

This component will finance activities that support the KOSGEB to deliver, monitor, and evaluate services and programs
to be provided to SuTP and Turkish businesses in a selected locality under this project. Component 2 aims supporting
KOSGEB to enhance its capacity for designing, delivering and monitoring of services implemented under Component 1.
This will include translation of existing Entrepreneurship Training Modules into Arabic and English, field visits to countries
having similar experiences with refugees (i.e. Germany, Lebanon), and training for relevant KOSGEB staff in business
mentorship, migration policies, and project management. KOSGEB will also conduct outreach and communication
activities to inform and attract SuTP in universities, and potential entrepreneurs.
            The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
            Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
            Project (P168731)


    KOSGEB will also establish a project implementation unit (PIU) in headquarters that will be responsible for overall project
    coordination, and a liaison office in the field for day-to-day implementation. The costs of human resources to be
    contracted out for the PIU and liaison office, and the relevant operating costs and cost of equipment will be financed
    under this sub-component.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Project will be implemented in Gaziantep, Turkey.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Arzu Uraz Yavas, Social Specialist
    Esra Arikan, Environmental Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

     Safeguard Policies                           Triggered              Explanation

                                                                         KOSGEB will distribute small grants to Syrian and
                                                                         Turkish entrepreneurs. The sub-projects that will
                                                                         benefit from the grants are expected to be
                                                                         Category B and C projects. The environmental and
                                                                         social management framework (ESMF) is being
                                                                         prepared for describing the national environmental
                                                                         assessment procedures and WB safeguard
                                                                         requirements and will be disclosed on both the
                                                                         Borrower and Bank's website. The ESMF will
                                                                         include screening criteria for assessing project risk
                                                                         and categories and will be guiding KOSGEB for
                                                                         screening Category A projects out. It is anticipated
     Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01          Yes
                                                                         that there will be no large scale significant and/or
                                                                         irreversible impacts from the project. Most of the
                                                                         sub-projects to benefit from the grant are expected
                                                                         to          be        training,         consultancy,
                                                                         rehabilitation/renovation activities of existing
                                                                         facilities or establishment of small scale new
                                                                         production facilities within existing buildings. The
                                                                         locations and the scope of sub-projects will be
                                                                         identified during the project implementation and
                                                                         relevant environmental forms will be filled in line
                                                                         with the ESMF document. It should be noted that
                                                                         KOSGEB will be approached for financing of sub-
The World Bank                                                                                     Appraisal ISDS
Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
Project (P168731)



                                                        projects after the sub-project sponsors have
                                                        obtained all necessary environmental permits and
                                                        environmental           clearance     from       Turkish
                                                        Government. After ascertaining that all Turkish
                                                        requirements have been met and clearances
                                                        obtained, the sub-projects will be screened
                                                        according to World Bank categorization and the
                                                        corresponding assessment and review procedures
                                                        will be followed as described in details in the
                                                        environmental review procedures of the ESMF.
                                                        Regarding the Bank’s review, the first 3 sub-project
                                                        grant applications will be submitted to the Bank by
                                                        the KOSGEB for “prior review?. Following this
                                                        “pilot? period, if World Bank and KOSGEB agrees,
                                                        the World Bank will change to spot checking the
                                                        screening and environmental review process on a
                                                        “post review? basis. Regarding social impacts, the
                                                        project does not expect to have any adverse
                                                        impact. Since the grant program will not allow any
                                                        purchasing of land or civil works there will not be
                                                        any land acquisition impacts, as per OP 4.12. Other
                                                        non-safeguards impacts are expected to be positive
                                                        as it will help create new business and employment
                                                        opportunities for both Syrian and host
                                                        communities in Gaziantep, which is impacted by
                                                        the Syrian refugee influx. The Turkey portfolio has
                                                        ongoing engagement and various projects for
                                                        SuTPs (Syrians under Temporary Protection) since
                                                        2015. The social dynamics of the SuTP is constantly
                                                        analyzed through analytical work and through
                                                        routine engagement with the relevant government
                                                        entities, and also through site visits from time to
                                                        time. The team has been to the region during the
                                                        project inception stage. The likelihood of a
                                                        potential social conflict in this project is very low as
                                                        the beneficiaries of this small grant project will be
                                                        SuTP and Turkish entrepreneurs who confirm the
                                                        eligibility criteria of KOSGEB’s microgrant. Since the
                                                        target is very limited and the project is
                                                        implemented in a pilot city Gaziantep, which has
                                                        more than 400.000 SUTP and is very well-known for
                                                        its thriving economy fostered by both Syrian and
                                                        Turkish entrepreneurs, there are already various
                                                        ongoing entrepreneurship grant supports and
                                                        programs for the Turkish citizens. Formal Syrian
                                                        entrepreneurs are eligible for government-led
The World Bank                                                                                     Appraisal ISDS
Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
Project (P168731)



                                                        support programs. However, their knowledge on
                                                        these programs and access are limited. This will be
                                                        the first pilot to assess how the grants mechanism
                                                        works for the SuTP community. In its
                                                        communication efforts, KOSGEB will pay attention
                                                        on the fact that this grant program is financed
                                                        through EU’s FRIT money and will not only benefit
                                                        the SuTP entrepreneurs but also the entrepreneurs
                                                        from the host community. As the project’s aim is to
                                                        foster the economy and create new employment,
                                                        the indirect beneficiaries of this project will be
                                                        employees, both Turkish and SuTPs. KOSGEB will
                                                        insert language in their sub-grant agreement with
                                                        the entrepreneurs, that they would follow the
                                                        national labor law and hire employees accordingly
                                                        (which usually is not the case for SuTps, they are
                                                        usually hired informally). Even though the
                                                        government has introduced work permits in 2016
                                                        for Syrians under temporary protection, there is a
                                                        rule that a company should employ ten Turks for
                                                        every foreigner. In terms of gender, the same Bank
                                                        task team is engaged in another gender-specific
                                                        project funded under the EU-FRIT, EUR 55 million
                                                        was allocated to the World Bank to finance three
                                                        projects. The project will not have gender specific
                                                        activities, but will have positive discrimination
                                                        against women entrepreneurs and those with
                                                        disabilities who fit into the selection criteria. In its
                                                        grant sub-agreement with the entrepreneur,
                                                        KOSGEB requires a commitment from the grant
                                                        receiver to oblige by the national law. For this
                                                        project, even though the scale of the sub-projects
                                                        will be small grant projects and hence
                                                        environmental and social risks are low, the
                                                        commitment plan will be modified and explicitly
                                                        have some language on the environmental and
                                                        social compliance with World Bank requirements.
                                                        Due to the limited resources of the grants, in order
                                                        not to inflate any demand and potential tension
                                                        among the host and Syrian communities, KOSGEB
                                                        will have a targeted communication strategy about
                                                        the eligibility criteria and grant selection process.
                                                        Hence, KOSGEB will not promote the program to
                                                        public at large. Given that the target group of the
                                                        small grants is limited to one city and KOSGEB is
                                                        experienced       in     managing     entrepreneurial
           The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
           Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
           Project (P168731)



                                                                        programs, KOSGEB's call-center and its local office
                                                                        in Gaziantep will be addressing any type of inquiry
                                                                        or concerns, as a GRM. There will be a designated
                                                                        personnel to deal with the communications
                                                                        amongst the grant applicants in KOSGEB's
                                                                        Gaziantep local branch.
                                                                        Project activities in natural habitats will not be
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No
                                                                        eligible for application.
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No                     No forest or nature related activities are planned.
                                                                        No agricultural activities or any other type that
 Pest Management OP 4.09                         No
                                                                        includes pest agents or control are to be funded.
                                                                        The grant will not support activities that will have
                                                                        any impacts on cultural properties and chance finds
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No
                                                                        will not be an issue since project is not expected to
                                                                        provide any grants to construction activities.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No                     N/A
                                                                        Under this small grant program, KOSGEB does not
                                                                        support any purchasing of immovable assets, civil
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             No                     works or retrofitting. Therefore, the project will not
                                                                        trigger the Bank’s safeguard policy on Involuntary
                                                                        Resettlement (OP 4.12).
                                                                        Envisaged activities do not include any type of
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
                                                                        intervention on dams.
 Projects on International Waterways                                    No activities impacting international waterways
                                                 No
 OP/BP 7.50                                                             will take place.
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No                     N/A
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The project has been assigned as Category 'B' in accordance with World Bank safeguard policy OP/BP/GP 4.01
      (Environmental Assessment). The sub-projects that will benefit from the grants are expected to be Category B and C
      projects only. The environmental and social management framework (ESMF) is being prepared for describing the
      national environmental assessment procedures and WB safeguard requirements and the document will be disclosed
      in country and shared on Bank’s external website as soon as the appraisal is completed and before effectiveness. It is
      anticipated that there will be no large scale significant and/or irreversible impacts from the project. Most of the sub-
      projects to benefit from the grant are expected to be rehabilitation/renovation activities of existing facilities or
      establishment of small scale new production facilities within existing buildings. The locations and the scope of sub-
      projects will be identified during the project implementation and relevant environmental forms will be filled in line
      with the ESMF document. It should be noted that KOSGEB will be approached for financing of sub-projects after the
             The World Bank                                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
             Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
             Project (P168731)


       grant users have obtained all necessary environmental permits and environmental clearance from Turkish
       Government. After ascertaining that all Turkish requirements have been met and clearances obtained, the sub-
       projects will be screened according to World Bank categorization and the corresponding assessment and review
       procedures will be followed as described in detail in the environmental review procedures of the ESMF.




     2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

       No


     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

       N/A


     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
       Borrower is preparing an ESMF. Since the sub-projects are expected to be category B and C, the Borrower will not
       experience any in difficulty to comply with the ESMF. The first 3 sub-project grant applications will be submitted to
       the Bank by KOSGEB for “prior review?. Following this “pilot? period, if World Bank and KOSGEB agree, the World
       Bank will change to spot checking the screening and environmental review process on a “post review? basis.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The sub-projects will mainly focus on investments within existing infrastructure (i.e. equipment renewal, renovation)
       it is not anticipated that external stakeholders will be negatively impacted. The World Bank team expects a positive
       impact on grant users and the local public. All details are included in the ESMF which is to be disclosed before project
       effectiveness.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
14-Dec-2018                                                       28-Dec-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure
         The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
         Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
         Project (P168731)


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                              Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                NA
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?             Yes



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                NA
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                 NA
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                           Ahmet Levent Yener
 Task Team Leader(s)
                                           Sirma Demir Seker
           The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
           Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens
           Project (P168731)



    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                     Nina Chee                              19-Oct-2018

    Practice Manager/Manager               Cem Mete                               21-Oct-2018

.
