The World Bank                                                                               Appraisal ISDS
Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                       Appraisal Stage


          Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Oct-2018| Report No: ISDSA25854




                        Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                               Country Director:    Paul Noumba Um
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Jennifer J. Sara
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Catherine Signe Tovey
                             Task Team Leader:      Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem
              The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
              Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
    P169078                                                       Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem                                         Africa
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    23-May-2019                                                   B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GWA01                                                         No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             2.70
    Total Financing                                                                                                2.70
    Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                  2.70
         Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                             2.70


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  To support selected IGAD countries prepare for the development and management of groundwater through strengthening
. knowledge systems, building their capacity and assessing the feasibility of specific investments.
          The World Bank                                                                                          Appraisal ISDS
          Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
 A. Project Components
1. The proposed project with an estimated budget of US$ 2.7 million. has been structured around four main components
    that start addressing the abovementioned gaps. Each component includes a regional dimension, with a set of activities
    at local, national or transboundary level in the Horn of Africa, and a global dimension aiming at developing guidance
    for assessing and managing groundwater in dryland regions in Africa and elsewhere. The Project components are:-

2. Component 1: Expand the knowledge base on regional groundwater resources (US$500,000). This component seeks
   to continue taking stock of existing information and initiatives to establish a baseline of knowledge on the physical
   and social aspects of groundwater resources in the region, engaging external partners for some of the activities as
   needed. This component consists of: (i) technical studies to determine the availability, variability, and natural recharge
   of shallow groundwater and (ii) workshops to disseminate and validate the technical studies. Building on the
   methodology of a pilot study to understand availability, spatial and temporal variability, and reliability in the regions
   of Somaliland and Puntland, volumes of water available for harvesting for 7, 14, and 21 days monthly will be defined
   at catchment level for the entire region. The input data used for the study will be extracted from a modelling exercise
   being carried out at the Intergovernmental Authority on Development Climate Prediction and Application Center
   (ICPAC) in Nairobi, Kenya. This subcomponent will be complemented by mapping of the potential groundwater
   recharge zones in the arid lands of the IGAD region (funded by the European Space Agency [ESA]).


3. Component 2: Strengthen capacities in groundwater development and management in IGAD member countries
   (US$500,000). This component consists of a program of capacity building to: (i) identify institutional needs and
   regional cooperation opportunities, particularly as they relate to groundwater and drought resilience and on
   transboundary cooperation; and (b) validation of findings with key stakeholders, including, inter alia, regional, national
   and local institutions, universities, civil society organizations. Activities under this component will focus specifically on
   the nexus “groundwater and drought resilience and on transboundary cooperation,? technical aspects such as design
   for drilling and completion of (deep) wells, manual drilling of shallow wells, and pump selection. Some capacity-
   building activities proposed will be more tailored to state-level needs. Under this component, IGAD member states
   will have active role in defining their needs as well as mobilizing relevant sector institutions at the national and sub
   national levels including basin authorities, universities, CSOs, NGO’s and others.

4. Component 3: Maximize the benefits of groundwater to strengthen resilience to drought and economic
   development in the region (US$1,500,000). This component consists of: (i) the development of feasibility studies
   related to sectoral water needs and assessment of economically exploitable groundwater resources as a means to
   build resilience to drought using groundwater in up to three IGAD areas; (ii) preparation of a ToR for the Environmental
   and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs); and (iii) development of any safeguard-related instruments, including ESIAs.
   The feasibility studies will include assessment of environmental and social factors that might affect the study areas,
   with accompanying mitigation measures. The component will focus on sectoral water needs and on assessing
   economically exploitable groundwater resources (as opposed to theoretically available resources) and starts
   identifying suitable solutions to build resilience to drought using groundwater. The development in future demands
   from groundwater resources will certainly require a more detailed understanding of the water availability, water
   quality, and the potential pollution threats because the available knowledge is not enough for the aquifers in use.
   Some priorities include Mt. Elgon (between Uganda and Kenya), Merti (between Somalia and Kenya), and Bagara
   Aquifera between South Sudan and Sudan. All these are shared groundwater resources and, if developed, have huge
   potential in promoting cooperation among the shared water resource users. The studies will be outsourced to
   professional consultancy firms and will also provide general guidelines for groundwater assessment and development
                   The World Bank                                                                                       Appraisal ISDS
                   Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



              in different aquifer types (geology) and at different depths. Depending on the outcomes of these feasibility studies,
              other potential aquifers will be considered for feasibility study during the Mid Term Review of the project.

       5. Component 4: Project management, monitoring, and evaluation (US$200,000). This component consists of: (i) key
          consultancies to support Project implementation; (ii) travel expenses related to the Project; and (iii) provision of
          Operating Costs. IGAD is the implementing agency for the project and will mobilize its in-house capacity for the work.
          However, as the need arises, IGAD will use the service of consultants either a firm or individual to fill some of the
          missing specialized input gaps. This component will finance IGAD staff travel-related expenses to supervise this
          project, consultant contracts and travels costs, workshop and review meeting costs, and report production and
          dissemination expenses.

B. Project Cost and Financing
                                                                                                          Counterpart
Project Components                                                     Project cost   Trust Funds
                                                                                                             Funding

Component 1: Expand the knowledge base on regional groundwater
                                                                           500,000       500,000                    0
resources

Component 2: Strengthen capacities in groundwater development and
                                                                           500,000       500,000                    0
management in IGAD member

Component 3: Maximize the benefits of groundwater to strengthen
                                                                         1,500,000     1,500,000                    0
resilience to drought and economic development in the region

Component 4: Project management, Monitoring and evaluation                 200,000       200,000                    0

Total Costs                                                              2,700,000     2,700,000

I. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements


       6. A regional organization is considered as implementing agency: The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
          (IGAD). IGAD’s past and present program activities provide a foundation from which to further integrate and enhance
          understanding and utilization of groundwater resources. IGAD has a strong presence across the Greater Horn of Africa
          and in supporting its individual member states. IGAD is engaged in a range of individual and collaborative efforts to
          improve knowledge, understanding and strategies on integrated water resources management and drought resilience.
          Specifically, regarding groundwater, there is opportunity for greater targeted knowledge generation particularly for
          resources beyond superficial shallow aquifers and translation into investments to support disaster risk reduction,
          climate resilience and livelihood development.

       7. The components and activities are knowledge management, technical assistance and capacity building. Most of the
          activities will be undertaken using the inhouse capacity of IGAD and for some specialized areas consultant service
          contacts will be used that will be managed by IGAD Headquarters from Djibouti. Overall IGAD’s institutional capacity
          is adequate. IGAD has also experience in managing similar recipient executed activities to the required technical and
          fiduciary quality.

       8. IGAD has assigned a dedicated team that includes a team leader, Financial management specialist, procurement
          specialist, project accountant, internal auditor, M&E Specialist, communications and Gender officer for the project.
                 The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
                 Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



            IGAD has also communicated in writing the staff authorized signatories for the client Connection. The project team is
            streamlined with in IGAD’s Water Unit and will have all the institutional support from the regional body for all support
            that it needs


 B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation


        9. A simplified Monitoring and Evaluation system including reporting formats will be developed to report on the results
           indicators. World Bank will maintain a biannual implementation review mission on the project and supplement that
           with interim support missions as needed. IGAD will produce periodical reports on the agreed results framework and
           prepare a final project completion report after project closure. Periodical reports need to combine the status of
           activities together with the financial standing for ease of monitoring the agreed deliverables.

 C. Sustainability


        10.      The feasibility studies on the three groundwater potential areas will include detailed cost-effective technical
        options to extract and rationally use the groundwater, institutional arrangement to implement and manage groundwater,
        economic and financial analysis, and detailed operation and maintenance arrangements. These studies will also include
        the preparation of detailed environmental impact assessment for any potential impact that might arise during the
        development of the groundwater. This will ensure sustainable use of the resources for a long foreseeable time while
        maintaining a balance between extraction and recharge of the aquifers. All these are expected to contribute to the
        sustainable use of the groundwater sources with a balanced recharge rate. The institutional strengthening and capacity
        building as related to the Ground Water development and management in the region coupled with expanding knowledge
        base is also expected to contribute to the sustainability.

        11.      The major outputs of this programmatic technical assistance are a surface and ground water assessment for
        selected parts of the region, Comprehensive needs assessment of the capacity to develop and manage groundwater in
        the region, and three complete feasibility studies for the development of Ground Water potential areas. All are aiming to
        benefit the states and people of IGAD block countries. IGAD has a well-established dissemination and outreach mechanism
        for outputs and deliverable to have a wide distribution. A series of review workshops both for the major and additional
        outputs to solicit inputs will be organized largely with experts from IGAD member countries and sector partners
        participation. The final deliverables will be reviewed and endorsed by IGAD’s technical Committee for wider distribution.
        All the reports will help World Bank and development partners to design support programs to the region and member
        states. The reports will be available to public for easy access on IGAD’s website and websites of member stats relevant
        ministries. Most of the reports will also be shared on the World Bank Water GP website “Ask Water? to help teams in
        other places that are planning to design similar initiatives use it for easy reference.



II. KEY RISKS


 A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks
           The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
           Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



12. The risks associated with this proposal are considered minimal and manageable. This rating has been determined
    based upon limited political and operational risks. The main risks relate to accessing data, which can be overcome via
    engagement with multiple stakeholders and relaying on both primary and secondary data sources. Stakeholder
    engagement is enhanced by working with a partner, such as IGAD, with a strong network and good engagement with
    member countries. On the other hand, any promotion of resource development risks overexploitation if inadequately
    managed groundwater development is not different and has the added risk of being difficult to control access. Hence,
    for the pilots to be implemented, it is imperative to calculate sustainable yields, acknowledging environmental
    baseflows, and develop appropriate governance and management strategies, with accompanying community
    engagement/ownership (and potentially enforcement) components. Such issues will be addressed in the program
    components. For the feasibility studies that include trips, surveying or training in the field, security risk exists, which
    may slow down project implementation and jeopardize field work.


13. There is also risk of not enough ownership from the institutions in charge of compiling and running the databases and
    different tools developed or lack of engagement with the training programs or other planned products and activities.
    Similarly, the possibility of information related to ground water not being accessible to everyone who needs it is also
    the other associated risk. The project will strive to streamline activities into existing agencies at national level and
    IGAD will continue to play the leading role in knowledge management and dissemination at the regional level and will
    ensure sustainability and continuation. Awareness building and training will also play an important role in ensuring
    the sustainability of the project’s outputs.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    This is a project that includes conducting feasibility studies on ground water potential in three places in the
    horn of Africa. Some priorities include Mt. Elgon (between Uganda and Kenya), Merti (between Somalia and
    Kenya), and Bagara Aquifer between South Sudan and Sudan. The feasibility studies will include assessment
    of environmental and social factors that might affect the study areas, with accompanying mitigation
    measures. Since the specific sites for the feasibility studies are known, each feasibility study will include an
    Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA). The assessment must be done side by side with the
    feasibility studies and for this very reason a ToR for conducting the ESIA is the project’s effectiveness
    condition as reflected in the project’s grant agreement.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Tracy Hart, Environmental Specialist
    Haroub Ahmed Haroub, Social Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered               Explanation
      The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
      Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



                                                          Component three of the project supports the
                                                          complete feasibility study of the potential
                                                          resources and implementation/investment plans
                                                          for managed development of three ground water
                                                          aquifers. The feasibility studies will include
                                                          assessment of environmental and social factors
                                                          that might affect the study areas, with
                                                          accompanying         mitigation     measures.     The
                                                          assessment must be done side by side with the
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes            feasibility studies and for this very reason a ToR for
                                                          conducting the ESIA is the project’s effectiveness
                                                          condition as reflected in the project’s grant
                                                          agreement.

                                                          The ESIA will include Social analysis including an
                                                          estimation of the number of persons and structures
                                                          affected by the Project as well as the identification
                                                          and estimation of the existing economic activities
                                                          on site – like grazing.
                                                          Due to the paucity of natural habitats in the Horn
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                No             of Africa, and the fact that the three physical areas
                                                          are known, this policy is not likely to be applicable.
                                                          Due to the paucity of forests in the Horn of Africa,
Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No             and the fact that the three physical areas are
                                                          known, this policy is not likely to be applicable.
Pest Management OP 4.09                    No             This policy is not applicable.
                                                          This policy will be applicable in order to support the
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11     Yes            inclusion of chance find procedures in the
                                                          environmental and social safeguards documents.
                                                          This is in view of the ground water feasibility studies
                                                          and their potential to affect indigenous people
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              Yes            during future implementation. The feasibility
                                                          studies will determine that and recommend
                                                          measures to address.
                                                          This is also in view of the ground water feasibility
                                                          studies and their potential to displace people
                                                          during future implementation. The feasibility
                                                          studies will determine that and recommend
                                                          measures
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        Yes            to address.

                                                          The social baseline and stakeholder engagement
                                                          activities under ESIA will describe the actions,
                                                          budgets and resources that will be required for
                                                          undertaking a resettlement action plan should the
       The World Bank                                                                                 Appraisal ISDS
       Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



                                                           feasibility determine potential for displacement of
                                                           people.
                                                           It is possible that the feasibility studies will include
                                                           options for infrastructural development to include
                                                           small dams or seasonal storage catchments similar
                                                           to dams. The ground water feasibility studies will
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  Yes
                                                           include environmental and social impact
                                                           assessments (ESIAs) that will have a section on how
                                                           to manage environmental impacts associated with
                                                           small dam construction and implementation.
                                                           OP7.50 is triggered because the Project involves
                                                           the groundwater resource surveys of the
                                                           transboundary aquifers of Mt. Elgon (between
                                                           Uganda and Kenya), Merti (between Somalia and
                                                           Kenya), and Bagara (between South Sudan and
                                                           Sudan). Though these are transboundary ground
                                                           water aquifers which are international waterways
                                                           as defined by paragraph 1(a) of OP 7.50, the
                                                           proposed project involves only surveys and
                                                           feasibility studies and does not include
                                                           infrastructure work to develop the ground water
                                                           resources.
 Projects on International Waterways
                                            Yes            OP7.50 requires riparian’s to be notified and for
 OP/BP 7.50
                                                           projects with activities that have negligible impact
                                                           on the flows to international water ways, allows
                                                           exception from notification. Paragraph 7(b) of the
                                                           Policy spells out this exception, stating that an
                                                           exception to the requirement of notification can be
                                                           made in the case of “Water resources surveys and
                                                           feasibility studies on or involving intranational
                                                           water ways?. Based on this discussion, the activities
                                                           under this project will have no impact on the flows
                                                           to international waterways and the team sought
                                                           exception from notification. The exception for
                                                           notification was approved by RVP per terms of
                                                           OP/BP 7.50 on March 5, 2019.
                                                           In relation to the ground water feasibility study
                                                           areas, at this stage there are no disputed areas
                                                           known to the team. For any eventuality of such
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No             issues to arise during implementation the feasibility
                                                           studies will determine and recommend acceptable
                                                           modalities of weather to develop the Ground
                                                           Water potential jointly or by individual countries.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
          The World Bank                                                                                           Appraisal ISDS
          Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)




A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is applicable to this project. The currently-known set of potential downstream
     activities to be supported through this technical assistance are believed to be commensurate with category "B", i.e.
     their impacts are likely to be site-specific, localized, and reversible. The increased knowledge of the groundwater
     asset in terms of water quality, quantity, movement, and depth will increase the possibility that further development
     of the transboundary aquifers can be sustainably managed.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
     If the feasibility studies to be financed as part of this technical assistance result in preliminary designs for a small dam
     or reservoir, there is the potential for the following indirect and/or long-term impacts: seasonal river diversion,
     including the construction of diversion or storage infrastructure; land clearing and relocation/demolition of existing
     infrastructures; construction of secondary dykes; population resettlement; construction of access roads;
     construction, maintenance and closure of labor camps and other temporary infrastructures; construction of a water
     infrastructure: digging, blasting, construction of foundations, transportation and storage of material, operation of
     heavy machinery; exploitation of borrow pits (on-site and off-site); manipulation of fuel, waste and hazardous
     materials, production of wastewater; post-construction changes in water flooding patterns. For this reason, it is
     essential that public participation occur in the scoping phase of the feasibility studies, in order to inform the upstream
     design of any potential downstream intervention.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
     Included in Component 3 is the financing of three feasibility studies, to include the ground water assessment, the
     infrastructure need to develop the water assets, preliminary costing, assessment of the associated environmental
     and social safeguards risks and mitigation measures. That will also includ an assessment of the socio-economic
     barriers to water security for most vulnerable groups/sectors in the IGAD region. A communication strategy on
     groundwater and its role for building resilience to drought will also be developed as part of Component 3.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
     capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     IGAD has in place Guidelines for Transboundary Environmental Assessment, which include very specific protocol for
     OP 7.50 related notification processes, public participation procedures, supporting technical methodologies for water
     supply and water resource management, and assessment of institutional and legal frameworks. IGAD has prior
     experience in complying with World Bank Group environmental and social safeguards policies.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
     an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     They key stakeholders include citizens located in the three transboundary areas of Mt. Elgon (between Uganda and
     Kenya), Merti (between Somalia and Kenya) and Bagara aquifer between South Sudan and Sudan. IGAD
     Transboundary Environmental Assessment protocol calls for conducting consultation with potentially affected
                            The World Bank                                                                                     Appraisal ISDS
                            Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



                      communities, relevant government agencies, and representatives of other interested parties, civil society
                      organizations (NGOs), the private sector, independent experts and all other stakeholders including the general public,
                      during the scoping phase of the project cycle. During scoping, meetings shall be held to obtain comments from the
                      identified affected and interested stakeholders, on what should be included in the assessment study and what
                      alternatives should be considered, in order to conduct an adequate Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                      (ESIA).

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure


         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure

INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                     No
        The World Bank                                                                   Appraisal ISDS
        Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 No

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                    NA
impacts on cultural property?



IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                    No
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    No
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    NA
review the plan?



SD_TABLE
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                No

Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                    NA
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                    NA
been made for public awareness and training?



PIW_TABLE
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                              No

If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP            No
prepared and sent?

Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                             No



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
            The World Bank                                                                                Appraisal ISDS
            Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative (P169078)



    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     NA
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   NA
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     NA
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     NA
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     NA
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     NA
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                        Nathalie S. Munzberg                     03-May-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager                  Catherine Signe Tovey                    15-May-2019

.
