The World Bank                                                                              Appraisal ISDS
Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Appraisal Stage


         Appraisal Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2018| Report No: ISDSA24156




                       Regional Vice President:    Cyril E Muller
                              Country Director:    Lilia Burunciuc
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Nina Bhatt
                            Task Team Leader:      Holly Welborn Benner
              The World Bank                                                                               Appraisal ISDS
              Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
    P165286                                                      Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Holly Welborn Benner                                         Kyrgyz Republic
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    31-May-2018                                                  B-Partial Assessment
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU03                                                        No


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             2.73
    Total Financing                                                                                                2.73
    Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                  2.73

         Japan Social Development Fund                                                                             2.73


    2. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE

    Project Development Objective
  The PDO is to support innovative livelihoods development and the employability of an estimated 4,000 young women and
. men in about 20 target communities in order to improve socio-economic opportunity and inclusion.
           The World Bank                                                                                                           Appraisal ISDS
           Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)




    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

     Context/Rationale
     Youth (defined by the law as those aged 14-281) remain amongst the most vulnerable groups in the Kyrgyz Republic.
     They account for 35 percent of the total population of the country. In spite of a relatively high per capita investment in
     the education sector (4 percent of GDP), and a public education system that is mandatory through 9th grade, and free
     through to 11th grade, the country’s schools have done little to equip young people with the to ols to find meaningful
     and secure employment. The system also fails to provide opportunities for young people to contribute to innovative
     and constructive solutions to societal challenges. The IMF estimates that youth make up 50 percent of the country’s
     unemployed population, and more than 60 percent of youth live in rural areas that lack not only infrastructure and
     services, but also economic opportunity. The national youth unemployment rate in 2015 was 15 percent, and youth
     not in employment, education or training (NEET) was 21.4%.2 Facing limited opportunities, many young people,
     particularly men, seek employment in urban areas or abroad – typically in the Russian Federation. This is also an area
     where communities themselves articulate concerns regarding risk taking behavior such as drugs or alcoholism fueled
     by idleness, or the allure of more extreme political ideologies.

     The Kyrgyz economy is changing, and with it the demand for skills is changing. The Youth and Livelihoods Study revealed
     the potential for non-traditional investments that are focused on developing e-businesses. The ICT sector is expanding
     rapidly in the Kyrgyz Republic. While only 7 percent of households have access to the internet in their homes, 28
     percent of the population uses it. As of 2015, mobile broadband penetration was estimated at 68.5 percent.3 The
     landscape is rapidly changing as the government makes substantial investments in the ICT sector. To enable universal
     access, the government is launching Taza Koom, a national project that aims by the year 2020 to connect every village
     to the internet via fiber optic cable. The World Bank is supporting a complementary initiative, Digital CASA, which aims
     to support a regional cross-border approach to improve broadband internet connectivity by catalyzing investment in
     infrastructure and modernizing relevant policies and regulatory frameworks, with the ultimate aim of bringing reliable
     and affordable internet service to citizens, and fostering innovation in public services. The benefits of ICT improvements
     can potentially yield multiple dividends. Neither of these initiatives however, support the development of e-
     enterprises, or youth to use ICT to improve economic opportunities. This proposed grant would bring the opportunity
     created by better infrastructure and a more digital environment to the economic development of youth.

     In this context, the proposed L4Y project, submitted for consideration to the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF),
     will pilot an approach to improving economic opportunities for youth and leveraging new opportunities in the Kyrgyz
     economy – in the context of community-driven development model in the Kyrgyz Republic. While the project applies
     lessons from a number of sector-specific support programs globally, the project aims to introduce and pilot innovative
     ways of working with vulnerable groups in a fragile region and country where youth-centered and community driven
     economic development support has not been provided in the past.

     Project Development Objective
     To support innovative livelihoods development and the employability of an estimated 4,000 young women and men in
     about 20 target communities in order to improve socio-economic opportunity and inclusion.


1
  In this project, youth project beneficiaries are limited to adults, that is, above 18 years old as per national legislation.
2 International Labor Organization. 2015. Country Profile: Kyrgyz Republic.
3 Asian Development Bank, Digital Economy Study in Central and West Asia (Unleashing the Potential of the Internet in Central Asia, South Asia, the

Caucasus and Beyond), 2015.
      The World Bank                                                                                        Appraisal ISDS
      Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)



This JSDF grant will leverage links to the planned CASA-1000 Community Support Project (CASA1000-CSP). This JSDF
grant will support technical assistance, capacity building and private sector engagement that will support and expand
economic infrastructure investments targeting youth.

Overview – Project Components
The project comprises three components. The first component will prepare young women and men for the labor market
by promoting entrepreneurship and job skills linked to local labor market needs. The second will increase opportunities
for young people in the marketplace by working with youth-centric value chains, facilitating local value addition, and
creating new opportunities for micro and small enterprises within the AAs traversed by the CASA-1000 transmission
line. Both components will support traditional value chains as well as promote access to e-services and the digital
economy, and expand opportunities by fostering innovation in the labor market. The third component relates to the
management and administration of the project, as well as its monitoring and evaluation and strategies for
disseminating learning from the project.

Component 1 - Preparing youth for jobs
Component 1 will support the supply side of the market system and prepare youth for the labor market. It will be
disaggregated into two subcomponents: (i) assisting youth to join the traditional economy; (ii) assisting youth to join
the e-economy. Through participatory assessments and provision of skills development for employment, the
component aims at preparing youth to become active actors in the traditional and e-economies.

Opportunities for skills development will be identified using a combination of participatory and technical assessments,
cognizant of the differing needs of women and men. Areas of youth interest in the target areas have been researched
through the consultative gender-sensitive Youth Needs Assessment carried out during preparation and will be further
established through the participatory Youth Development Plans that will be developed in the CASA-1000 CSP. This grant
will finance technical and market assessments to further triangulate results in order to identify promising trades for
skills development. The project will identify appropriate training providers relevant to the target sectors, partner with
local technical and vocational education and training (TVET) centers, and strengthen their capacity to deliver relevant
skills development programs and better prepare youth to enter the labor market.

Component 2 - Creating market opportunities for youth
The interventions under this component will complement supply side skills building for youth under Component 1 with
demand side interventions to increase opportunities for youth in the labor force. This will include promoting and
enhancing youth-centric value chains and livelihoods opportunities in traditional sectors and in the digital economy
and e-services.

In the first subcomponent, the project will conduct a detailed value chain analysis to identify potential investment
opportunities for micro and small enterprises, such as in processing, packaging, marketing, and transportation, as well
as the constraints that prevent the market from reaching its full potential. With this analysis in hand, the project will
pilot enhanced opportunities for young women and men in the marketplace by facilitating local value-addition and
creating new opportunities for micro and small enterprises in target areas. The pilot will form and mentor about 30
common interest groups, provide support to 20 entrepreneurs/enterprises already in the value chain in the form of
small-grants (estimated 20 sub-grants valued at USD 5,000 each), and provide business acceleration services to those
supported entrepreneurs.

In the second subcomponent, the project will support new technologies that have the potential to support the
development of the agricultural service, and industrial sectors in the target areas and for local MSMEs. In order to
           The World Bank                                                                                           Appraisal ISDS
           Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)



     foster ICT-related innovation in enterprise, the project will provide financial (estimated 20 sub-grants valued at USD
     5,000 each) and technical support to a limited number of youth-led e-enterprises that foster IT/innovation to reduce
     transaction costs and bring more efficiency by linking producers with input suppliers or end markets. Grantees will be
     selected using a competitive process for e-innovation amongst MSMEs and the most promising applications will be
     supported. Technical assistance will be provided by a local enterprise acceleration firm. MSDSP will use its internal co-
     financing to provide small investments to these MSMEs.

     Component 3 - Project Management and Administration, M&E and Knowledge Dissemination
     This component will finance the incremental costs for project management, specifically coordination and supervision
     of implementation, financial management, annual audits, citizen engagement mechanisms and monitoring and
     evaluation. The implementing agency will be responsible for preparing work plans and operational manuals, managing
     the budget, managing relations with local authorities and communities, and developing terms of reference for the
     necessary consultancies. In addition, the IA will be responsible for tracking the progress of the project, carrying out
     semi-annual assessments of outcomes and results, and communicating and reporting regularly on the progress of the
     project. The project will not purchase new vehicles, but will provide travel allowances and/or apportion costs for the
     use of existing vehicles.

     The project will be implemented by a Kyrgyz-registered NGO, the Public Foundation Kyrgyzstan Mountain Societies
     Development Support Programme (MSDSP). MSDSP is a legal entity established by Aga Khan Foundation (AKF),
     Switzerland. MSDSP is active in 15 districts of Osh, Naryn, Jalal-abad, and Batken oblasts and has offices in five locations.
     It takes a long-term approach to reducing poverty, using a multi-input area development approach that weaves
     together diverse community-based inputs addressing basic education, health, governance, environmental and
     livelihoods needs to lift up an entire areas’ development. Over the past 10 years, in order to improve livelihoods, MSDSP
     has implemented horticulture and livestock value-chain development projects, in addition to providing youth with the
     skills, attitudes and knowledge for integrating into the labor market or for starting their own business. MSDSP can
     leverage support from sister agencies in the Aga Khan Development Network (including Kyrgyzstan branch of Aga Khan
     Foundation (AKFK).

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Rural agricultural areas in Osh, Jalal-Abad and Batken Oblasts in the Kyrgyz Republic.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Kristine Schwebach, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Rustam Arstanov, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

     Safeguard Policies                            Triggered              Explanation
      The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
      Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)



                                                              Component 2 of the project will finance the
                                                              introduction of new technologies to improve
                                                              productivity. Prior to this, grant applicants may
                                                              have to do small renovation. Environmental
                                                              impacts will include those typically associated with
                                                              small construction works such as generation of
                                                              dust, noise, vibration, generation of small amount
                                                              of construction waste, temporary disruption of
                                                              community transport system due to a
                                                              transportation of goods to the construction site,
                                                              small discharge of the wastewater, hazards
                                                              associated with asbestos management.
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes                  Additionally, there might be occupational health
                                                              and safety risks associated with the operation of
                                                              equipment. Such hazards include slips and strips,
                                                              caught-in or – between, falls from heights, being
                                                              struck by falling, swinging, rolling or flying objects,
                                                              respiratory issues due to the presence of dust at the
                                                              work place, exposure to occupational noise. Minor
                                                              anticipated environmental issues would include
                                                              spills of lubricants and fuel from machinery and
                                                              equipment, generation of production food and
                                                              packaging waste, dust, increase in traffic pollution
                                                              due to transportation of goods to and from the
                                                              facilities.
                                                              Project activities will be implemented in the
                                                              developed agricultural areas. No impact on natural
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No
                                                              habitats or areas adjacent to natural habitats is
                                                              expected.
                                                              No forestry activities will be supported. No
                                                              purchase of timber is expected. No projects
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No
                                                              activities will be conducted in the forests or areas
                                                              adjacent to them
                                                              Support will be provided to CIG for the provision
                                                              agricultural inputs (seeds, fertilizers, pesticides,
                                                              etc.) that are needed to help them to establish
                                                              long-term business relationship with the lead
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes
                                                              entrepreneurs. This pose certain risks associated
                                                              with the type of pesticides fertilizers and pesticides
                                                              to be procured and their proper handling and
                                                              application.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No                   No PCR are located in the project area
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No                   not applicable
                                                              Project activities do not trigger the Involuntary
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No                   Resettlement policy as the project will not require
                                                              involuntary acquisition of land, impact on assets, or
           The World Bank                                                                                            Appraisal ISDS
           Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)



                                                                          cause a negative impact on livelihoods. Project
                                                                          activities will have overall positive social impacts. If
                                                                          any negative impacts occur, they will be temporary
                                                                          and easily mitigated through the environmental
                                                                          and social instruments (frameworks and plans)
                                                                          prepared for the project. The project has
                                                                          incorporated a grievance redress mechanism for
                                                                          any person who feels they have been negatively
                                                                          impacted without proper remediation measures
                                                                          taken. Additionally, the project will actively engage
                                                                          with stakeholders to ensure active participation
                                                                          and improve project success with target
                                                                          populations.
                                                                          no project activities will depend on existing or new
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                                                                          dams. no activities on dams are expected
 Projects on International Waterways                                      no project activities will be conducted on the rivers
                                                  No
 OP/BP 7.50                                                               or areas adjacent to rivers
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No                      not applicable
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Project investments will be small and no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Under Component 2, the
      project will provide matching grants to private lead entrepreneurs and community interest groups (CIG) (producer
      groups) to finance introduction of new technologies, such as upgrade of existing equipment, to improve productivity
      and value-addition. Prior to the installation of these equipment, grant applicants may have to do small renovation to
      their current facilities. Environmental impacts will include those typically associated with small construction works
      such as generation of dust, noise, vibration, generation of small amount of construction waste, temporary disruption
      of community transport system due to a transportation of goods to the construction site, small discharge of the
      wastewater, hazards associated with asbestos management.

      Additionally, there might be occupational health and safety risks associated with the operation of equipment. Such
      hazards include slips and strips, caught-in or – between, falls from heights, being struck by falling, swinging, rolling or
      flying objects, respiratory issues due to the presence of dust at the work place, exposure to occupational noise. Minor
      anticipated environmental issues would include spills of lubricants and fuel from machinery and equipment,
      generation of production food and packaging waste, dust, increase in traffic pollution due to transportation of goods
      to and from the facilities.

      Support will be provided to CIG for the provision agricultural inputs (seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, etc.) that are needed
      to help them to establish long-term business relationship with the lead entrepreneurs. This pose certain risks
      associated with the type of pesticides fertilizers and pesticides to be procured and their proper handling and
      application. In particular, pesticides have a potential to contaminate soil, water and other vegetation. In addition to
       The World Bank                                                                                         Appraisal ISDS
       Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)



  killing insects or weeds, pesticides can be toxic to a host of other organisms including birds, fish, beneficial insects,
  and non-target plants. Fertilizers may deplete the quality of soil, lead to eutrophication in and contaminate the
  nearest water bodies. In addition, persons who deal with pesticides in the day-to-day operations may develop acute
  and chronic adverse health conditions.

  All anticipated environmental and social impacts under the project are expected to be minor, short lived and localized
  and can be easily managed with generally accepted good agriculture and construction practices. To control the risks
  mentioned above, they will be identified based on the sub-project specifics, assessed in terms of probability and
  severity of harm. Mitigation measures will be defined and included into the site-specific ESMPs.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Successful agricultural enterprises may eventually change the landscape of the areas. Though no land acquisition is
  expected under the current project, economic output of small enterprises will contribute to the development of local
  communities. Potential long term effects include increase in population, conversion of natural lands into agricultural
  lands, changes in special planning and increase in pressure on natural environment.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  No alternatives were considered under the project. No investment alternative would further deteriorate the
  economic situation in the country.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Borrower has developed a comprehensive framework level Environmental and Social Management Plan. It
  describes anticipated environmental impacts and procedure for assessing risks associated with each hazard (namely
  ESMP Checklist for minor civil works, ESMP template for the operation and maintenance of equipment, Pest
  Management Plan for operations that would involve a purchase and use of pesticides) and requirements for
  environmental and social supervision and reporting for subprojects.The generic ESMP checklist-type format ("ESMP
  Checklist") will be used to cover typical preventive and mitigation approaches to sub-grants level civil works contracts
  with localized impacts and the use of processing equipment. The ESMP Checklists will be included in grant
  applications from each lead entrepreneurs and CIG, should there be any renovation works, purchase of processing
  equipment and procurement of pesticides and fertilizers, both in specifications and bills of quantities. The ESMP
  Checklists will be verified and used for environmental screening by specialized staff within MSDSP charged with
  determining eligibility of micro-grants to ensure that 1) no high-risk activities that could be assigned Category A in
  accordance with the OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment are financed under the project; 2) all environmental risks are
  identified and accessed; 3) proper mitigation measures are defined and budgeted for.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders would include young entrepreneurs involved in agriculture sectors in target geographical areas, local
  rural communities, parties involved in the targeted value chains, retailers, ecosystem users.
            The World Bank                                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
            Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)



DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure
20-Apr-2018                                                   23-Apr-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Kyrgyz Republic                                                 26-Apr-2018
 Comments
 disclosed at http://infoik.net.kg/index.php/item/518-plan-upravleniya-okruzhayushchej-i-sotsialnoj-sredoj-dlya-
 proekta-zanyatost-dlya-molodezhi


PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
20-Apr-2018                                                    23-Apr-2018
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Kyrgyz Republic                                                 26-Apr-2018
 Comments


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                   Yes
         The World Bank                                                                    Appraisal ISDS
         Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)



If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                     Yes
and approve the EA report?

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes



PM_TABLE
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                           Yes

Is a separate PMP required?                                                          No

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project        NA
team include a Pest Management Specialist?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                     Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
 and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                     Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                     Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                     Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                     Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


Task Team Leader(s)                       Holly Welborn Benner
           The World Bank                                                            Appraisal ISDS
           Livelihoods for Youth Community Support Project (P165286)



                                          Janelle Plummer



    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager               Jorge A. Munoz              04-Jun-2018

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
