Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC652 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 23, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P088153 
Project Name: AR NATIONAL 
HIGHWAY ASSET MANAGEMENT 
Task Team Leader: Maria Marcela Silva 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2004 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways 
(80%);General public administration sector 
(20%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector 
development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (P);Other public sector 
governance (S);Other accountability/anti-
corruption (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Marco Zambrano 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 400 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The overall purpose of the project is to consolidate an efficient road management strategy, 
bringing about the necessary capabilities to preserve the national road network in the long term. 
This would be a key condition towards increasing the competitiveness of the economy and 
supporting a sustainable path of economic growth and poverty reduction. The proposed project 
builds on the achievements of the ongoing Bank-assisted 4295-AR 
National Highways 
Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project
 and would have the following specific objectives:  
 
a.  Preserve the condition of vital road assets, through the gradual expansion of 
performance-based contracts for the rehabilitation and maintenance of the 
non-concessioned primary paved network;  
b.  Strengthen road sector management through carrying out a renewal program 
of DNV to revitalize its role in the sector by: (i) reinforcing its human 
resource base; (ii) strengthening its planning capacities; and (iii) consolidating 
its transformation into a results-oriented organization accountable for specific 
outputs (e.g. preserving transitability and adequate road conditions, enhancing 
road safety, promoting integration, etc.). 
Page  2
 
 
 
The overall and specific objectives of this project are consistent with the Country Assistance 
Strategy (CAS) being discussed with the GOA, in particular with the objectives of: (i) promoting 
sustained economic growth with equity by maintaining and improving transport infrastructure; 
and (ii) promoting better governance through strengthening institutions and increasing 
accountability and transparency.   
 
The proposed project would benefit people in rural and low-income areas through the reduction 
of time and travel costs, new employment opportunities as many of the rehabilitation and 
maintenance activities require unskilled labor for carrying out the works and for the production 
of materials (cement, asphalt), and improved access to basic services.  In addition, expanding the 
CREMA system to other regions of the country would help to decrease disparities in favor of 
poorer areas in transport investment. At a macro level, lower transport and logistic costs are 
expected to have an impact on local incomes.  
 
This is the first investment project of the new Country Assistance Strategy -CAS (scheduled to 
be presented to the Board on February 12, 2004), and has expected annual disbursements close to 
US$ 80 million on average, in a sector with a proven track record. 
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
During the identification mission for the project (November 2003) four components were 
preliminarily identified, assuming at that stage, that the CAS would include a Loan for US$400 
million and a financing percentage of 75%.  
 
Component 1 – Rehabilitation and Maintenance (Estimated cost US$470 million of which 
US$350 million would be financed by the Bank Loan).
 Through this component, the Bank 
would support part of DNV’s CREMA Program, which aims to maintain within a five-year 
horizon, the entire paved non-concessioned network through CREMA contracts. In particular, 
this component would finance the execution of works under CREMA contracts that have 
been/are being procured under Loan 4295-AR representing about 6.011 Km, and the expansion 
to about 4.000 Km of roads which are entering the CREMA program for the first time, and as a 
result require substantial rehabilitation works. DNV will continue financing those segments 
under CREMA contracts that are about to expire after seven years.    
 
Component 2 – Bridge Restoration (Estimated cost US$34 million of which US$25 million 
would be financed by the Bank Loan). 
Given recent budgetary restrictions, DNV has not been 
able to properly take care of its bridges and has only performed emergency interventions on 
specific points. So far, DNV has slated about 100 bridges for attention in the next five years, of 
which 39 are in critical condition and need to be urgently addressed under the project. Works 
under this component would include the replacement and/or reconstruction of 27 bridges, 
construction of 2 new bridges, widening of 9 bridges and rehabilitation of 1 bridge.   All of the 
above works would be carried out within the existing right-of-way.  
 
Page  3
 
 
Component 3- Road Safety (Estimated cost US$27 million of which US$20 million would be 
financed by the Bank Loan). 
This component would support the implementation of 
recommended actions that evolved from a Technical Assistance financed by the Bank (through 
Loan 3611-AR) that give origin to what has been called: “
Plan Estatégico de Seguridad Vial de 
la DNV
”. Specifically, this component includes (i) physical interventions to upgrade safety 
standards (e.g. shoulders pavement, roadside obstacle shields, pavement markings, intersections) 
in critical black spots of selected corridors; and (ii) technical assistance and pilot studies to test 
the effectiveness of low-cost preventing and corrective measures. 
 
Component 4- Institutional Renewal (Estimated cost US$5 million). 
The project would provide 
technical assistance to: (i) develop and implement a human resources plan to rebuild DNV’s 
technical and institutional capacity, which would encompass diagnostic studies for identification 
of key areas that need to be strengthened, training programs to current staff, recruiting programs 
for technical and professional positions, establishing a few centers of excellence in key 
functional areas of DNV, etc.; (ii) improve DNV’s highway planning capacities and the 
development of strategic planning and management tools; (iii) create user-oriented performance 
monitoring systems, prepare and disseminate DNV’s operational and financial performance and 
design other tools to increase accountability and transparency. The proposed project could 
explore twinning arrangements with road agencies from other countries using the experience 
from Eastern European countries accessing the EU. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Argentina’s Primary Road Network 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
Under the Loan 3611-AR, a permanent environmental unit was established in DNV.  This unit 
has been responsible for satisfactorily reviewing the sub-projects, both under the 3611-AR and 
4295-AR Loans for their environmental content, and is expected to do so for the proposed new 
project.  The environmental Operation Manual approved by the Bank for use under the 3611-AR 
Loan is currently being applied to guide the selection and implementation of sub-projects and 
will continue in use under the proposed project. Adequate norms and specifications have been 
developed and will be incorporated into contracts for engineering and civil works, and adequate 
supervision and management will be carried out. During project preparation, the team will 
review the institutional arrangements and environmental management tools (Operation Manual) 
to determine if there are any particular areas that require strengthening or updating. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The proposed project supports minimum rehabilitation and maintenance works 
within existing right-of-way of the primary road network. Thus, the Program does 
Page  4
 
 
not foresee significant environmental impacts that could jeopardize the natural 
environment of its area of influence. 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Maria Marcela Silva 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
Page  5
 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
 
