Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/28/2005 
Report No.:  AC1443
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P092836 
Project Name:  Institutional Strengthening - ANSES II TA 
Task Team Leader:  Kathrin A. Plangemann 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 17, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSPS 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
12.50
12.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Building on the achievements of the first operation, the project development objective is 
to enhance service-delivery by ANSES by improving its efficiency, effectiveness, 
transparency and accountability through institutional reengineering, fraud and error 
detection, change management and greater internal and external oversight, as well as 
institutional strengthening of the Social Security Secretariat. In particular, the proposed 
project will:  
 
(i) 
consolidate and expand selected organizational reforms of ANSES through 
business process reengineering, integration and automation of core processes, functions, 
and products, and ICT investments for continuous dynamic change with a view to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of service-delivery;  
 
(ii) 
support the institutional strengthening of the Social Security Secretariat to 
enhance its policymaking and oversight functions, strengthen the accountability of 
ANSES and other social security institutions, and promote outreach to other stakeholders;  
 
(iii) 
enhance access to information and exchange of information, help fraud and error 
detection in benefit determination and liquidation, and promote effective channels for 
citizens engagement and oversight, with a view to improve internal and external 
transparency and citizen participation; and  
 
(iv) 
promote change management, innovation, coordination and dissemination of good 
management practices with a view to enhance project performance and sustainability.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Institutional Effectiveness of ANSES (US$ 16.1 million). This component 
aims at increasing efficiency and effectiveness of ANSES through the design of a new 
strategy, reengineering and automation of core business processes, a redesign of the 
organizational structure and the necessary enabling mechanisms to support these changes 
in the corporate culture. This will be achieved through state-of-the-art practices of 
corporate management, applied according to international best practices and fit to the 
public sector, on the basis of a careful sequencing strategy, including techniques such as 
Balanced Scorecard to help define the strategy of ANSES, Enterprise Resource 
Management (ERP) to help integrate systems, and Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM) to help improve service-delivery. This will help make service-delivery more 
efficient, effective, and client-oriented and will help generate efficiency gains by 
reducing transaction costs, e.g. measured by reduction of time in benefit award. This 
component will support: (i)Strategic Management, (ii)Reengineering of core business 
processes, (iii) Automation of core business processes and integration of systems, and 
(iv) Improvement of the organizational structure and decentralized service-delivery.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Effectiveness of the Social Security Secretariat (US$ 2.0 
million).  The second component will promote the institutional strengthening of the 
Social Security Secretariat of the Ministry of Labor to enhance its managerial and 
technical capacity for greater oversight of social security institutions, particularly 
ANSES. A strengthened Secretariat will ensure greater accountability of ANSES, by 
promoting effective monitoring and evaluation of its performance, and will also help 
strengthen the technical analysis and public debate on key social security issues to 
strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of the system and the functioning of its 
institutions. The component has the following subcomponents and activities: (i) 
Strengthening the management capacity of the Secretariat, (ii) Strengthening the 
technical capacity of the Secretariat, and (iii) Promoting outreach to other public 
institutions, private sector and civil society.  
 
Component 3: Transparency and Participation (US$ 4.1 million). This component aims 
at enhancing the transparency of ANSES by improving access to and exchange of 
information, particularly through improved fraud and error detection, litigation control, 
cross-checking of beneficiary data with other institutions and social accountability 
mechanisms for beneficiaries and other stakeholders.  This component supports the 
following subcomponents and activities: (i) Fraud and error detection, (ii) Strengthening 
litigation control, (iii) Greater access to information.  
 
Component 4: Change management (US$ 1.5 million). The fourth component is 
designed to ensure effective project implementation across components, help mitigate 
risks and support sustainability. It includes overall project management and specific 
change management instruments, including a communications strategy and dissemination 
of best practices of public management. It thus includes both the specific internal change 
management instruments required for the first component of the institutional 
effectiveness of ANSES and a project strategy of change management, as well as other 
Page  3
external change mechanisms oriented versus the Social Security Secretariat, SINTyS, 
RENAPER and other relevant institutions. In particular, this component would support 
the following subcomponents and activities: (i) Project management, (ii) Monitoring and 
evaluation, (iii) Change Management Instruments.    
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Buenos Aires, Argentina   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr William Reuben (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
n.a.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n.a.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n.a.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n.a.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n.a.   
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kathrin A. Plangemann 
06/02/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr William Reuben 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
06/02/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
06/02/2005 
Comments:   
