Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/18/2005 
Report No
.:  32400
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Argentina 
Project ID:  P070628 
Project Name:  Provincial Road Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maria Marcela Silva 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 11, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSFT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
136.00
136.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Project aims at improving the reliability of essential road assets that 
facilitate access of provincial production to the markets and the efficiency of their 
management as a means to support the country?s productive sector, competitiveness and 
economic growth. Thus, by building upon the achievements of the on-going Provincial 
Roads Project (AR-4093), the proposed Project will further the agenda in terms of 
rehabilitation and maintenance of the core provincial network, to meet the following 
specific objectives: (i) strengthen the planning process to support the preparation and 
implementation of comprehensive multi-year road programs; (ii) introduce the use of 
performance-based contracts as a key step toward implementing a sustainable and cost 
effective road management strategy; and (iii) bring about the required technical 
capabilities in the provincial road agencies to confront the introduction of new 
management strategies, gradually supporting their transformation into results-oriented 
organizations with enhanced capacities (planning, administration and supervision of 
contracts, environmental management, road safety management). 
 
Objectives (i) and (ii) apply only to those provinces that will participate in the works 
components of the Project while objective (iii), on a demand driven basis, will also be 
open to other provinces. In this respect, this Project can be seen as the first operation of a 
more comprehensive program that could include other provinces as they fulfill the 
requirements of this Project.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The GoA has requested a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) for US$ 150 million to support 
road investment programs in the paved network of different provinces in the country over 
the period 2005-2011.  
 
The Project is demand-driven and has been designed and appraised based on financing 
requests of interested provinces that prepared and submitted investment programs during 
Project preparation  (C?rdoba, Corrientes, Neuqu?n, Santa Fe, Entre R?os and Chubut) . 
Altogether these six provinces have identified investment needs that exceed the available 
Project funds. Given that this is an on lending operation, provinces are required to enter 
into Subsidiary Loan Agreements (SLA) with the National Government to participate. As 
such, the proposed operation would support investment programs for those provinces that 
have fulfilled all prior steps needed for an SLA and have signed said SLA, until the 
available amount of the loan is fully allocated .  
 
These prior steps include: (i) proposed provincial programs designed and appraised 
satisfactorily to the Bank according to the Project?s technical, economic and 
environmental guidelines as defined in the Project Operational Manual; (ii) fulfillment of 
National Government steps required to obtain authorization for new debt as well as 
authorization from provincial legislatures; and (iii) establishment of a framework for 
fiscal sustainability and its monitoring in line with the National Government fiscal policy.  
 
The National Government?s fiscal policy is to ensure that: (i) provinces follow a 
sustainable fiscal policy; (ii) adequate procedures exist to systematically monitor fiscal 
performance, and (iii) mechanisms to take corrective measures exist should provincial 
fiscal performance diverge from a sustainable path. The mechanism for implementing 
this policy is the Federal Fiscal Responsibility Law and its regulatory decree (Decree 
1731/04), which establishes fiscal benchmarks,  as well as procedures for monitoring 
fiscal performance and for taking corrective measures. To date, 17 provinces have 
adhered to the Law.  Authorization for provinces to contract debt, whether or not they 
have adhered to the FRL, is tied to presentation to the National Government of fiscal 
information, as set forth in Annex 5 of the FRL?s regulatory decree, in order to determine 
their fiscal capacity to engage in further debt at the time of application.  In order to follow 
provincial fiscal performance over time and to engage provinces in corrective actions, the 
Government is establishing monitoring mechanisms and corrective procedures for all 
provinces requesting new debt authorizations. For those adhering to the FRL, these 
mechanisms are included in the FRL. For other provinces, the National Government is 
establishing equivalent procedures and benchmarks to ensure consistency with the 
parameters of the FRL. For the purposes of the proposed Project, the SLAs would reflect 
these mechanisms and benchmarks agreed between the National Government and 
Participating Provinces to authorize and monitor each on-lending operation. 
 
Subsequent loans to satisfy other provinces? needs are feasible subject to: (i) an overall 
satisfactory implementation of this Project; and (ii) the existence of a critical mass of 
provinces ready to initiate works under a new loan.  In order to support other provinces to 
Page  3
get ready to participate in future programs, they will be eligible to participate in the 
institutional strengthening component of this Project.  
 
To meet the proposed Development Objectives four main components were identified 
based on a proposed loan amount of US$150 million and a maximum financing 
percentage of 75%:   
 
Component 1 ? Civil Works Component (Estimated cost US$161.9 million without 
contingencies, of which US$121.4 would be financed by Bank loan) consisting of two 
sub-components: (i) a performance-based combined rehabilitation and maintenance sub-
component to be contracted under the CREMA system; and (ii) a conventional 
rehabilitation and/or upgrading-repaving sub-component to be contracted under the ad-
measurement type system. A group of subprojects in the Provinces of C?rdoba, 
Corrientes, Chubut, Entre R?os, Neuqu?n and Santa Fe that meet sound, technical, 
economic and environmental eligibility criteria have been identified and integrate the 
program of works to be financed under the proposed Project. 
 
?
Sub Component 1.1- Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance through performance-
based contracts (Estimated cost without contingencies of US$128.5 million of which 
US$96.4 million would be financed by the Bank loan). This sub-component includes the 
execution of performance-based contracts over approximately 15 sub-networks of 
provincial roads located in the provinces of C?rdoba (5 Mallas), Corrientes (3 Mallas), 
Neuqu?n (2 Mallas), and Santa Fe (5 Mallas) covering a total length of 2,204 km 
(representing 24% of the provinces total paved network). The rehabilitation works cover 
approximately 71% of the total length to be contracted and account in general for 78% of 
the total contract amount, the remaining 22% being assigned to routine maintenance 
operations, representing about US$2,560 per km per year. 
 
?
Sub Component 1.2- Road Paving and Rehabilitation (Estimated cost without 
contingencies of US$33.4 million of which US$25.0 million would be financed by the 
Bank Loan). Through this component, the Bank would continue supporting rehabilitation 
and paving investments on selected segments of the provinces? road networks that are 
crucial for provincial productivity but that cannot be included on a CREMA-type contract 
given the nature of the works required.  These works are to be procured under the 
traditional ad-measurement type  contracts. Provinces would be required to design 
adequate maintenance strategies to ensure the sustainability of the proposed 
interventions. This sub-component includes the execution of works over a total length of 
264 km in the provinces of Corrientes, Chubut and Entre R?os. 
 
Component 2 ? Routine Maintenance (Estimated cost US$89.0 million). Participating 
Provinces are expected to develop and perform, with their own funds, an effective 
maintenance strategy on the portion of their paved network that will not be attended by 
CREMA contracts included in the loan (totaling 9,337 km). During Project 
implementation, the budget allocated to the maintenance strategy and the condition of the 
network that will be maintained with local funds will be monitored, in order to ensure 
that the level of service provided to the road users matches to a reasonable extent the 
standards achieved over the remaining part of the network that will be improved and 
Page  4
financed under the loan. It was agreed with the provinces, that the annual maintenance 
programs as designed or executed would ensure, as a minimum, that during the Project 
implementation period no potholes remains open, no edge break occurs between the 
pavement and the shoulders and that all horizontal marking and vertical signs are 
adequately restored, in order to comply with the most critical road safety requirements.  
Suitable performance indicators have been set in order to monitor compliance with 
agreed targets. 
 
Component 3 ? Road Sector Management and Institutional Building (Estimated cost 
US$7 million). In line with the overarching objective of developing a more 
comprehensive road asset management strategy at the provincial level, this component 
would support activities to strengthen participating road agencies to meet the demands 
imposed by the introduction of a results-oriented approach.  The following areas have 
been identified as the main targets of this component: (i) strategic planning; (ii) budget 
execution and supervision of works; (iii) performance based management; (iv)road 
safety; (v) information technology and communications; and (vi) environmental 
management.  Within each of these areas a series of activities have been identified to 
enhance the ability to plan, contract out and monitor road operations and to widely 
disseminate what is being achieved, increasing accountability for outcomes.   
 
Provinces that at this stage are not prepared or do not have the technical and/or financial 
capacity required to participate in the Civil Works component would be able to 
participate in this component. In this sense, the Project would provide technical 
assistance to other provincial road agencies (in technical, environmental, planning and 
managerial aspects) to prepare them to participate in the program in the future. A follow-
up operation would be needed to expand the CREMA system to these provinces.  
 
To participate, such provinces would need to provide a report with complete 
information regarding: (i) the physical characteristics of the provincial road network 
(paved, earth, gravel) and traffic volumes; (ii) the evolution of DPVs budget (by source 
and use) from 1998 to the current budget period; (iii) the evolution of personnel 
employed by DPV; (iv) description of the institutional organization and activities 
performed; and (v) the objectives and results expected to be achieved through the 
participation in this component.   
 
Component 4 ? Project Management and Technical Assistance to Provinces. The Project 
includes US$3 million to be financed from loan proceeds to facilitate Project 
coordination and management through the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU).  Among 
other activities, through this component the PCU will be able to provide technical support 
to provinces in the preparation and assessment of subprojects, provide technical support 
to other provinces not participating in the Civil Works component to prepare them to 
participate in the Project and to design their specific institutional strengthening programs, 
coordinate technical assistance and training activities to the Participating Provinces, 
supervise Project implementation in each province and monitor achievement of agreed 
targets under each component, design baseline indicators to measure Project?s impact, 
carry out impact assessment evaluations and cost-efficiency analysis, design a road safety 
Page  5
strategy to be implemented in the Participating Provinces, etc.  The PCU will review on 
an annual basis the Participating Provinces? investment programs and budgets and ensure 
that adequate counterpart funds have been allocated to the different components.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Provinces of Cordoba, Corrientes, Chubut, Entre Rios, Neuquen and Santa Fe.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSFT) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed Project involves only paving, rehabilitation and maintenance works in 
existing provincial roads, and as such no significant socio-environmental impacts that 
could endanger the natural surroundings of the area of influence, or the local population 
is expected. Potential impacts are direct and temporary   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project includes a series of environmental and social considerations that were 
developed during project preparation, with the objective of ensuring project's socio-
environmental sustainability, and its compliance with provincial environmental 
Page  6
regulations and Bank's Safeguard Policies. The Borrower has prepared an Environmental 
Management Framework for the Project, and the Environmental Assesment Report which 
includes the environmental evaluation of projects that would be financed by the Bank.  
 
With the purpose of assuring a suitable socio-environmental management during Project 
implementation, an evaluation of the institutional capacity of the PCU and the EU/DPVs 
was carried out, to identify actions and activities necessary to strengthen their 
institutional capacity in terms of socio-environmental management.  The results of this 
evaluation were translated into an Institutional Strengthening Plan for Socio-
Environmental Management, which is detailed within the Environmental Management 
Framework.  
 
During the ongoing Provincial Roads Project, Environmental Units started to be created 
within the DPVs, with the objective of introducing the issue of socio-environmental 
management into the road sector of  all participating Provinces.  
 
The institutional capacity of the Road Agency's Environmental Units varies from case to 
case but in general, said units have the technical staff and the experience required to 
develop an adequate socio-environmental management during project implementation. It 
is also important to signal that the proposed Conceptual Framework will serve as a guide 
in terms of socio-environmental management for each of these units.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/18/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/19/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maria Marcela Silva 
04/19/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez 
04/14/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
