Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1733 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/22/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P096159 
Project Name: AZ - BAKI URBAN WATER SUPPLY REHABILITATION PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Paul Kriss 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 13, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2005 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00
3.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the original Greater Baku Water Supply Rehabilitation Project 
(GBWSRP) are consistent with the proposed project for additional financing, and will not 
change.  The objectives of the original project were: (a) to make emergency short term 
improvements in the water supply system in order to restore water supply to Baku, in particular 
to the poorer segments of the population; (b) to improve the water supply system as a whole; and 
(c) to provide the basis for longer term planning and recovery for the sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional loan would provide financing for costs associated with the Utility 
Metering Project (UMP).  The proposed project is expected to increase the impact and 
development effectiveness of the GBWSRP.  The UMP will enable Azersu to install production, 
bulk, and consumer water meters in the Greater Baku area.  It will also help finance additional 
rehabilitation works on the distribution network and possibly internal plumbing systems within 
apartment blocks and other high rise buildings.  Proposed project components comprise the 
following:  
 
Page  2
1) 
Physical Works component (US$ 13 million): (i) supply and installation of water meters 
and pressure gauges; and (ii) Rehabilitation of distribution systems and possibly plumbing 
networks in apartment / high rise buildings to reduce physical water losses.  
 
2) 
Technical Assistance and Capacity Building component (US$ 2 million): (i) Consulting 
services for conducting Sectorization of Greater Baku?s water distribution system; (ii) study of 
changes required in the tariff structure as a result of transfer to volumetric billing; (iii) provision 
of support for making improvements in Azersu?s billing and collection system.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will focus on Greater Baku area serving capital city Baku.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Project will be implemented by Azersu (responsible for implementing the investment 
components), and by the Corporate Development Unit (CDU; responsible for corporate 
development aspects of the technical assistance component) currently implementing the 
GBWSRP and its Supplemental Credit.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Rita E. Cestti (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will finance distribution system rehabilitation works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/22/2005 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
GBWSRP?s Supplemental Credit Environmental Management Plan will be updated for this 
additional financing for project scale-up, and will incorporate experience gained under the 
GBWSRP and its Supplemental  Credit.  
 
The Project will be mostly rehabilitating existing infrastructure, not extending service to 
new areas, therefore the project involves no land acquisition or resettlement issues.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paul Kriss 
07/22/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/22/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
07/22/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
