Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1603 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/26/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P094488 
Project Name: Highway 2 
Task Team Leader: Olivier P. Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 6, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2005 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main project development objective is to reduce road transport costs and improve access, 
transit and safety within Azerbaijan's East-West and North-South corridors, through upgrading 
some sections of the Alat-Astara road of the Baku-Iran highway (M3) and rehabilitating the 
Baku-Shamaxi road.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would include:  
 
-
Upgrade of some sections of the M3 highway between Alat and Astara (about 200 km), 
including expansion of the existing 2 lane roadway to a 4 lane roadway under a mostly new 
alignment; and the construction of bypasses around key towns;  
 
-
Rehabilitation of the existing road Baku-Shamaxi, a 120 km section of the much traveled road 
to the good farming areas West of Baku.  The road serves Azerbaijan?s East-West traffic 
corridor and its more densely populated cities and villages, such as Shamaxi and Sheki, and 
ultimately leads to the North-Eastern part of Georgia.  
 
-
Provision of technical assistance and goods to support RTSD strengthening and project 
implementation.   
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
See above.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ecology and Safety Sector (ESS) of the Road Transport Service Department (RTSD) will 
have responsibility for ensuring the implementation of the recommendations contained in the 
environmental management and land acquisition/ resettlement plans and for ensuring compliance 
with national standards.  The ESS has very limited environmental background and experience, 
however, capacity is being developed within the ESS through the Bank's Highway project (in 
relation to the construction of the by-pass around the city of Tovuz).  In addition, the 
Environmental Assessment and Management Framework proposed under this project will 
identify any additional support that is required to ensure that safeguard policies are met.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This FI project is expected to have Cat A and B sub-projects linked to the proposed upgrade 
of the M3 motorway to a 4 land roadway with new alignments and by-passes around key towns.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The Regional Environmental Assessment will identify any natural habitat issues or special 
needs linked to this project and the preliminary route alignments.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The Regional Environmental Assessment will identify any cultural property sites linked to 
this project and the preliminary route alignments.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project is expected to require land acquisition and resettlement. The RTSD is preparing 
the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) as per the OP/BP 4.12, and the Resettlement Action 
Plan or Land Acquisition Plan will be prepared and implemented accordingly. Support may be 
provided to the RTSD for the preparation and implementation of the RAP or LAP.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/16/2005 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To ensure the compliance of the proposed project with Bank safeguard policies, in particular 
in terms of environment, resettlement and land acquisition, the Borrower is preparing a 
Regional Environmental Assessment covering the entire project scope; together with an 
Environmental Assessment and Management Framework, and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework that outline the procedures for the management of environmental and social 
issues of sub-projects.  These documents will be disclosed in country and in the InfoShop 
prior to appraisal and are expected to be completed before September 2005. The project 
would then be divided in sections and each section design would include appropriate specific 
Environmental Assessments, Environmental Management Plans and Land Acquisition 
Plans/Resettlement Action Plans with adequate disclosure.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
05/23/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
05/26/2005 
Comments:  Based on the clearance from the safeguards specialists and my review, this is cleared for 
adequacy on safeguards at this concept stage. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
05/26/2005 
Comments:  Based on the approval from the ECA Regional Safeguards Coordinator, this is cleared. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
