Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1907 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/20/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P087861 
Project Name: South Zone Power Distribution Project 
Task Team Leader: Alan F. Townsend 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 8, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P);Infrastructure services 
for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to invest in infrastructure rehabilitation and expansion, in 
corporate and operational systems, and in institutional strengthening of SZPDC such that the 
company provides reliable and efficient power service and makes 250,000 connections over the 
course of the project.  [Note 
–
theproject team intends to develop key performance indicators that 
reflect reliable and efficient service, but it is premature at this point to define this in more detail, 
in part because at least some reliability indicators are only partly in control of the distribution 
company.]   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will primarily fund capital investment for the rehabilitation, strengthening, and 
expansion of SZPDC’s network.  It can be expected that a range ofdistribution network 
infrastructure will be involved including cable, meters, capacitors, transformers, line poles, 
ancillary equipment, etc.  The project will also include a substantial allocation for investments 
and technical assistance related to corporate and operational strengthening.  This component will 
focus on corporate and operational systems related to financial and human sources management, 
and operations, maintenance, and stores, and will include significant investment in hardware, 
Page  2
software, and training.  Finally, there will be funds for technical studies and for paying the base 
fees of the management assistance contractor.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The SZPDC will be the power distributor for the key port city of Chittagong, as well as for other 
significant cities in the east and south of the country such as Comilla and Cox’s Bazaar. While 
currently, the distribution circles that willmake up SZPDC account for about 750,000 customers, 
by the end of the project it is expected that another 250,000 connections will be added. As many 
as 12 towns including potentially extensive peri-urban areas may be involved.  During 
preparation it is envisaged that heavily rural service territories would be transferred to rural 
cooperatives.  
 
The south zone area is culturally and ecologically very rich and diverse. It has large tribal 
population who live in the hills along the border with Burma. The area is dotted with a number 
of heritage / religious structures dating back to the 7th Century.  
 
A
number of safeguard policies could be triggered if safeguard issues are not managed 
properly.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has no capacity for safeguards management and this will be a new area for them.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sameer Akbar (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Other than possible triggering of safeguard policies, the key environmental management 
issue in this project would be the collection and disposal of old transformers and capacitors. 
These can be potential carriers of hazardous Poly Chlorinated Biphenyl (PCB) laden oil, that 
would need specialized management. An assessment will need to be undertaken to determine the 
nature and scale of this problem, followed by the preparation of a management plan. 
Implementation of the plan might need skills upgrading and investment in a treatment and 
disposal facility.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/29/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environomental Category: B - Partial Assessment  
 
Other than possible triggering of safeguard policies, the key environmental management 
issue in this project would be the collection and disposal of old transformers and capacitors. 
These can be potential carriers of hazardous Poly Chlorinated Biphenyl (PCB) laden oil, that 
would need specialized management. An assessment will need to be undertaken to determine 
the nature and scale of this problem, followed by the preparation of a management plan. 
Implementation of the plan might need skills upgrading and investment in a treatment and 
disposal facility.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alan F. Townsend 
11/01/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/07/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Penelope J. Brook 
11/01/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
